rhode island department of transportation standard specifications for road and bridge construction amended august num table of contents division i page part num general requirements and covenants section num definitions and terms num section num bidding requirements and conditions num num prequalification of bidders num num contents of proposal forms num num interpretation of quantities in bid schedule num num examination of plans specifications special provisions and site of work num num preparation of proposal .
num num proposal guaranty .. num num irregular proposals num num delivery of proposals num num withdrawal or revisions of proposals num num combination or conditional proposals .. num num public opening of proposals num num disqualification of bidders and rejection of proposals num num material guaranty num num bidding certifications .. num section num award and execution of the contract num num consideration of proposals num num post qualification requirements and award of contract .
num num cancellation of award num num return of proposal guaranty num num contract bond num num execution and approval of the contract num num failure to execute contract num num escrow of bid documentation num section num scope of work num num intent of contract num num changes in the contract num num differing site conditions num num alterations in the plans or details .. num num extra work num num suspension of work ordered by the engineer num num significant changes in the character of the work num num maintenance of traffic num num maintenance of public access .. num num rights in and use of materials found on the project num num final cleaningup num num railway highway provisions num num construction over or adjacent to navigable waters num num contractors responsibility for the work num num environmental protection num i part num general requirements and covenants continued page sectionnum control of work num num authority of the engineer num num plans and shop drawings num num conformity with plans and specifications .. num num coordination of plans specifications supplemental specifications and special provisions .. num num cooperation by contractor num num cooperation with utilities .. num num cooperation between contractors .. num num construction stakes lines and grades num num authority and duties of resident engineer num num inspection of work num num removal of unacceptable and unauthorized work .
num num load restrictions num num maintenance during construction .. num num opening sections of project to traffic num num furnishing rightofway num num failure to maintain roadway or structure .
num num acceptance num num claims for adjustments and disputes num num procedures for claims and disputes num num project delays .
num num work zone training num section num control of material num num source of supply and quality requirements .
num num local material sources .. num num samples tests cited specifications num num certification of compliance num num plant inspection num num storage of materials num num handling of materials num num unacceptable materials num num departmentfurnished materials num section num legal relations and responsibility to public .
num num laws to be observed num num specific statutes required to be inserted .
num num permits licenses and taxes num num patented devices materials and processes num num restoration of surfaces opened by permit .. num num federalaid participation num num sanitary health and safety provisions .. num num public convenience and safety num num barricades and warning signs .
num num use of explosives num num protection and restoration of property and landscape .. num num forest protection num num responsibility for damage claims num ii part num general requirements and covenants continued page num third party beneficiary clause .. num num personal liability of department employees .. num num no waiver of legal rights .
num num hazardous materials .. num num civil rights num section num prosecution and progress num num subletting of contract num num notice to proceed num num prosecution and progress num num limitation of operations num num character of workers num num methods and equipment num num determination of contract time num num failure to complete on time num num default of contract .
num num termination of contract num section num measurement and payment num num measurement of quantities num num scope of payment .. num num compensation for altered quantities num num differing site conditions changes extra work and force account work num num eliminated items num num partial payments num num partial payment of lump sum items num num payment of withheld funds num num acceptance and final payment num num compensation for project delays .
num num prompt payment procedures num num subcontractor prompt payment num division ii construction details part num earthwork and erosion control section num site preparation num section num excavation and embankment num section num structure excavation and backfill .. num section num trimming and fine grading num section num trench excavation num section num perimeter erosion controls .. num section num check dams .. num section num temporary dewatering basins num section num storm drain protection .
num iii part num earthwork and erosion control continued page section num stilling basins for water pollution control .. num section num construction accesses .. num section num maintenance and cleaning of erosion and pollution controls num section num placement of millings beneath guardrail num section num containment system for control of hydrodemolition runoff and maintenance and disposal of hydrodemolition runoff .
num part num aggregate and gravel base and subbase courses section num aggregate and gravel base courses .. num section num gravel borrow subbase courses .
num section num special graded aggregate for shaping and trimming driveways or shoulders .. num section num selected leveling and filler aggregate .. num part num bituminous pavements section num dense graded bituminous concrete pavements .. num section num friction course .
num section num asphalt emulsion tack coat .
num section num prime coat num section num seal coat .. num section num cold recycled base course pavement rehabilitationrecycling num section num hot recycle option for bituminous pavements .. num section num cleaning routing and sealing cracks in bituminous concrete pavements .. num section num sawing and sealing transverse joints in bituminous concrete pavements over rigid base num section num temporary patching material potholes and trenches .. num part num concrete pavements section num portland cement concrete pavement and base num section num full depth cleaning and sealing of joints and cracks two and onehalf num½ inches nominal width or less in portland cement concrete pavement .. num iv part num concrete pavements continued page section num repairing deteriorateddamaged joints greater than two and onehalf num½ inches and less than or equal to eight num inches nominal width in finished portland cement concrete pavement .. num section num pavement grooving .
num section num portland cement concrete base course wcrack control numinch extra strength num part num concrete section num portland cement concrete num section num mineral additives for portland cement concrete .. num section num controlled low strength material clsm .. num section num class hpae portland cement concrete num section num concrete with calcium nitrite based corrosion inhibitor .. num part num drainage and erosion control section num culverts and storm drains .
num section num manholes inlets and catch basins num section num underdrains and combination drains .. num section num reconstruct catch basins and manholes num section num reconstruct existing type d catch basin to catch basin with gutter inlet .. num section num plug and cap pipe all sizes num section num adjust drainage and utility structures .. num section num cleaning and flushing pipes and drainage structures .
num section num concrete for thrust blocks headwalls and miscellaneous purposes num section num cut ins for manholes catch basins and pipe .
num section num paved waterways num section num water and gas gate boxes num section num adjust curb stop water gate and gas gate boxes num section num post type hydrants .
num part num bridge structures section num general .
num section num temporary bridges .
num section num removal of existing bridges .
num section num driven piles .. num v part num bridge structures continued page section num earth retaining systems num section num timber construction num section num masonry construction .
num section num castinplace structure concrete masonry .
num section num precastprestressed structure concrete masonry .
num section num reinforcing steel .
num section num weep holes pavement subdrains and wall drains .
num section num water stops and flashings num section num waterproofing and dampproofing num section num placement of concrete bridge decks .. num section num latex modified concrete for bridge overlays num section num earth retaining systems num section num timber construction num section num masonry construction .
num section num castinplace structure concrete masonry .
num section num precastprestressed structure concrete masonry .
num section num sawing and sealing joints in bituminous concrete pavements .
num section num silicone highway joint seal .. num section num roadway joints expansion and fixed .
num section num structural steel construction num section num painting structural steel num section num personnel and environmental protection num section num thermal sprayed zinc coating for new structural steel .
num section num bridge bearings .. num section num bridge scupper piping .. num section num metal bridge railing .. num section num pedestrian chain link fence aluminum .
num section num bridge signs num section num granite identification tablets num section num granite curb for bridges num section num scuppers .. num section num structural concrete repair by epoxyresin base adhesive injection num section num repairs to structural concrete masonry with integrally colored concrete patching mortar .
num section num saw cut in existing concrete walls .
num section num remove and dispose bituminous concrete pavement from concrete bridge decks partial depth and full depth num section num deck surface concrete removal by hydrodemolition .. num part num incidental construction and services section num steel beam guardrail .
num section num steel backed timber guardrail .
num section num fences .. num vi part num incidental construction and services continued page section num remove and reset fence .
num section num sidewalks and driveways .. num section num curbing for roadways num section num dust control num section num flagstones .. num section num precast concrete median barrier .
num section num raised reflective pavement marker snow plowable num section num stone masonry walls .
num section num remove and rebuild or construct new drylaid stone walls num section num trafficpersons .. num section num flagpersons .
num section num highway bounds .
num section num remove relocate and reset shock absorbing barrier modules .. num section num remove and replace rural mail box post and mountings num section num rural mail boxes postmaster approved .. num section num test pits num section num riprap num section num slope paving num section num temporary construction signs .
num section num portable channelizing devices and barricades .
num section num advance warning arrow panel .
num section num portable changeable message sign num section num precast concrete median barrier for temporary traffic control .
num section num remove and relocate precast concrete median barrier for temporary traffic control .. num section num truck mounted attenuator tma with truck mounted flashing arrow board tmfab .. num section num field offices and materials laboratory num section num plant field laboratory .
num section num cleaning and sweeping pavement .. num section num cutting and matching pavement num section num sawcutting of pavements for installation of traffic count loop detectors .. num section num field control and construction layout num section num removing bituminous pavement by cold planing num section num mobilization .. num section num maintenance and movement of traffic protective devices .. num section num price adjustments num section num stone walls in historic scenic or rural areas .. num section num onsite administration facility .. num section num replacement of partially damaged safety related hardware .
num section num detectable warning systems num vii part t traffic control systems page section t.num electrical work tnum section t.num highway lighting tnum section t.num ground rods bare ground wire .
tnum section t.num wire and cable .
tnum section t.num handholes and pull boxes tnum section t.num conduit .. tnum section t.num luminaires tnum section t.num aluminum lighting standards and foundations tnum section t.num service pedestal .
tnum section t.num traffic signal systems tnum section t.num traffic signal standards and posts tnum section t.num traffic signal controllers and cabinets tnum section t.num detectors and relays .
tnum section t.num traffic signal heads tnum section t.num directional regulatory and warning signs tnum section t.num ground mounted primary directional signs tnum section t.num overhead sign panels and supports .. tnum section t.num delineators and hazard markers .
tnum section t.num milepost markers .
tnum section t.num pavement markings tnum section t.num temporary construction zone reflective pavement delineators .. tnum section t.num lighting for night work operations .. tnum part l landscaping section l.num loam plantable soil or high organic soil .
lnum section l.num seeding .
lnum section l.num sodding .
lnum section l.num refertilization of seeded sodded and grassed areas lnum section l.num seed stabilizers .. lnum section l.num planting .
lnum section l.num extended establishment period lnum section l.num tree and shrub trimming .. lnum section l.num selective clearing lnum section l.num tree and shrub root pruning lnum section l.num tree and shrub protection device lnum section l.num tree cutout paving lnum section l.num tree wells and tree walls .
lnum section l.num herbicide lnum viii division iii part m materials page section m.num borrow and aggregates .
mnum section m.num portland cement concrete mnum section m.num bituminous pavements .. mnum section m.num drainage .. mnum section m.num metals mnum section m.num paint .. mnum section m.num sheet piling and piles .
mnum section m.num fence and guardrail mnum section m.num curbing .. mnum section m.num dust control riprap stone walls cobblestones flagstones highway bounds mnum section m.num timber mnum section m.num waterproofing dampproofing and sealers mnum section m.num bridge bearings mnum section m.num stone for masonry .. mnum section m.num traffic control systems .
mnum section m.num signs and sign supports mnum section m.num pavement markings .
mnum section m.num landscaping materials mnum ix num division i part num general requirements and covenants section num definitions and terms num definitions and terms .
as used in sections num num the abbreviations and definitions set forth in this section shall have the following meanings num abbreviations .
wherever the following abbreviations are used in the contract they mean aan american association of nurserymen aar association of american railroads aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials aci american concrete institute agc associated general contractors of america aia american institute of architects aisi american iron and steel institute ansi american national standards institute ara american railway association area american railway engineering association artba american road and transportation builders association asce american society of civil engineers asla american society of landscape architects astm american society for testing and materials awpa american wood preservers association awwa american water works association aws american welding society fhwa federal highway administration u.s. department of transportation fss federal specifications and standards imsa international municipal signal association mil military specifications mutcd manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets highways nec national electrical contractors nema national electrical manufacturers association osha occupational safety and health administration sae society of automotive engineers tmp transportation management plan ul underwriters laboratory num num actual cost .
the cost actually incurred by the contractor or subcontractor in the performance of work .
actual costs will include labor material actual ownership cost of equipment or invoiced rental rates verified payroll burdens verified general and administrative overhead and profit .
while the contractor is required to establish such costs with competent documentation i.e .
invoices certified payrolls financial statements the department may rely upon an audit of the contractors financial records by a department appointed auditor .
num award .
the written acceptance by the state of the successful proposal consisting of the executed contract agreement and purchase order .
num bidder .
an individual partnership corporation or joint venture submitting a proposal for the advertised work .
the terms bidder and contractor are frequently used synonymously .
num bid documentation .
the term bid documentation means all writings working papers computer printouts charts computer data files associated with the preparation andor submittal of a bid proposal and all other data compilation which contains or reflects information data or calculations used by the contractor to determine its bid submitted for a project .
the term bid documentation includes material relating to the determination and application of equipment rates overhead rates labor rates efficiency or productivity factors arithmetic extensions schedules for time or any determination of time related to project overhead as well as quotations from subcontractors and material suppliers to the extent that such rates and quotations were used by the contractor in formulating and determining the amount of the bid .
the term bid documentation also includes any manuals which are standard to the industry used by the contractor in determining the bid for a project .
these manuals may be included in the bid documentation by reference and will show the name and date of the publication and the publisher .
num bridge .
a structure including supports erected over a depression or an obstruction such as water highway or railway and having a track or passageway for carrying traffic or other moving loads and having a length measured along the center of roadway of more than twenty num feet between undercopings of abutments or extreme ends of openings for multiple boxes .
a. bridge length .
the length of a bridge structure is the overall length measured along the line of survey stationing back to back of backwalls of abutments if present otherwise end to end of the bridge floor but in no case less than the total clear opening of the structure .
b. bridge roadway width .
the clear width measured at right angles to the longitudinal centerline of the bridge between the bottom of curbs or in the case of multiple height of curbs between the bottom of the lower risers or in the case of no curbs between the inner faces of parapet of railing .
num calendar day .
each and every day shown on the calendar beginning and ending at midnight .
num compensable delay .
an excusable delay for which the contractor may be entitled to additional monetary compensation which is not otherwise precluded by these regulations .
num completion .
completion of the project occurs when num the work has been satisfactorily completed in all respects in full accordance with the contract and num the contractor has satisfactorily executed and delivered to the engineer all documents certificates and proofs of compliance as required by the contract .
num num construction and maintenance agreementutilities .
an agreement between the state acting through its department of transportation and the owners of utilities .
owners may be either municipalities or private utility companies .
the agreements establish conditions for removing relocating or otherwise altering the location of utilities to facilitate proposed highway construction work .
they divide responsibility for such alterations between the two parties and establish payment procedures by which the state will reimburse the owners for costs they incur in performing their respective portions of the work .
num contract .
the agreement between the state and the contractor for the performance of the prescribed work and consisting of the following a .
contract agreement .
the written statement executed by the state through the state purchasing agent or its designee and the contractor and approved by the director department of transportation setting forth the obligations of the parties for the performance of the work .
b .
contract documents .
the notice to contractor advertisement for bids proposal contract bonds standard specifications supplemental specifications special provisions general and detailed plans notice of award notice to proceed and any subsequently executed contract addenda that are required to complete the construction of the work in an acceptable manner including authorized contract time extensions .
c. one instrument .
the executed contract agreement and the contract documents constitute one instrument i.e .
the contract .
num contract addendum .
any change to the contract made after its initial execution which change shall become part of the contract agreement .
contract addenda must be set forth in writing and executed by the original signatories or their successors in interest or their designees .
each contract addendum must be preceded and documented by a corresponding report of change .
num contract bonds .
the approved form of securities executed by the contractor and its surety or sureties guaranteeing complete execution of the contract and all supplemental agreements pertaining thereto and the payment of all legal debts pertaining to the construction of the project .
num contract item pay item .
a specific item of work for which a price is provided in the bid schedule .
num contract time .
the number of work days or calendar days allowed for completion of the contract including authorized time extensions .
when a calendar date of completion is specified in the proposal the contract shall be substantially completed on or before that date .
num contractor .
the individual partnership corporation or any combination thereof or joint venture contracting with the state for performance of the prescribed work .
the terms contractor and bidder are frequently used synonymously .
num county .
the county in which the work specified is to be performed .
num culvert .
any structure which provides an opening under the roadway but which does not meet the classification of a bridge as defined in subsection num .
num daily charge .
the per diem rate for liquidated damages specified in the contract and soestablished in accordance with the schedule of liquidated damages .
num num department .
the department of transportation as constituted under the laws of this state .
num dig safe .
a onecall damage prevention system established and funded by public utilities that own and operate underground facilities within the state for the purpose of receiving and giving notice of proposed excavation activity pursuant to chapter num of the general laws of rhode island entitled excavation near underground utility facilities .
num division of purchases .
a division in the department of administration of the state of rhode island the head of which is the state purchasing agent .
num engineer .
the chief engineer of ridot acting directly or through his or her duly authorized representatives who is responsible for engineering and administrative supervision of the contract .
num equipment .
all machinery tools and apparatus together with the necessary supplies for upkeep and maintenance necessary for the construction and completion of the contract .
num equitable adjustment .
an adjustment in the contract price andor time occasioned by the performance of work beyond that required by the original contract including extra work changes certain differing site conditions and changes in quantities .
the equitable adjustment of contract price will be based on an agreed upon lump sum agreed upon unit prices force account or the actual cost of the work .
the equitable adjustment of the contract time will be based on a comparison of the time demonstrated by the contractors schedule and the time required for the execution of the work .
num excusable delay .
a delay to the contract or milestonephase completion date not otherwise precluded by these regulations which was unforeseeable and beyond the contractors control and not caused by the contractors fault or negligence and for which a contract or milestone time extension may be granted by the department .
num extra work .
work not provided for in the contract as awarded but considered essential to the satisfactory completion of the contract .
num financial statements .
a set of reports detailing on an annual semiannual or other prescribed time period the financial activity or a company corporation or other business venture .
for purposes of post qualification and award these shall include a complete set of audited financial statements certified by a certified public accountant cpa or in the case of contracts valued at num or less a bidders financial references and an original copy of its current financial statement .
num force account .
a method of payment for extra work ordered by the engineer when no other method of payment is provided for in the contract and when the contractor and the engineer are unable to agree upon an acceptable method .
the force account method of payment provides for reimbursing the contractor for those actual costs it incurred in performing such work .
num geotextile .
any permeable textile material used with foundation soil rock earth drainage or any other geotechnical engineering related material as an integral part of a manmade project structure or system .
num num highway street or road .
a general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian travel including the entire area within the rightofway .
num holidays .
in the state of rhode island legal holidays occur on new years day martin luther king day memorial day independence day victory day labor day columbus day veterans day thanksgiving day and christmas .
if any holiday listed above falls on a sunday the following monday shall be considered a holiday .
num inclement weather .
any day or days for which the engineer decides that weather conditions are so extreme andor severe that normal construction operations should not proceed num laboratory .
the testing laboratory of the department or any other testing laboratory which may be designated by the engineer .
num liquidated damages .
deductions from monies due the contractor assessed on a daily basis to compensate the state for losses incurred because of the failure of the contractor to complete the work within the time established by the contract .
num major and minor contract items .
any item having an original value in excess of num percent of the original contract amount shall be considered to be a major item .
all other original contract items shall be considered minor items .
in addition any minor item which increases by num percent will be considered a major item .
the revised quantity will then be considered the original contract quantity for purposes of determining a major item of work under subsection num significant changes in the character of work .
num materials .
any substances specified for use in the construction of the project .
num noncompensable delay .
an excusable delay for which the contractor may be entitled to an extension of time but no additional monetary compensation .
num nonexcusable delay .
a delay to the contract or milestonephase completion date which was reasonably foreseeable and within the control of the contractor for which no time extension will be granted .
num notice to contractors .
a public announcement inviting bids for work to be performed andor materials to be furnished .
such notice will indicate with reasonable accuracy the nature and location of the work to be performed the time and place of the opening of proposals and any contract statutory provisions required by the federal government .
num notice to proceed .
written notice from the engineer to the contractor to commence the contract work and which designates the date of beginning of contract time .
num notice of tentative award .
a written communication from the state or its designee to the successful bidder indicating the conditional intention of the state to award the contract .
this communication instructs the successful bidder to arrange a meeting with the appropriate state official within fifteen days of the receipt of said notice for the purpose of executing the contract agreement and contract bonds and for the delivery of the required certificates of insurance .
num num pavement structure .
the combination of subbase base course and surface course placed on a subgrade to support the traffic load and distribute it to the roadbed .
a. subgrade .
the top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure shoulders and curbs are constructed .
b. subgrade treatment .
modification of roadbed material by stabilization .
c. subbase .
the layers of specified or selected material of designed thickness placed on a subgrade to support a base course .
d. base course .
the one or more layers of specified material and thickness placed on a subbase or a subgrade to support a surface course .
e. surface course .
one or more layers of a pavement structure designed to accommodate the traffic load the top layer of which resists skidding traffic abrasion and the disintegrating effects of climate .
the top layer is sometimes called the wearing surface .
num plans .
the approved plans profiles typical cross sections working drawings and supplemental drawings or exact reproductions thereof which show the location character dimensions and details of the work to be performed .
num preconstruction conference .
a meeting between the contractor and the engineer prior to the actual commencement of work for the purpose of reviewing the following a .
the contractors submission of construction schedules .
b .
the contractors involvement with public and private utilities .
c. the contractors proposed methods and procedures for prosecuting the work .
d. any questions the contractor may wish to ask relative to the prosecution of the work .
num profile grade .
the trace of a vertical plane intersecting the top surface of the proposed wearing surface usually along the longitudinal centerline of the roadbed .
profile grade means either elevation or gradient of such trace according to the context provided .
num project .
the specific section of the highway or other specific property on which construction is to be performed as described in the contract .
num proposal .
the written offer of a bidder on prescribed forms generated by the department of transportations approved proposal preparation computer software to perform the stated work at the prices quoted .
as used herein proposal is synonymous with bid .
num proposal form .
the prescribed form generated by the quest lite bid preparation software on which the offer of a bidder is submitted .
num proposal guaranty .
the security furnished with a proposal to assure that the bidder will enter into the contract if the proposal is accepted .
num num purchase order .
a document issued by the state purchasing agent and transmitted to the contractor with copies of the executed contract that indicates that appropriate accounts have been established and that funds have been assigned to those accounts for the purpose of reimbursing the contractor for its work in implementing the contract .
num quest lite .
the computer software used by bidders to prepare a bid proposal .
num resident engineer .
the engineers authorized representative at the site of the work whose main responsibility is to insure contract compliance .
num responsive bid .
a proposal which complies with all material requirements of the notice to contractors .
num report of change .
a written order to the contractor covering contingencies extra work increases or decreases in contract quantities and additions or alterations to the plans or specifications within the scope of the contract and establishing the basis of payment and time adjustments for the work affected by said changes .
a report of change provides the required documentation for the execution of a contract addendum .
num rightofway .
a general term denoting land property or interest therein usually in a strip acquired for or devoted to transportation purposes .
num roadbed .
the graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
num roadside .
a general term denoting the area adjoining the outer edge of the roadway .
extensive areas between the roadways of a divided highway may also be considered roadside .
num roadside development .
those items necessary for the preservation of landscape materials and features the rehabilitation and protection against erosion of all areas disturbed by construction through seeding sodding mulching and the placing of other ground covers such suitable planting and other improvements as may increase the effectiveness and enhance the appearance of the highway .
num roadway .
the portion of a highway within limits of construction .
num shoulder .
the portion of the pavement structure contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of stopped vehicles for emergency use and for lateral support of base and surface courses .
num sidewalk .
that portion of the roadway primarily constructed for the use of pedestrians .
num specialty items .
those specific work items listed in either the bid schedule or elsewhere in the contract whose item numbers are designated by the prefix s. the work required to implement specialty items is considered to be a type that a contractor would not generally perform with its own organization .
num num specifications .
the compilation of provisions and requirements for the performance of the prescribed work and consisting of the following a .
standard specifications a book of specifications approved for general application and repetitive use .
specifically the rhode island standard specifications for road and bridge construction of latest revision .
b .
supplemental specifications approved additions and revisions to the standard specifications .
c. special provisions additions and revisions to the standard and supplemental specifications applicable for an individual project .
d. the required contract provisions for federalaid projects when applicable .
e. federal wage rates a schedule of prevailing rates of wages of labor for the geographical area in which the work of the contract is to be performed compiled by and issued from time to time by the secretary of the united states department of labor .
num specification booklet .
definition deleted num specified completion date .
the date stated in the proposal on which the contract work or specified portion thereof is to be substantially completed .
num stabilization .
modification of soils or aggregates by incorporating materials that will increase loadbearing capacity firmness and resistance to weathering or displacement .
num state .
the state of rhode island and providence plantations acting through its authorized representatives .
num structures .
bridges culverts catch basins drop inlets retaining walls cribbing manholes endwalls buildings sewers service pipes underdrains foundation drains and other features which may be encountered in the work .
num subcontractor .
an individual or legal entity with whom the contractor sublets part of the work .
num substantial completion .
substantial completion of a unit or portion of the work such as a structure an interchange or section of road or pavement occurs at the point at which the portion of the work is complete such that it can be safely and effectively used by the public and when the following criteria are realized num all courses of pavement are complete num curbing and sidewalks are placed num all project drainage is complete num guardrail and terminal sections are properly installed num pavement markings are in place num traffic signal systems meet the following requirements a isolated traffic signals the signal control equipment is fully programmed detectors are installed and functioning and the signal is in actuated operation b coordinated traffic signal systems the requirements of condition a are met the interconnect is installed and functioning and the signals are operating as a coordinated system c closed loop signal systems the conditions of a and b are met the communications link is operating and the monitoring functions including system and intersection graphics are installed and operating at the departments monitoring stations num regulatory and warning signs are installed num num highway lighting is operational and num only corrective or repair work remains for the physical completion of the contract .
num substructure .
all of the structure below the bearings of simple and continuous spans skewbacks of arches and tops of footings of rigid frames and including backwalls wingwalls and wing protection railings .
num superintendent .
the contractors authorized representative in responsible charge of the work .
num superstructure .
the entire structure except the substructure as defined in subsection num .
num supplemental agreement .
a contract addendum signed by the department and the contractor for the performance of work which is beyond the scope of the original contract but which the department elects to perform in conjunction with the existing contract .
num surety .
the legal entity or individual other than the contractor executing a bond or bonds furnished by the contractor .
num titles or headings .
the titles or headings of the sections and subsections herein are intended for convenience of reference and shall not be considered as having any bearing on their interpretation .
num township town city or district .
a subdivision of the state used to designate or identify the location of the proposed work .
num traveled way .
the portion of the roadway provided for the movement of vehicles exclusive of shoulders and auxiliary lanes .
num winter shutdown .
the period from december numth through the following april numth .
num work .
the furnishing of all labor materials equipment and other incidentals necessary for the successful completion of the project in accordance with the contract num working day .
a calendar day during which normal construction operations could proceed for a major part of a shift normally excluding saturdays sundays and holidays .
num repetition of expressions .
in order to avoid cumbersome and confusing repetition of expressions in these specifications it is provided that whenever anything is or is to be done if as or when or where contemplated required determined directed specified authorized ordered given designated indicated considered necessary deemed necessary permitted reserved suspended established approval approved disapproved acceptable unacceptable suitable accepted satisfactory unsatisfactory sufficient insufficient rejected or condemned it shall be understood as if the expression were followed by the words by the engineer or to the engineer .
num contract award booklet .
a document provided to the contractor after the award of the contract containing the following elements of the contract documents notice to contractors the bidders proposal executed copies of both the contract agreement and contract bonds and a contract award compact disk cd containing the ri standard specifications for road and bridge construction supplemental specifications special provisions required contract provisions for federalaid projects num federal wage rates all contract addenda issued prior to the date of the opening of proposals distribution of quantities plans appendices and bid analysis reports .
num contract bid package .
a compact disk cd containing the following items provided to prospective bidders for bid preparation purposes ri standard specifications for road and bridge construction supplemental specifications special provisions required contract provisions for federal aid projects federal wage rates distribution of quantities plans appendices the quest lite installation software and the quest lite bid file .
num transportation management plan .
the document that lays out the set of coordinated transportation management strategies that will be used to manage the work zone safety and mobility impacts of the project .
num tmp implementation managers .
the project managers with the primary responsibility and authority for implementation of the transportation management plan .
the department and the contractor must each designate on the transportation management plan their respective tmp implementation manager for the project .
section num bidding requirements and conditions num prequalification of bidders .
prequalification of bidders shall be in accordance with num cfr num rhode island general law num together with regulations and procedures promulgated thereunder and those regulations .
num contents of proposal forms .
the completed proposal form is generated by the departments quest lite bid preparation software which is furnished to the prospective bidder on compact disk cd as part of the contract bid package with the plans specifications and additional contract bid documents in accordance with the instructions set forth in the notice to contractors .
the proposal form consists of three parts .
the first part the preamble outlines the various understandings and agreements required of the prospective bidder as conditions to its offer to perform the stated work .
the second part the bid schedule is that portion of the form where the various items of work are listed in a numbered sequence and includes the unit prices entered by the bidder and total bid amounts of each item which are computed by quest lite .
the third part of the form is the signature page which includes the total or gross sum of bid and which must be signed by the bidder or his authorized signatory .
this signature signifies the bidders acceptance of all requirements and conditions of the contract and its agreement to substantially complete the work by a calendar date certain .
the plans specifications and other contract bid documents designated in the proposal form will be considered a part of the proposal .
when applicable prospective bidders will be required to pay the department the sum stated in the notice to contractors for each set of contract bid packages taken out by said bidders .
in the case of joint ventures contract bid packages must be taken by the joint venture this does not however preclude entities comprising the joint venture from taking out contract bid packages independently .
in addition the joint venture must be independently registered as a user of the departments electronic bidding system known as quest lite .
num num interpretation of quantities in bid schedule .
the quantities appearing in the bid schedule are estimated and are used for the comparison of proposals .
payment to the contractor will be made for the actual quantities of work performed and accepted or materials furnished in accordance with the contract .
the estimated quantities of work to be performed and the materials to be furnished may be increased decreased or omitted as deemed necessary or advisable by the engineer or as hereinafter provided .
num examination of plans specifications special provisions and site of work .
the bidder is expected to carefully examine the site of the proposed work the proposal the plans the rhode island standard specifications for road and bridge construction supplemental specifications special provisions distribution of quantities and contract forms before submitting a proposal .
the submission of a proposal will be considered conclusive evidence that the bidder has made such an examination and is satisfied as to the conditions to be encountered in performing the work and as to the requirements of the contract as defined in the contract documents .
boring logs and other records of subsurface investigations are available for inspection by bidders .
it is understood that such information was obtained and used for department design and estimating purposes only .
it is made available to bidders so all have access to identical subsurface information available to the department .
furthermore this information is not intended as a substitute for personal investigation interpretations and judgment of the bidders .
the locations of all utilities as shown on the plans are approximate .
the contractor shall seek to determine the exact location of all existing utilities both underground and overhead by notifying dig safe in accordance with state law .
damage to utilities which are shown on the plans or located by the respective utilities in accordance with the dig safe process shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
damage to utilities and their associated service connections which are not shown on the plans or located by the respective utilities in accordance with the dig safe process will be paid for by the department .
num preparation of proposal .
the bidders attention is directed to the fact that all proposals must be generated by ridots quest lite software and the proposal must be submitted to the purchasing division of the department of administration in the form of an electronic file on a compact disk cd which should be labeled and identified at a minimum with the bidders name and the rhode island construction contract number of the project being bid .
in addition the bidder shall submit its proposal in hard copy format on forms generated by the department of transportations quest lite program .
the bidder shall specify a unit price in words and figures for each pay item for which a quantity is provided .
all pay items for which a bidder is required to specify a unit price shall have a bid price of at least one cent .
the quest lite software requires a unit price to be entered for each pay item and will not allow a unit price of less than one cent to be entered as a bid price for an individual pay item .
the bidder shall show the products of the respective unit prices and quantities written in figures in the column provided for that purpose and the total amount of the proposal obtained by adding the amounts of all items .
the total bid price is to be based on the unit prices written in words correctly extended and added .
in case of a discrepancy between the unit prices written in words and those written in figures the unit prices written in words shall govern .
the state reserves other rights as noted in subsection num consideration of proposals .
num when the proposal contains a choice to be made by the bidder the bidder shall indicate its choice in accordance with the instructions for that particular item .
thereafter no further choice will be permitted .
erasures and alterations to the proposal shall not be permitted .
a copy of the joint venture agreement must be included with the proposal when submitted .
the joint venture agreement must clearly identify the entities which comprise the joint venture and the officers of the joint venture .
the bidders hard copy proposal generated from the quest lite software must be signed in ink by an authorized signatory of the partnership joint venture corporation or by such other agent of the contractor legally qualified and acceptable to the state as hereinafter provided .
if the proposal is made by an individual hisher name and mailing address shall be shown by a partnership the name and mailing address of each partnership member shall be shown as a joint venture the name and mailing address of each member or officer of the firms represented by the joint venture shall be shown by a corporation the name of the corporation and the business address of its corporate office shall be shown .
in the case of partnership andor joint venture the names and addresses of each member or officer of the partnership or joint venture must be listed in a separate attachment to be included with the submitted proposal .
all certification documents are contained within the bid file that is used by the quest lite program .
by utilizing quest lite bidders are agreeing that they have executed all required certifications enumerated in the proposal report labeled documents which is located at the end of the proposal form .
failure to comply with the requirements of the quest lite software will not enable the bidder to successfully complete the preparation of a bid proposal .
num proposal guaranty .
a proposal will not be accepted or considered unless accompanied by a guaranty in the form of an original bid bond made payable to the state of rhode island .
bid bonds must be provided by surety companies licensed and authorized to conduct business in the state of rhode island .
all surety companies must be listed with the department of the treasury fiscal services circular num latest revision published by the federal register .
the amount of the proposal guaranty shall be as designated in the notice to contractors .
when the bidder is a joint venture the proposal guaranty must be made out to the name of the joint venture and all parties of the joint venture must be named in the execution of the proposal guaranty made by the same thereon .
if there is more than one surety to the bid bond each surety shall be named and execution made by same thereon .
execution of the bid bonds will not be considered complete unless accompanied by a certified copy of the power of attorney for the suretys attorneyinfact .
num irregular proposals .
num a .
mandatory reasons for disqualification in addition to others as set forth in those regulations .
the department will declare a proposal nonresponsive and shall disqualify a bidder for any of the following irregularities num .
if the proposal form is obtained from any party other than the department .
proposal forms are nontransferable .
num .
if the proposal is on a form other than that generated by the department of transportations quest lite software or if the form is altered or any part thereof is detached or incomplete num .
if there are unauthorized additions unauthorized conditional or alternate bids or irregularities of any kind which may tend to make the proposal incomplete indefinite or ambiguous as to its meaning num .
if the bidder adds any provisions reserving the right to accept or reject an award num .
if the proposal is not completed using the quest lite software num .
if the department determines that the low bid is both mathematically and materially unbalanced num .
if the proposal is received after the time designated for the opening of bids num .
if the bidder fails to execute the required certifications enumerated in the proposal report labeled documents located at the end of the proposal num .
if the bidder fails to submit an original bid bond properly executed .
num .
if compact disk cd data files and the hard copy submission do not match unless such a discrepancy is determined to be the result of an error or malfunction within the departments quest lite software .
num .
if a compact disk cd is not submitted or num .
if the proposal pages generated by the quest lite software have been altered in any way .
b .
other reasons for disqualification in addition to other reasons set forth in those regulations .
the department and the division of purchases reserve the right to declare a proposal nonresponsive and may disqualify a bidder for any of the following irregularities num .
if the bidder fails to include at least a minimum amount where required for a particular item num .
if the proposal does not contain a total or gross sum of bid written in words and figures in the space provided num .
if the proposal is not properly signed num .
if the bidder fails to comply in every detail with the instructions provided in subsection num preparation of proposal num .
if the proposal is not submitted in a sealed envelope and clearly labeled as to its contents num num .
if the compact disk cd containing the bidders proposal is unreadable by the department of transportations bid proposal software .
num delivery of proposals .
proposals shall be submitted in sealed envelopes .
the envelope shall be labeled to clearly indicate its contents .
when sent by mail the sealed proposal shall be addressed in care of the official in whose office the bids are to be received all as indicated in the notice to contractors .
proposals shall be filed prior to the time and at the place specified in the notice to contractors .
num withdrawal or revision of proposals .
a bidder may withdraw or revise a proposal after it has been deposited with the division of purchases provided the request for such withdrawal or revision is received by the division of purchases in writing or by telegram not later than two num hours before the time set for opening proposals .
upon presentation of its written request at the proper time a bidders proposal will be returned unopened .
if a proposal is withdrawn in accordance with this provision the proposal guaranty shall be returned to the bidder .
whether or not proposals are opened exactly at the time set for such opening a proposal will not be received nor may any be withdrawn after the time set for the opening of proposals .
the department reserves the right to revise the plans specifications other contract documents the proposal and bid opening date for any project at any time prior to the time set for opening of proposals .
such revisions will be made by addendum duly numbered and dated and made accessible to bidders through the ridoa division of purchases website known as the r. i .
vendor information program rivip at httpwww.purchasing.ri.gov .
num combination or conditional proposals .
if the department so elects proposals may be issued for projects in combination or separately so that proposals may be submitted either on the combination or on separate units of the combination .
the department and division of purchases reserve the right to make awards on combination bids or separate bids to the advantage of the state .
no combination of proposals other than those as specified by the department will be considered .
separate contracts will be written for each individual project included in the combination .
conditional proposals will be considered only when specified in the special provisions .
num public opening of proposals .
proposals will be opened and read publicly at the time and place indicated in the notice to contractors or as amended by duly authorized contract addenda .
bidders their authorized agents and other interested parties are invited to be present at the opening of proposals .
num disqualification of bidders and rejection of proposals .
a .
mandatory reasons for disqualification .
the department will declare a proposal unresponsive and shall disqualify a bidder for any of the following reasons num num .
more than one proposal for the same work from an individual partnership corporation or joint venture under the same or different name num .
evidence of collusion among bidders .
participants in such collusion will not be considered for future proposals until requalified by the department num .
the making of false statements on prequalification documents andor other required bidders certifications num .
failure to comply with any prequalification requirements as set forth in subsection num num .
debarment by federal or state authorities or num .
failure to provide a properly executed contract bond .
b .
other reasons for disqualification .
the department and the division of purchases reserve the right to declare a proposal unresponsive and may disqualify a bidder for any of the following reasons num .
lack of competency and adequate machinery plant and other equipment num .
uncompleted work under contract which in the judgment of the department might hinder or prevent the prompt completion of additional work if awarded num .
failure to pay or satisfactorily settle all bills due for the prime contractors labor and material on contracts in force with the department at the time of the bid opening num .
failure to pay or satisfactorily settle subcontractor payments as provided for under section num subcontractor prompt payment where good cause as determined by the department of transportation has not been accepted .
determination of failure to pay or satisfactorily settle subcontractor payments will be made within num days of bid opening provided however that the bidder shall have the right to either pay or settle any such claims within said numday period .
num .
failure to comply with any post qualification regulations or requirements of either the department or the division of purchases num .
default under previous contracts num .
unsatisfactory performance on a previously awarded contract or num .
failure to reimburse the state for monies owed on any previously awarded contracts including those where the prospective bidder is a party to a joint venture and the joint venture has failed to reimburse the state for monies owed .
num material guaranty .
the successful bidder may be required to furnish a complete statement of the origin composition and manufacture of any or all materials to be used in the construction of the work together with samples to be tested for conformance with contract provisions .
a .
domestic steel products .
the bidder is advised of the buy american requirements that apply to domestic steel products as set forth in subsection numa of these specifications .
num num bidding certifications .
a. noncollusive bidding certification .
num .
the certificates .
every proposal submitted to the department shall contain an anticollusion certificate for contract and force account duly subscribed to and affirmed by the bidder as true under the penalties of law .
num .
certifications .
by submission of a proposal each bidder and each person signing the proposal which includes the anticollusion certificate on behalf of the bidder certifies as to its own organization under penalty of perjury that to the best of their knowledge and belief a the prices in this proposal have been arrived at independently without collusion consultation communication or agreement with any other bidder or with any competitor for the purpose of restricting competition .
b unless required by law the prices which have been quoted in this proposal have not been knowingly disclosed and will not knowingly be disclosed by the bidder directly or indirectly to any other bidder or competitor prior to opening of proposals .
c no attempt has been made or will be made by the bidder to induce any other person partnership or corporation to submit or not to submit a proposal for the purpose of restricting competition .
num .
noncompliance .
the quest lite software will not enable a prospective bidder to complete the preparation of a proposal unless the bidder certifies that he is in compliance with paras .
numa numb and numc above .
the fact that a bidder num has published price lists rates or tariffs covering items being procured num has informed prospective customers of proposed or pending publication of new or revised price lists for such items or num has sold the same items to other customers at the same prices being bid does not constitute a disclosure within the meaning of numa .
the proposal submitted to the department will be considered as authorized by the board of directors of the bidder .
such authorization will be deemed to include the signing and submission of the proposal and the inclusion therein of the certificate as to noncollusion on the part of the corporation .
the signers of the proposal hereby tender to the department a statement that the named contractor has not either directly or indirectly entered into any agreement participated in any collusion or otherwise taken any action to restrain free competitive bidding in connection with the proposal .
b .
certification regarding debarment suspension and other responsibility matters .
num .
the certificate .
every proposal submitted to the department shall contain a certification regarding debarment suspension and other responsibility matters duly subscribed to and affirmed by the bidder as true under the penalties of law .
num .
certification .
by submission of a proposal each bidder and each person signing the proposal which includes the debarment certification on behalf of the bidder certifies as to its own organization under penalty of perjury that to the best of their knowledge and belief num a are not presently debarred suspended proposed for debarment declared ineligible or voluntarily excluded from covered transactions by any federal department or agency b have not within a threeyear period preceding the submission of a proposal been convicted of or had a civil judgment rendered for commission of fraud or a criminal offense in connection with obtaining or performing a pubic contract or transaction c are not presently indicted for or otherwise criminally or civilly charged by a governmental entity d have not within the prior threeyear period had one or more public transactions terminated for cause or default .
num .
noncompliance .
in the event a prospective bidder is unable to certify to one or more of the conditions above the bidder must attach a list of exceptions to the hard copy proposal generated by the quest lite program .
exceptions listed will not necessarily result in denial of award but will be considered in determining contractor responsibilities .
the quest lite software allows a prospective bidder to either certify that he is in compliance with the provisions outlined in paras .
numa b c and d above or to not certify these provisions and instead provide with the proposal a list of exceptions to document the reasons why he is unable to certify his compliance with these provisions .
in the latter case the software will generate a statement on the signature page of the proposal that additional documentation is attached in support of the bidders inability to fully certify to the provisions .
c. disadvantaged business enterprise affirmative action certificate .
num .
the certificate .
for all contracts containing provisions for the participation of disadvantaged business enterprises dbes prospective bidders shall be required to complete a certification affirming compliance with the u.s. department of transportation and applicable state of rhode island regulations regarding participation by disadvantaged business enterprises in the contract as contractors subcontractors andor suppliers of materials and services .
num .
certification .
by submission of a proposal each bidder and each person signing a proposal which includes the dbe certification certifies that the organization shall affirmatively seek out and consider disadvantaged business enterprises to participate in the contract and develop and submit for approval to the department within ten days from the receipt of bids a disadvantaged business enterprise program in accordance with the provisions of the dbe certification .
num .
noncompliance .
the quest lite software will not enable a prospective bidder to complete the preparation of a bid proposal unless the bidder completes the dbe certification form in the proposal .
d. disclosure of lobbying activities .
num .
the certificate .
every bidder shall be required to certify and disclose through the bid preparation process any lobbying of federal agencies employees officers members of congress or officers or employees of congress or members of congress in connection with a covered federal action .
num .
certification .
by submission of a proposal each bidder and each person signing a proposal certifies that to the best of their knowledge and belief num a no federal appropriated funds have or will be paid by or on behalf of the prospective bidder to any individual or entity for the purpose of influencing or attempting to influence any federal agency employee or officer thereof in connection with the awarding of any federal contract the making of a federal grant or load or any other form of a contractual nature .
b if any funds other than federal appropriated funds have been paid for the purpose of influencing any federal agency employee or officer thereof the prospective bidder shall complete and submit as part of the bid proposal submission standard form lll disclosure form to report lobbying in accordance with its instructions .
the prospective bidder also acknowledges by submitting a bid proposal that the requirements of this certification shall also apply to all lower tier subcontracts which exceed num and that all subcontractors shall certify and disclose accordingly .
num .
noncompliance .
the quest lite software will not enable a prospective bidder to complete the preparation of a bid proposal unless the bidder certifies that he has met the requirements of paras .
num a and b above .
in order to complete a bid proposal the bidder is required to certify that no federal appropriated funds have been used for lobbying purposes to certify whether other sources of funds have been used for lobbying and if so to report this activity on standard form lll which is included in the quest lite software .
section num award and execution of the contract num consideration of proposals .
after the proposals are opened and read they will be compared on the basis of the summation of the products of the estimated quantities shown in the proposal by the unit bid prices .
the results of such comparisons will be made available to the public .
the state reserves the right to correct arithmetic errors in the proposals prior to comparison of said proposals .
in the event of a discrepancy between unit bid prices and extensions the unit bid price shall govern .
the state reserves the right to reject any or all proposals to waive technicalities or to advertise for new proposals .
num postqualification requirements and award of contract .
a. submission of post qualification requirements .
all post qualification requirements shall be submitted as specified in the contract documents .
this includes but is not limited to all documentation and requirements referenced under part ii action required by contractor as contained in the special provision entitled disadvantaged business enterprise affirmative action certification for contractors and consultants .
this special provision is located in the section of the contract documents entitled required contract provisions for federalaid projects .
num as part of the post qualification submission the contractor must designate on the transportation management plan the contractors tmp implementation manager for the contract .
the contractors tmp implementation manager together with the departments tmp implementation manager are the persons with the primary responsibility and authority for implementation of the transportation management plan .
b .
financial statements .
the successful bidder will be required to submit a complete set of audited financial statements certified by a certified public accountant cpa .
for contracts valued at num and under the successful bidder is required to submit only its financial references and an original copy of its current financial statement .
c. award of contract .
contract award if it be awarded will be made within sixty num calendar days following the opening of proposals or within the time specified in the notice to contractors to the lowest responsible and qualified bidder who submits the lowest responsive proposal .
the successful bidder will first receive a notice of tentative award .
this written communication will indicate the conditional intention of the state to award the contract and instruct the successful bidder to arrange for the execution of the contract agreement and contract bond and for the delivery of the certificates of insurance all as hereinafter provided .
on contracts jointly bid contractors will be held jointly and severally liable for the entire contract .
corporate bidders must furnish documentary evidence that they have met all legal requirements to transact business in the state of rhode island as a condition precedent to approval of the contract .
num cancellation of award .
both the department and division of purchases reserve the right to cancel the award of any contract before the execution thereof by all parties without any liability against the state .
num return of proposal guaranty .
the state reserves the right to retain the surety of all bidders until either the successful bidder enters into the contract or until such time as the award or cancellation of the contract is announced .
at this point sureties will be returned to all bidders .
a contractor will not be released from the bidding obligation because of an alleged error in the preparation of the proposal unless the state returns the contractors proposal guaranty .
num contract bond .
at the time of the execution of the contract the successful bidder shall furnish a contract bond in a sum equal to the full amount of the contract .
the contract bond shall guarantee the following complete performance of the contract full payment for all materials and equipment and full payment of all wages of labor .
the form of the contract bond shall be acceptable to both the department and the division of purchases .
in the event the surety fails or becomes financially insolvent the successful bidder shall file a new bond in the amount designated by the department within thirty num days of such failures or insolvency .
num the bond submitted to the department shall be provided by a surety both acceptable to the department and licensed and authorized to conduct business in the state of rhode island .
all surety companies must be listed with the department of the treasury fiscal services circular num latest revision published by the federal register .
subsequent to award of contract the department or division of purchases may call for additional security as required .
changes additions and modifications to the contract may be made without the consent of surety .
num execution and approval of the contract .
the contract shall be executed by the successful bidder hereinafter referred to as the contractor in accordance with the instructions contained in the notice of tentative award .
at the specified time and place the contractor shall deliver the contract bond and required certificates of insurance execute the contract agreement and comply with all other stipulations set forth in said notice .
receipt by the contractor of the executed contract agreement and a purchase order signed by the director of the department andor the purchasing agent and the state controller constitutes the official award of the contract .
the contract execution date may be extended by mutual agreement of the department and the successful bidder .
num .
failure to execute contract .
a .
failure of state to execute contract .
if the contract is not executed within fifteen num calendar days following execution of the contract agreement and bond by the contractor said contractor shall have the right to withdraw its proposal without penalty .
b .
failure of the bidder to execute contract .
failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract agreement and contract bond deliver the required certificates of insurance and comply with other stipulations within fifteen num calendar days of receipt of the notice of tentative award shall be considered revocation of said notice and require forfeiture of the proposal guaranty to the state .
such forfeiture shall not be considered a penalty but rather a liquidation of damages sustained by the state .
furthermore the department will not issue or receive subsequent proposals for construction work from a bidder who fails to execute a contract until said bidder demonstrates its ability to obtain the necessary bonding and insurance coverage to the complete satisfaction of the department .
in the event a contract is not executed with the firstdesignated responsible bidder the department may either award the contract to the next lowest responsible bidder or reject all bids and readvertise the project for the purpose of soliciting new proposals .
num escrow of bid documentation .
the placing in escrow of bid documentation in accordance with this section shall be required only when specifically called for in the notice to contractors .
otherwise this section shall not apply .
a .
scope and purpose .
the purpose of this specification is to preserve the bid documents of the contractor for use by the parties in any claims or litigation between the department and contractor arising out of this contract .
num the contractor shall submit to the department a legible copy of bid documentation used to prepare the bid for this contract .
such documentation shall be placed in escrow with a banking institution or other bonded document storage facility and preserved by that institutionfacility as specified in the following sections of this clause .
b. submittal and return of bid documentation .
prior to execution of the contract the contractor shall submit to the department the required bid documentation in a sealed container .
the container shall be clearly marked bid documentation and shall also show on the face of the container the contractors name and address the date of submittal the project number the contract number and project name .
c. affidavit .
in addition to the bid documentation the contractor shall submit an affidavit signed under oath by a representative of the contractor authorized to execute bidding proposals listing each bid document submitted by author date nature and subject matter .
the affidavit shall attest that the affiant has personally examined the bid documentation that the affidavit lists all of the documents relied upon by the contractor in preparing its bid for this project and that all such bid documentation is included in the submission to the department .
d. duration and use .
the department and the contractor will jointly deliver the sealed container and affidavit to a banking institution or other bonded document storage facility selected by the department for placement in a safety deposit box vault or other secure accommodation .
the agreement with the document depository shall reflect that the bid documentation and affidavit shall remain in escrow during the life of the contract or until the contractor notifies the department of his intention to file a claim or initiate litigation against the department related to the contract .
notification of the contractors intention to file a claim or initiation of litigation against the department shall be sufficient grounds for the department to obtain the release and custody of the bid documentation .
in the absence of such action and provided that the contractor has signed the final standard release form the department shall instruct the document depository to release the sealed container to the contractor .
in accordance with its representation that the sealed container placed in escrow contains all of the materials relied upon by the contractor in preparing its bid the contractor agrees to waive its right to use any bid documentation other than that placed in escrow in disputes arising out of this contract .
e. refusal or failure to provide bid documentation .
failure to provide bid documentation in accordance with the requirements of this section shall be considered revocation of the notice of award and forfeiture of the proposal guaranty to the state .
f. confidentiality of bid documentation .
the bid documentation and affidavit in escrow are and will remain the property of the contractor .
the department has no interest in or right to the bid documentation unless notification of the intention to file claim is received or litigation ensues between the department and contractor .
in the event of such notification or litigation the bid documentation and affidavit shall become the property of the department provided however that these materials and all copies made by the department shall be returned to the contractor at the conclusion of litigation or final resolution of all outstanding claims upon execution of a final release .
moreover the department shall make every reasonable effort to insure that bid documentation to which it has gained access will remain confidential within the department and will not be made available to anyone outside the department or used by a former department employee .
num g. cost and escrow instructions .
the cost of the escrow will be borne by the department .
the department will provide escrow instructions to the document depository consistent with this clause .
there will be no separate payment for compilation of the data container or cost of verification of the bid documentation .
all costs shall be included in the overall contract bid price .
section num scope of work num intent of contract .
the intent of the contract is to provide for the construction and completion in every detail of the work as described .
the contractor shall furnish all labor materials equipment tools transportation and supplies required to complete the work all in accordance with the plans specifications and terms of the contract .
num changes in the contract .
a .
right to change .
the engineer reserves the right to make changes in the contract at any time during the progress of the work as are necessary to satisfactorily complete the project .
such changes shall not invalidate the contract nor release the surety .
the contractor agrees to perform the work as directed by the engineer .
any costs applicable to such changes will be paid for by the execution of an appropriate contract modification .
b .
causes for changes .
changes in the contract may result from any of the following causes num .
differing site conditions .
num .
alterations in the plans or details additions to reductions in or elimination of an existing item of work contained in the proposal .
num .
extra or unforeseen work for which there is no item of work in the proposal .
num .
suspension of the work for which delay damages are reasonable .
num .
significant changes in the character of the work .
num differing site conditions .
during the progress of the work if subsurface or latent physical conditions are encountered at the site differing materially from those indicated in the contract or if unknown physical conditions of an unusual nature differing materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the work provided for in the contract are encountered at the site the party discovering such conditions shall promptly notify the other party in writing of the specific differing conditions before the site is disturbed and before the affected work is performed .
upon written notification the engineer will investigate the conditions and if it is determined that the conditions materially differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time required for the performance of any work under the contract an adjustment excluding anticipated profits will be made num and the contract modified in writing accordingly .
the engineer will notify the contractor of the determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract is warranted .
no contract adjustment which results in a benefit to the contractor will be allowed unless the contractor has provided the required written notice .
no contract adjustment will be allowed under this clause for any effects caused on unchanged work .
num alterations in the plans or details .
the engineer may order changes in the plans or details increase reduce or eliminate any contract work item deemed necessary to satisfactorily complete the project .
should such alterations in the contract result in changes in the quantities of work to be performed the contractor shall complete such altered quantities in the same manner prescribed for the corresponding unaltered quantities .
unless otherwise provided for under subsection num significant changes in the character of the work such altered work shall be paid for at the same unit prices as for the corresponding unaltered items of work .
a. prefabricated materials .
the engineer may find it necessary to decrease or eliminate items of work that involve prefabricated materials which are not considered stock commercial items .
in the event fabrication of such materials was started or completed before the contractor is advised of the decrease or elimination of the items in question the department may num .
upon verification reimburse the contractor for the fabrication cost including material cost less salvage value or num .
instruct the contractor to have the fabricated material delivered to the project to be placed in the care of the engineer for subsequent use by the state on other work .
payment for such material will be made in accordance with subsection num partial payments .
num extra work .
the contractor shall perform extra work for which there is no price included in the contract whenever it is deemed necessary or desirable to complete the work as contemplated .
such work shall be performed in accordance with the specifications and as directed and will be paid for as provided under subsection num differing site conditions changes extra work and force account work .
num suspensions of work ordered by the engineer .
if the performance of all or any portion of the work is suspended or delayed by the engineer in writing for an unreasonable period of time not originally anticipated customary or inherent to the construction industry and the contractor believes that additional compensation andor contract time is due as a result of such suspension or delay the contractor shall submit to the engineer in writing a request for adjustment within seven calendar days of receipt of the notice to resume work .
the request shall set forth the reasons and support for such adjustment .
upon receipt the engineer will evaluate the contractors request .
if the engineer agrees that the cost andor time required for the performance of the contract has increased as a result of such suspension and the suspension was caused by conditions beyond the control of and not the fault of the contractor its suppliers or subcontractors at any approved tier and not caused by weather the engineer will make an num adjustment excluding profit and modify the contract in writing accordingly .
the contractor will be notified of the engineers determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract is warranted .
no contract adjustment will be allowed unless the contractor has submitted the request for adjustment within the time prescribed .
no contract adjustment will be allowed under this clause to the extent that performance would have been suspended or delayed by any other cause or for which an adjustment is provided for or excluded under any other term or condition of this contract .
num significant changes in the character of the work .
the engineer reserves the right to make in writing at any time during the work such changes in quantities and such alterations in the work as are necessary to satisfactorily complete the project .
such changes in quantities and alterations shall not invalidate the contract nor release the surety and the contractor agrees to perform the work as altered .
if the alterations or changes in quantities significantly change the character of the work under the contract whether such alterations or changes are in themselves significant changes to the character of the work or by affecting other work cause such other work to become significantly different in character an adjustment excluding anticipated profits will be made to the contract .
the basis for the adjustment shall be agreed upon prior to the performance of the work .
if a basis can not be agreed upon then an adjustment will be made either for or against the contractor in such amount as the engineer may determine to be fair and equitable .
if the alterations or changes in quantities do not significantly change the character of the work to be performed under the contract the altered work will be paid for as provided elsewhere in the contract .
a .
circumstances for significant change .
the term significant change shall be construed to apply only to the following circumstances num .
when the character of the work as altered differs materially in kind or nature from that involved or included in the original proposed construction or num .
when a major item of work as defined elsewhere in the contract is increased in excess of num percent or decreased below num percent of the original contract quantity .
any allowance for an increase in quantity shall apply only to that portion in excess of num percent of original contract item quantity or in case of a decrease below num percent to the actual amount of work performed .
num maintenance of traffic .
unless otherwise provided the contractor shall maintain the road undergoing improvement open to all traffic during the work of the contract .
where so provided on the plans the contractor may bypass traffic over an approved detour route .
additional detours not shown on the plans may be employed only if plans for the detours are designed submitted reviewed approved and implemented in accordance with the requirements indicated in the transportation management plan and such plans receive the written approval of the local citytown public works director .
detours of a shortterm nature which may be implemented only during the contractors scheduled hours of operation and which must be removed at the close of the days operations shall require a numhour advance notice and approval of the engineer .
the contractor shall keep the portion of the project being used by public traffic whether it be through or local traffic in a condition that shall safely and adequately accommodate num such traffic .
the contractor shall furnish erect and maintain all temporary traffic control devices in accordance with the manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways latest edition .
the contractor shall bear all expense of maintaining traffic over the section of road undergoing improvement without direct compensation except as provided below a .
special detours .
when the contract contains items for maintenance of detours or removing existing structures and maintaining traffic the payment for such items shall cover all cost of constructing and maintaining detour or detours including the construction of temporary bridges and accessory features and the subsequent legal removal of the same .
the failure or refusal of the contractor to construct detours at the proper time and to maintain same in working condition shall be sufficient cause for suspending the work until such detours are provided in satisfactory condition for use by public traffic .
rightofway for temporary roads or bridges will be furnished by the department .
b .
maintenance of traffic during suspension of work .
during any suspension of the work the contractor shall make passable and shall open to traffic those sections of the project together with temporary roadways or portions thereof as may be agreed upon between the contractor and the engineer for the temporary accommodation of traffic during the anticipated period of suspension .
thereafter and until an issuance of an order for the resumption of construction operations the maintenance of the temporary roadways and sections of the project will be the responsibility of the department .
when work is resumed the contractor shall replace or renew any work or materials lost or damaged because of such temporary use of the project remove to the extent directed by the engineer any work or materials used in the temporary maintenance thereof by the state and complete the project in every respect as though its prosecution had been continuous and without interferences .
additional work caused by such suspension for reasons beyond the control of the contractor will be paid for by the state in accordance with subsection num differing site conditions changes extra work and force account work .
c. maintenance directed by the engineer .
if the engineer directs special maintenance for the benefit of the traveling public then the contractor will be paid on the basis of prevailing unit prices or in accordance with subsection num extra work .
the engineer will be the sole judge of work to be classed as special maintenance .
detours or routes used exclusively by the contractor for hauling materials and equipment shall be constructed and maintained at its own expense .
in order to provide for the safety comfort and wellbeing of residents of heavily populated residential areas the contractor shall select haul routes between the project and material sources that will minimize disturbance to such residents .
the contractor shall submit for the engineers review its planned route of haul and its plan for minimizing the adverse effect of such hauling operations on local residents .
it shall be the responsibility of the contractor to obtain all necessary permits approvals and licenses and to comply with the ordinances rules and regulations of the local community concerning haul routes and detours all at no expense to the department .
the department reserves the right to select alternative haul routes to divide the hauling traffic over several routes and to impose such other restrictions it deems necessary to minimize the impact of the hauling operation on local residents .
the contractor shall not store barricades material or equipment in a manner that would impede or impair the safety of the traveling public .
d. maintenance for traffic flowutility work .
the contractor shall provide as part of the contract construction signing in accordance with the manual on uniform traffic control devices for all utility work performed directly by utility companies municipalities or their respective subcontractors .
num also included is the provision by the contractor of flaggers traffic persons and the setting up maintaining and moving of signs all in accordance with applicable provisions contained in part num of these standard specifications .
num maintenance of public access .
unless otherwise provided the contractor shall maintain existing streets highways roads private walks and sidewalks which may be involved with the project open for vehicular andor pedestrian traffic .
the contractor shall also provide and maintain in a safe condition temporary approaches crossings and intersections with trails roads streets businesses parking lots residences garages farms and other features as may be necessary and at its own expense and as directed by the engineer .
with respect to maintaining public access as described above the contractor will not be required to remove snow .
if the engineer decides that the interests of the public andor abutting property owners so require the contractor shall construct plank crossings or other such approved temporary crossings over trenches in streets roads or private ways .
all such temporary crossings shall be provided as directed by the engineer .
num rights in and use of materials found on the project .
the contractor with the approval of the engineer may use on the project such stone gravel sand or other material determined suitable by the engineer as may be found in the excavation and will be paid both for the excavation of such materials at the corresponding contract unit price and for the pay item for which the excavated material is used .
the contractor shall replace at its own expense with other acceptable material all of that portion of the excavation material so removed and used which was needed for use in the embankments backfills approaches or otherwise .
no charge for the materials so used will be made against the contractor .
the contractor shall not excavate or remove any material from within the highway location which is not within the grading limits as indicated by the slope and grade lines without prior written authorization from the engineer .
num final cleaningup .
prior to any inspections performed subsequent to the contractors notice of substantial completion all areas occupied by the contractor in connection with the work shall be cleaned of all rubbish excess materials temporary structures and equipment .
all parts of the work shall be left in an acceptable condition .
the cost of the final cleanup shall be incidental to other items of work and no separate payment shall be made .
the contractor shall remove its equipment materials and other obstacles from the project rightofway and from property adjacent to the project site which is not owned or controlled by the contractor within thirty num days after completion of the project .
the contractor shall clean and remove all cement streaks or drippings paint smears or drippings rust stains oil grease bituminous materials dirt and other foreign materials on or in any structure curb gutter median or gore marker due to its operation .
num num railwayhighway provisions .
if the contract requires that materials be hauled across the tracks of any railway the department will arrange with the railway for new crossings or for the use of any existing crossings .
if the contractor elects to use crossings other than those specified in the contract the contractor shall make arrangements for the use of the crossings .
work to be performed by the contractor on the railway rightofway shall be performed to avoid interference with the movement of trains or traffic of the railway company .
the contractor shall avoid accidents damage or unnecessary delay or interference with railway trains and other property .
num construction over or adjacent to navigable waters .
work over on or adjacent to navigable waters shall be so conducted so that free navigation of the waterways will not be interfered with and that the existing navigable depths will not be impaired except as allowed by permit issued by the u.s. coast guard or the u.s. army corps of engineers as applicable .
num contractors responsibility for the work .
until substantially complete the contractor shall be responsible and shall protect all work against injury or damage from all causes whether arising from the execution or the nonexecution of the work .
at the contractors expense the contractor shall rebuild repair restore and make good all losses injuries or damages to any portion of the work from any cause except those beyond the control of and without the fault or negligence of the contractor including but not restricted to acts of god such as earthquake tidal wave tornado hurricane or other cataclysmic phenomenon of nature or acts of the public enemy or of governmental authorities .
in case of suspension of work from any cause whatsoever the contractor shall be responsible for the project and shall take such precaution as may be necessary to prevent damage to the project provide for normal drainage and shall erect any necessary temporary structures signs or other facilities at its expense .
during such period of suspension of work the contractor shall properly and continuously maintain in an acceptable growing condition all living material in newly established plantings seedings and soddings furnished under his contract and shall take adequate precautions to protect new tree growth and other important vegetative growth against injury .
all costs associated with the work described in this subsection shall be borne by the contractor unless otherwise provided under subsection num differing site conditions .
num environmental protection .
the contractor shall comply with all federal state and local laws and regulations controlling pollution of the environment .
pollution of streams lakes ponds and reservoirs with fuels oils bitumens chemicals or other harmful materials and pollution of the atmosphere from particulate and gaseous matter shall be avoided .
when work areas or pits are located in or adjacent to live streams such areas shall be separated from the main stream by a dike or barrier to keep sediment from entering a flowing stream .
care shall be taken during the construction and removal of such barriers to minimize siltation of the stream .
water from aggregate washing or other operations containing sediment shall be treated by filtration settling basins or other means sufficient to reduce the sediment content to not more than that of the stream or lake into which it is discharged .
num other requirements relating to temporary and permanent erosion and water pollution controls are set forth in sections num through num respectively of these specifications .
a .
plant and pest control requirements .
the united states department of agriculture has advised that soil and soilmoving equipment operating in regulated areas of certain counties will be subject to plant and pest quarantine regulations .
in general these regulations provide for cleaning soil from equipment before it is moved from regulated areas .
complete information may be secured from appropriate divisions of the rhode island department of environmental management and the united states department of agriculture .
contractors shall comply with these regulations where applicable to the state of rhode island .
section num control of work num authority of the engineer .
the engineer will decide all questions related to the quality and acceptability of materials furnished work performed and the rate of progress of the work questions regarding the interpretation of the contract documents and questions as to the acceptable fulfillment of the contract by the contractor .
the engineer will have the authority to suspend the work completely or in part due to the failure of the contractor to correct conditions unsafe for the workers or the general public for failure to carry out provisions of the contract for failure to carry out orders for such periods necessary due to unsuitable weather for failure to correct damages to public or private properties caused by the contractor andor its subcontractors for conditions considered unsuitable for the prosecution of the work or for any other condition or reason determined to be in the states interest .
num plans and shop drawings .
plans will show details of all structures lines grades typical cross sections of the roadway location and design of all structures and a summary of items appearing on the proposal .
bridge plans will either show all dimensions and details necessary for complete construction or such information that when supplemented by additional field data gathered by the contractor will enable the contractor to prepare complete shop drawings .
the contractor shall keep one set of plans available at the site at all times and shall provide approved shop drawings to the engineer upon request .
all shop drawings will be submitted in a timely fashion such that the contractors approved schedule will not be adversely impacted by the submittal process .
shop drawings shall consist of such detailed plans required to control the work that are not included in the plans furnished by the department .
they shall include but not be limited to stress sheets erection plans falsework plans sheeting plans cofferdam plans bending diagrams for reinforcing steel or any other supplementary plans or similar data required of the contractor .
the contractor shall submit eight num sets of shop drawings to the engineer and one set to the design consultant of record .
shop drawings shall be accompanied by eight num sets of design computations cuts from manufacturers catalogs andor supporting technical bulletins .
num engineering shop drawings and design computations shall be stamped only by a rhode island registered professional engineer .
the stamping of plans for professional design shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements of the rhode island board of registration for professional engineers or other boards of professional registration as applicable .
within fortyfive num calendar days of submission all shop drawings shall be reviewed by the engineer and returned to the contractor for appropriate action .
shop drawings that are found to be erroneous lacking information necessary to control construction or not in conformance with accepted design criteria will be disapproved and returned to the contractor .
the contractor shall address the engineers comments and resubmit revised shop drawings andor design computations .
the contractor will not be allowed any increase in contract time for the time taken by the contractor to submit revised shop drawings caused by an erroneous submission or by a previous submission either lacking the information necessary to control construction or not conforming to accepted design criteria .
also the time taken by the engineer to review the revised shop drawings does not constitute justification for additional contract time .
shop drawings must be approved by the engineer prior to performance of the work involved .
such approval shall not relieve the contractor of any responsibility under the contract for the successful completion of the work .
unless otherwise specified in the contract documents the contract price will include the cost of furnishing all shop drawings .
num conformity with plans and specifications .
work performed and materials furnished shall be in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades cross sections dimensions and material requirements including tolerances specified in the contract documents .
in the event the engineer finds the materials furnished work performed or the finished product are not in reasonably close conformity with the contract documents but that reasonably acceptable work has been produced the engineer will determine if the work should be accepted and remain in place .
if accepted the engineer will document the basis of acceptance by contract modification which will provide for an appropriate adjustment in the contract price for such work or materials as necessary to support this determination .
reasonably close conformity means compliance with reasonable and customary manufacturing and construction tolerances where working tolerances are not specified .
where working tolerances are specified reasonably close conformity means compliance with such working tolerances .
without detracting from the complete and absolute discretion of the engineer to insist upon such tolerances as establishing reasonably close conformity the engineer may accept variations beyond such tolerances as reasonably close conformity where such variations will not materially affect the value or utility of the work or the interests of the state .
num coordination of plans specifications supplemental specifica tions and special provisions .
the standard specifications supplemental specifications plans special provisions and contract addenda are essential parts of the contract and a requirement occurring in one is as binding as though occurring in all .
they are intended to be complementary and to describe and provide for a complete work .
in case of discrepancy calculated dimensions will govern over num scaled dimensions plans will govern over standard and supplemental specifications supplemental specifications will govern over standard specifications and special provisions will govern over standard specifications supplemental specifications and plans .
the contractor shall take no advantage of any apparent error or omission in the contract documents .
if the contractor discovers such an error or omission the engineer shall be promptly notified .
the engineer will then make such corrections and interpretations necessary to fulfill the intent of the contract documents .
num cooperation by contractor .
the department will supply the contractor with a contract award booklet containing a contract award compact disk cd from which the plans specifications contract addenda and other contract documents may be printed .
the contractor will be required to keep one set of printed copies of the contract documents available on the project site at all times .
the contractor shall give the work the constant attention necessary to facilitate progress and shall cooperate fully with the engineer the departments resident engineer and inspectors and other contractors .
the contractor shall have on the project site as its agent a competent superintendent capable of reading and thoroughly understanding the contract documents and experienced in the type of work being performed .
the superintendent shall receive orders or instructions from the engineer shall be authorized to act for the contractor on the work and shall have full authority to execute orders or directions of the engineer without delay .
the contractor shall promptly supply irrespective of the amount of work sublet the necessary materials equipment tools labor and other incidentals to complete the contract .
a .
causes for removal .
the engineer may remove the superintendent from the project at any time if num .
the performance of the superintendent is unsatisfactory or num .
the superintendent is uncooperative in his relationship with the engineer .
num cooperation with utilities .
the department will notify all utility companies all pipe line owners or other parties affected and endeavor to have all necessary adjustments of public or private utility fixtures pipe lines and other appurtenances within or adjacent to the limits of construction made as soon as practicable .
water lines gas lines wire lines service connections water and gas meter boxes water and gas valve boxes light standards cableways signals and all other utility appurtenances within the limits of the proposed construction in which the respective owners hold no private easements are to be relocated or adjusted by said owners in accordance with executed construction and maintenance agreementsutilities .
it is understood that the contractor has considered in its proposal all of the permanent and temporary utility facilities in their present or relocated positions as specified in the contract and as revealed by site investigation .
no additional compensation will be allowed the contractor for any delays num inconvenience or damage sustained by it due to any interference caused by such facilities or the operation of relocating them unless otherwise provided for in subsection num differing site conditions .
in general the contract will indicate those various utility items which are to be relocated or adjusted by the utility owner in accordance with construction and maintenance agreements and those which are to be relocated or adjusted by the contractor .
in this latter case all underground construction required under the contract for new or existing electric andor telephone related facilities shall be performed by a contractor approved by the respective utility company .
the contractor may perform this work if it has been soapproved otherwise the contractor shall retain a firm that has been approved for such work .
the work involved would include all adjustments to utility manholes frames and grates as well as the utility lines themselves .
prior to the preconstruction conference the contractor shall submit to the engineer written statements from the respective utility companies that the firm or firms selected by the contractor are approved for such work .
see special provision code num .
prior to commencing work the contractor shall make arrangements to protect the properties of railway telegraph telephone water gas and power companies or other property from damage that could result in considerable expense loss or inconvenience .
in addition the contractor shall notify each utility owner andor municipality whose facilities might be affected by its work num hours in advance of the commencement of such work .
this notification shall also request the respective utility owner andor municipality to assign a representative to be present at the site of the work during the period of the contractors operations .
the locations and depths of existing utilities as shown on the plans are approximate and should not be relied upon by the contractor .
the contractor shall check and verify the location of all existing utilities both underground and overhead before proceeding to commence the work or order materials .
excavation shall be in accordance with all statutes ordinances and regulations of the municipality state or federal government that may be applicable .
the contractor is specifically required to follow the dig safe process .
damage to existing utilities which are shown on the plans or located by the respective utilities in accordance with the dig safe process shall be the sole responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor shall cooperate with the utility owners in the removal and rearrangement of any underground or overhead utilities in order that these operations may progress in a reasonable manner that duplication of rearrangement work may be reduced to a minimum and that services rendered by the utility owners will not be unnecessarily interrupted .
in the event of interruption to water or utility services as a result of accidental breakage or of being exposed or unsupported the contractor shall promptly notify the proper authority and shall cooperate fully in the restoration of such services .
if water service is interrupted repair work shall be continuous until the service is restored .
no work shall be undertaken around fire hydrants until provisions for continued service have been approved by the local fire authority .
the contractor shall prevent damage to pipes cables and other utilities .
repairs to damaged utilities caused by carelessness or omissions on the contractors part will be corrected at the contractors expense .
the damaged facilities shall be restored to a condition similar or equal to that existing before the damage occurred .
if the engineer determines that adjustment or relocation of utilities is necessary to accommodate construction the engineer will make necessary arrangements with the owner if the work is not otherwise provided for in the contract .
if the engineer determines that adjustment of utility facilities is necessary to accommodate construction and the adjustment work is not provided for in the contract the contractor will be paid for the work in accordance with subsection num differing site conditions changes extra work and force account work .
a .
contractor coordination with u.s .
postal service .
the contractor shall notify and coordinate with the u.s .
postal service in situations where existing u.s .
postal boxes mail dropcollection boxes within the limits of the contract are to be removed and reset to allow for sidewalkcurbing construction .
this requirement applies only in the case of standard u.s .
postal service main drop boxes it is not applicable for the removal and resetting or replacement of private mailboxes .
the removal and resetting of u.s .
postal service mail drop boxes must be conducted only by the u.s .
postal service and therefore a reasonable time allowance must be provided by the contractor to allow the postal service to complete the removal prior to start of construction .
finally the contractor shall coordinate with the post office when construction is complete and acceptable such that the boxes may be reset .
b .
contractor coordination with narragansett bay commission .
the contractor must obtain a sewer facility alteration permit from the narragansett bay commission prior to undertaking any work that affects sanitary sewer facilities that fall within nbc jurisdiction .
the permit will be issued through the nbc and can be obtained at the location indicated in special provision code num of the contract .
num cooperation between contractors .
the department reserves the right to contract for and perform other or additional work on or near the work covered by the contract .
when separate contracts are let within the limits of any one project each contractor shall conduct its work without interfering or hindering the progress or completion of the work being performed by other contractors .
contractors working on the same project shall cooperate with each other as directed by the engineer .
each contractor involved shall assume all liability financial or otherwise in connection with its contract and shall protect and save harmless the department from any and all damages or claims that may arise because of inconvenience delay or loss experienced because of the presence and operations of other contractors working within the limits of the same project unless otherwise provided for under subsection num differing site conditions .
the contractor shall arrange the work and shall place and dispose of the materials being used without interfering with the operations of the other contractors within the limits of the same project .
the work shall be coordinated with that of the others in an acceptable manner and shall be performed in proper sequence with that of the other contractors .
num num construction stakes lines and grades .
the contractor will set construction stakes establishing lines slopes profile grades centerline and benchmarks for roadwork bridge work culvert work protective and accessory structures and appurtenances .
these stakes and marks shall constitute the field control by which the contractor shall establish other necessary controls and perform the work .
the contractor will maintain construction lines points and grade staking to assure accurate and proper control of the work and to verify final grades and construction lines .
the contractor shall be held responsible for preserving all stakes and marks and if the stakes or marks are destroyed or disturbed by the contractor the responsibility of replacing them will be borne by the contractor at his own expense .
the contractor will be responsible for the accuracy of lines slopes grades and other engineering work set forth under the contract documents and the provisions of section num field control and construction layout .
num authority and duties of resident engineer .
as the representative of the engineer the resident engineer has immediate charge of the engineering details of each construction project and is responsible for the administration and satisfactory completion of the project .
the resident engineer is delegated commensurate authority by the department and is thereby authorized to reject defective material and to suspend any work that is being improperly performed .
the resident engineer is authorized to make changes that involve increases or decreases in quantities not greater than tenpercent of the corresponding values that appear in the proposal .
the resident engineer is not authorized to make changes in any design element or project specification or to make increases or decreases in quantities greater than tenpercent of the corresponding values that appear in the proposal .
num inspection of work .
all materials and each part or detail of the work shall be subject to inspection by the engineer .
the engineer shall be allowed access to all parts of the work and shall be furnished with such information and assistance by the contractor as is required to make a complete and detailed inspection .
if requested by the engineer the contractor before acceptance of the work shall remove or uncover such portions of the finished work as may be directed .
after examination the contractor shall restore said portions of the work to the standard required by the contract .
should the work thus exposed or examined prove acceptable the uncovering removing and replacing the covering or making good of the parts removed will be paid for as extra work .
should the work so exposed or examined prove unacceptable the uncovering removing and replacing of the covering or making good of the parts removed shall be at the contractors expense .
work performed or materials used without supervision or inspection by an authorized department representative as a result of failure of the contractor to notify the engineer may be ordered removed andor replaced at the contractors expense .
when any unit of government or political subdivision utility or railroad corporation is required to accept andor pay a portion of the cost of the work covered by this contract its representatives shall have the right to inspect the work .
such inspection shall not make any unit of government or political num subdivision utility or railroad corporation a party to this contract and shall in no way interfere with the rights of either such party .
num removal of unacceptable and unauthorized work .
work which does not reasonably conform to the requirements of the contract will be considered unacceptable unless otherwise determined acceptable under the provisions of subsection num conformity with plans and specifications .
unacceptable work whether the result of poor workmanship use of defective materials or damage through carelessness found to exist prior to the final acceptance of the work shall be removed immediately and replaced in an acceptable manner at the contractors expense .
work performed contrary to the instructions of the engineer work performed beyond the lines and grades shown on the plans or as otherwise provided or any extra work performed without authority will be considered as unauthorized work and will not be paid for under the provisions of the contract .
work so performed may be ordered removed andor replaced at the contractors expense .
if the contractor fails to promptly comply with any order of the engineer made under the provisions of this subsection the engineer is authorized to require unacceptable work to be remedied or removed and replaced and unauthorized work to be removed and to deduct the costs incurred thereby from any monies due or to become due the contractor .
num load restrictions .
the contractor shall comply with all legal load restrictions in the hauling of equipment or materials on public roads beyond the limits of the project .
a special permit will not relieve the contractor of liability for damage which may result from the moving of such equipment or materials .
the operation of equipment on hauling loads which cause damage to structures or the roadway or to any other type of construction will not be permitted .
handling or hauling of materials over the base course or surface course under construction shall be limited as directed by the engineer to prevent damage to the pavement structure .
no loads will be permitted on a concrete pavement base or structure before the concrete has attained its required strength unless otherwise authorized in writing by the engineer .
num maintenance during construction .
the contractor shall maintain the work during construction and until the project is substantially complete .
this maintenance shall constitute continuous and effective work prosecuted day by day with adequate equipment and forces to the end that the roadway or structures are kept in satisfactory condition .
if the contract requires the placing of a course upon a course or subgrade previously constructed the contractor shall maintain the previous course or subgrade during all construction operations .
cost of maintenance work during construction and before the project is substantially completed is contained within the contract unit prices of the various pay items and the contractor will not be paid an additional amount .
num num opening sections of project to traffic .
opening of sections of the work to traffic prior to completion of the entire contract may be desirable from a traffic service standpoint or may be necessary due to conditions inherent in the work or by changes in the contractors work schedule or necessary due to conditions or events unforeseen at the time of the contract award .
such openings to traffic shall be made when ordered by the engineer .
under no condition shall the openings constitute acceptance of the work or a waiver of any provisions of the contract .
the contract will state which sections shall be opened to traffic prior to completion of the project .
on any section opened by order of the engineer whether covered in the contract or not the contractor shall not be required to assume any expense in maintaining the road for such traffic .
such expense will be borne by the department or compensated for in accordance with subsection num differing site conditions changes extra work and force account work .
if however the contractor is dilatory in completing shoulders drainage structures or other features of the work the engineer may notify the contractor in writing and establish a period of time in which the work should be completed .
if the contractor is dilatory or fails to make a reasonable effort toward completion in this period of time the engineer may order all or a portion of the project opened to traffic .
on sections which are so ordered to be opened the contractor shall conduct the remainder of the construction operations to cause the least obstruction to traffic .
costs incurred due to the dilatory nature of the contractors response to instructions of the engineer shall be borne solely by the contractor .
on any section opened to traffic under the above conditions whether stated in the contract or opened by necessity of contractors operations or unforeseen necessity damage to the highway not attributable to traffic that occurs except slides shall be repaired at the expense of the contractor .
the removal of slides shall be done by the contractor on a basis determined by the engineer prior to removal .
unless otherwise specified the contractor shall schedule pavement removal such that no location shall remain unpaved for longer than ten num working days .
this means that once the contractor commences with the removal of existing full depth pavement from any location where traffic flow is to be maintained he must restore the roadway with no less than a full depth bituminous base course at that particular location within num working days .
in the case of partial depth pavement removal cold planningmilling the contractor shall schedule the pavement removal such that no location shall remain without a new bituminous asphalt layer for longer than seven num calendar days .
num furnishing rightofway .
the department is responsible for securing rightsofway in advance of construction .
exceptions will be indicated in the contract .
num failure to maintain roadway or structure .
if the contractor fails to comply with the provisions of subsection num maintenance during construction the engineer will immediately notify the contractor of such noncompliance .
if the contractor fails to remedy unsatisfactory maintenance within num hours after receipt of such notice the engineer may immediately proceed to maintain the project .
the entire cost of this maintenance will be deducted from monies due or to become due the contractor .
num num acceptance .
a .
partial acceptance .
when the contractor substantially completes a unit or portion of the work in accordance with the definition contained in subsection num substantial completion the contractor may request an inspection of that unit or portion of the project .
the engineers inspection shall disclose the following num .
work not started but required to be completed .
num .
incomplete work the completion of which is required .
num .
unsatisfactory work the correction of which is required .
the engineer shall provide the contractor with a report containing the results of this inspection along with instruction for completing the construction of the unit or portion of the work under consideration .
the contractor shall immediately comply with these instructions .
upon completing and correcting the work the contractor may request another inspection .
if upon completion of this second inspection the engineer finds that the unit or portion of the work has been satisfactorily completed in compliance with the contract the engineer may accept that unit or portion of the work as physically completed and the contractor may be relieved of further responsibility for such unit or portion of the work provided that the contractor agrees to deliver full documentation certificates and proofs of compliance for said work during final acceptance .
if however during this second inspection the engineer finds any incomplete or unsatisfactory work no partial acceptance will be granted and acceptance of the unit or portion of the work must await the final acceptance of the entire project .
partial acceptance shall not void or alter any of the terms or provisions of the contract .
b .
final acceptance .
final acceptance of the project will be made by the engineer on behalf of the state when the contractor has completed the project in full accordance with the definition contained in subsection num completion .
the procedure for obtaining final acceptance follows num .
when the contractor determines that the work of the contract is substantially completed in accordance with the definition of subsection num substantial completion the contractor shall notify the engineer of this fact .
num .
within num calendar days of the contractors official notice the engineer will schedule a time and date for an inspection .
num .
the engineers inspection shall take place at the time and date established in subparagraph num above .
num .
within num calendar days of the inspection the engineer will notify the contractor in writing as to the following a any outstanding work items that remain to be completed .
num b any unsatisfactory work that must be corrected .
c the required submission of any and all executed documents certificates or proofs of compliance as required by the contract .
subparagraphs a b and c above constitute the engineers socalled punch list .
num .
the contractor shall complete the work correct unsatisfactory work submit the required documents and comply with all directions contained in the engineers punch list within num calendar days of the date of the engineers transmittal to the contractor of said punch list except that if during the progression of these num calendar days for the contractor to complete the work the date of december numth is encountered said progression of days shall stop and shall not again be resumed until the date of the following april numth is encountered the intervening num days being designated as winter shut down time .
num .
at the conclusion of the num calendar days for the contractor to complete the work the progression of which is defined above the engineer shall make another inspection of the work .
if the engineer determines that the work of the contract has been satisfactorily completed in full accordance with subsection num completion such inspection shall constitute the final inspection .
in such event the engineer will make final acceptance of the project on behalf of the state and shall notify the contractor in writing of this acceptance as of the date of the aforementioned final inspection .
if however this second inspection discloses that work remains to be completed unsatisfactory work remains to be corrected and documents remain to be submitted the process will revert to that of para .
b.num above and proceed accordingly with the additional stipulation that liquidated damages will commence on the date of the second inspection and will remain in effect until final acceptance is subsequently achieved all as hereinafter provided for in subsection num failure to complete on time .
num claims for adjustments and disputes .
a .
notification .
if the contractor deems that additional compensation is due for work or material not clearly covered in the contract the contractor shall notify both the engineer and the chief of construction operations in writing of its intention to make claim for such additional compensation before beginning or continuing the affected work also the contractor shall proceed diligently with performance of the contract pending final resolution of any request for relief payment claim appeal or action arising under the contract and comply with any decisions of the engineernum .
if such notification is not given or the contractor does not afford the engineer proper facilities for keeping strict account of the actual costs the contractor thereby waives any claim for additional compensation .
notice by the contractor and the fact that the engineer has kept account of the costs shall not be construed as substantiating the validity of the claim .
b. submission .
claims must be submitted within num days of substantial completion of the project .
claims submitted after num days will not be accepted .
an equitable adjustment will be made to the contract if the claim is found to be just .
num nothing in this subsection shall be construed as establishing any claim contrary to the terms of subsections num num num num num and num. c. documentation of claims .
any claim shall be in sufficient detail to enable the engineer to determine the basis for entitlement and the resulting costs .
the following minimum information must accompany each claim submitted num .
a detailed factual statement of the claim providing all necessary dates locations and items of work affected by the claim .
num .
the date actions resulting in the claim occurred or conditions resulting in the claim became evident .
num .
a copy of the notice of potential claim must be filed for the specific claim .
num .
the name and title of each department employee knowledgeable about facts that gave rise to such claim .
num .
the name and title of each contractor or employee knowledgeable about facts that gave rise to such claim .
num .
the specific provisions of the contract which support the claim and a statement why such provisions support the claim .
num .
the identification of any pertinent documents and the substance of any material or communications relating to the claim .
num .
a statement whether the additional compensation or extension of time is based on the provisions of the contract or an alleged breach of contract .
num .
if an extension of time is also sought the specific days for which it is sought and the basis for such claim as determined by an analysis of the construction schedule .
num .
the amount of additional compensation sought and a breakdown of that amount .
d. certification of claims .
when submitting a claim the contractor must certify in writing under oath in accordance with the formalities required as to the following num .
the claim is made in good faith .
num .
supportive data is accurate and complete to the contractors best knowledge and belief .
num .
the amount of the claim accurately reflects the actual cost incurred by the contractor .
e. auditing of claims .
all claims filed against the department shall be subject to audit by the department at any time following the claim filing whether or not the claim is part of a suit pending in the courts of this state .
the audit may begin on ten days notice to the contractor subcontractor or supplier .
num the contractor subcontractor or supplier shall make a good faith effort to cooperate with the auditors and shall provide at a minimum access to the following documents num .
daily time sheets and foremans daily reports .
num .
union agreements if any .
num .
insurance welfare and benefits records .
num .
payroll register .
num .
earnings records .
num .
payroll tax returns .
num .
material invoices purchases orders and all material and supply acquisition contracts .
num .
material cost distribution worksheets .
num .
equipment records list of company equipment rates etc .
num .
vendor rental agreements and subcontractor invoices .
num .
subcontractor payment certificates .
num .
canceled checks payroll and vendors .
num .
job cost report .
num .
job payroll ledger .
num .
general ledger general journal if used and all subsidiary ledgers and journals together with all supporting documentation pertinent to entries made in these ledgers and journals .
num .
cash disbursements journal .
num .
financial statements for all years reflecting the operations on this project .
num .
income tax returns whether such records are maintained by the company involved its accountant or others .
num .
depreciation records on all company equipment .
num .
all other documents used to develop costs for the contractors internal purposes in establishing the actual cost of owning and operating equipment .
num .
all documents which reflect the contractors actual profit and overhead during the time the project was being performed and for each of the five years prior to the commencement of this project .
num num .
all documents related to the preparation of the contractors bid including the final calculations on which the bid was based unless the documents are placed in escrow under other provisions of the contract .
num .
worksheets used to prepare the claim establishing the cost components for items of the claim including but not limited to labor benefits and insurance materials equipment subcontractors and all documents which establish the time periods individuals involved the hours and the rates for the individuals .
num procedure for claims and disputes .
every effort shall be made by the parties to the contract to resolve claims and disputes in accordance with the internal procedures of the department .
if such efforts are unsuccessful claims and disputes will be submitted to either binding arbitration or litigation for resolution in accordance with state law .
num project delays .
a .
general conditions concerning delays .
given the nature and extent of costs arising out of work that has been delayed and the intent of both the contractor and the state to promptly assign responsibility for such delay and to have all associated costs as fully documented as possible strict adherence to the provisions of this subsection is a condition precedent to the contractors entitlement to additional compensation or an extension of time because of project delays .
b .
notification of delay .
within num calendar days of any department action or omission which the contractor believes has delayed or may delay the project the contractor shall notify the resident engineer of such a delay and indicate whether it intends to file a request for delay costs .
the contractor shall confirm such notification in writing to the engineer within num calendar days of its notification to the resident engineer .
c. procedures .
upon notifying the resident engineer the contractor shall keep daily records of all nonsalaried labor material and equipment expenses for all operations that are allegedly affected by the delay .
the contractor shall also identify in the daily records each operation affected by the delay and the station location of each such operation .
the department will also keep daily records .
each monday the contractor shall compare the previous weeks daily records with those maintained by the department .
the contractor shall report to the engineer within num calendar days of each such comparison all disagreements with department records .
failure to meet to review the departments records or to report disagreements between the two sets of records will constitute the assumption that the departments records are accurate .
delay costs allegedly incurred prior to notifying the resident engineer that operations have been delayed will not be allowed .
num .
each monday the contractor shall prepare and submit written reports to the resident engineer regarding alleged delays which contain the following information num a number of days behind schedule .
b identify all operations that have been delayed or will be delayed .
c explain how the departments act or omission delayed each operation and estimate the amount of time required to complete the project .
d itemize all extra costs being incurred with explanations for each such cost .
num .
within num calendar days of the termination of an alleged delay the contractor shall submit a report to both the resident engineer and the engineer containing the following information a a description of the operations that were delayed .
documentation and explanation of how the department caused the delay to include the reports of all scheduling experts or other consultants if any and b an asbuilt chart or other graphic depiction of how the operations were delayed .
c an itembyitem calculation and explanation of extra costs being sought .
num .
the engineer will review the contractors submission and any reports prepared by the resident engineer .
a written decision will be provided to the contractor within num days of the receipt of the contractors submission .
if the engineer determines that the department is responsible for delays to the contractors operations an equitable adjustment to the contract will be authorized in accordance with subsection num compensation for project delays .
num work zone training .
the contractors tmp implementation manager and all other contractorsubcontractor personnel responsible for the setup operation maintenance inspection movement andor breakdown of temporary traffic control devices shall be trained in accordance with the departments training guidelines for personnel responsible for work zone safety mobility and shall possess a certificate of satisfactory completion of such training .
training shall be at a level appropriate to the individuals job responsibilities and to the job decisions the individual is required to make and shall be completed prior to the commencement of work .
section num control of material num source of supply and quality requirements .
materials used on the work shall meet all quality requirements of the contract and the master schedule for the preparation of a project schedule for sampling testing and certification of materials .
in order to expedite the inspection and testing of materials the contractor shall notify the engineer of the proposed sources of materials prior to delivery .
at the option of the engineer materials may be approved at the source of supply before delivery is started .
if after trial it is found that sources of supply which have been approved do not produce a reasonably uniform product or if the product from any source proves unacceptable at any time num the contractor shall furnish materials from other sources .
all materials shall be new unless otherwise specified in the contract .
no material which after approval has become unfit for use shall be employed in the work .
the department reserves the right to retest all materials which have been previously tested and accepted at the source of supply and delivered to the site .
however prior to incorporation into the work the department may reject all such materials which when retested do not reasonably meet the requirements of these specifications or those established for the specific project .
a .
buy american requirements for domestic steel .
in accordance with the u.s. code of federal regulations title num and section num of the surface transportation assistance act of num only such permanently incorporated steel materials as have been manufactured in the united states will be used on all projects .
further any pig iron andor pelletized and reduced iron ore used to produce permanently incorporated steel materials or permanently incorporated nonsteel products must be manufactured in the united states .
bidders are advised that the contract will be awarded to the bidder who submits the lowest total bid based on furnishing domestic steel materials .
num .
certification of steel .
all manufacturing processes of the steel material in a project i.e .
smelting and any subsequent process which alters the steel materials physical form or shape or changes its chemical composition must occur within the united states to be considered of domestic origin .
this includes processes such as rolling extruding machining bending grinding drilling and the application of coatings including iron .
num .
minimal use of foreign steel .
section numbnum of title num cfr permits a minimal amount of foreign steel to be incorporated into a federalaid project .
this amount is defined as onetenth of one percent num percent of the total contract cost or num whichever is greater .
the cost of the foreign steel is defined as its value delivered to the project .
num local material sources .
possible sources of local materials may be designated on the plans and described in the special provisions .
in general the quality of material in such deposits will be acceptable .
however the contractor shall determine the amount of equipment and work required to produce a material meeting the requirements of these specifications .
the contractor shall understand that it is not feasible to ascertain from samples the limits for an entire deposit and that variations shall be considered as usual and are to be expected .
the engineer may order procurement of material from any portion of a deposit and may reject other portions of the deposit as unacceptable .
the department may acquire and allow the contractor to take materials from sources designated on the plans andor as specified in the special provisions .
the department may also allow the contractor to use such other property as may be specified for plant site stockpiles and hauling roads .
if the contractor desires to use material from sources other than those designated the contractor shall acquire the necessary rights to take materials from the sources and shall pay all costs related thereto including any which may result from an increase in length of haul .
all costs of exploring and developing such other sources shall be borne by the contractor .
the use of material from other than designated num sources will not be permitted until representative samples taken by the engineer have been approved and written authority is granted for the use thereof .
when material deposits are neither described in the special provisions nor designated on the plans the contractor shall provide sources of material acceptable to the engineer .
when sources of material or material deposits are provided by the contractor the department will assume the cost of processing samples to determine the suitability of the material .
sites from which material has been removed shall upon completion of the work be left in a neat and presentable condition .
num samples tests cited specifications .
materials will be inspected tested and accepted by the engineer before incorporation in the work .
work in which untested and unaccepted materials are used without approval of the engineer shall be performed at the contractors risk .
no payment will be made for materials found to be unacceptable andor unauthorized .
unless otherwise designated tests in accordance with the cited current standard methods of aashto astm or other organizations used by the department will be made by and at the expense of the department .
samples will be taken by a qualified representative of the department .
materials being used are subject to inspection test or rejection at any time prior to incorporation into the work .
copies of all tests will be furnished to the contractors representative upon request .
whenever there is an aashto designation followed by an astm designation the aashto designation will govern when there are minor differences between the two specifications .
num certification of compliance .
the engineer may permit use prior to sampling and testing of certain materials or assemblies accompanied by certificates of compliance stating that such materials or assemblies fully comply with the requirements of the contract .
the certificate shall be signed by the manufacturer .
each lot of such materials or assemblies delivered to the work must be accompanied by a certificate of compliance and clearly identified .
materials or assemblies used on the basis of certificates of compliance may be sampled and tested and if found not in conformity with contract requirements will be subject to rejection whether in place or not .
the form and distribution of certificates of compliance shall be as approved by the engineer .
the engineer is authorized to refuse permission for use of materials or assemblies on the basis of certificates of compliance .
unexpired warranties .
if the contractor is furnished a warranty at the time of purchase of any product or material and the warranty has not expired at the time of acceptance of the work by the state the warranty shall then be turned over to the state .
num num plant inspection .
the engineer may undertake the inspection of materials at the source .
manufacturing plants may be inspected for compliance with specified manufacturing methods .
material samples will be obtained for laboratory testing for compliance with materials quality requirements .
this may be the basis for acceptance of manufactured lots as to quality .
a .
conditions .
in the event plant inspection is undertaken the following conditions shall apply num .
the engineer shall have the cooperation and assistance of the contractor and the producer with whom it has contracted for materials .
num .
the engineer shall at all times have full access to those parts of the plant where the manufacture or production of materials is taking place .
num .
adequate safety measures shall be provided and maintained .
num storage of materials .
materials shall be stored to insure the preservation of their quality and fitness for the work .
stored materials even though approved before storage may again be inspected prior to their use in the work .
stored materials shall be located to facilitate their prompt inspection .
a .
location of stored materials and equipment .
num .
roads without curbing and sidewalks .
construction materials and equipment may be stored within the clear zones designated below provided that prior written approval has been granted by the engineer .
material stored in these clear zones must be removed within fourteen num calendar days .
equipment may be stored in the clear zones only during workdays i.e .
no overnight storage of equipment will be allowed .
clear zone posted speed distance from edge of travel lane num mph or less num feet num mph num feet num mph or less num feet num mph or less num feet any area of the clear zones which is used for storage of construction material andor equipment must be clearly delineated with appropriate traffic control devices .
storage sites shall be restored to their original condition at the sole expense of the contractor .
additional space required for storage shall be provided at the contractors expense .
private property shall not be used for storage purposes without written permission of the owner or lessee .
if requested by the engineer copies of such written permission shall be furnished by the contractor .
the contractor shall comply with all federal state and local statutes andor ordinances in reference to the storage of materials and shall be liable for all damages arising from the violation thereof .
num num .
roads with curbing and sidewalks .
no portion of the shoulders and sidewalks may be used for storage of construction equipment andor material .
num handling materials .
materials shall be handled in such manner to preserve their quality and fitness for the work .
aggregates shall be transported from the storage site to the work in vehicles constructed to prevent loss or segregation of materials after loading and measuring .
num unacceptable materials .
materials not reasonably conforming to the requirements of the specifications will be considered as unacceptable and all such materials will be rejected and removed immediately from the site of the work unless otherwise instructed by the engineer .
rejected material the defects of which have been corrected shall not be used again until approval by the engineer has been granted .
num departmentfurnished material .
the contractor shall furnish materials required to complete the work except those specified to be furnished by the department .
material furnished by the department will be delivered or made available to the contractor at the points specified in the contract documents .
the cost of handling and placing departmentfurnished materials after they are delivered to the contractor shall be included in the contract price for the item in which they are used .
the contractor will be responsible for all material delivered .
deductions will be made from any monies due the contractor for shortages deficiencies other causes and damage which may occur after delivery .
demurrage charges resulting from the contractors failure to accept the material at the designated time and point of delivery will also be deducted from monies due the contractor .
section num legal relations and responsibility to public num laws to be observed .
the contractor shall keep fully informed of federal and state laws local laws ordinances and regulations and orders and decrees of bodies or tribunals having any jurisdiction or authority which in any manner affect those engaged or employed on the project or which affect the conduct of the project .
the contractor shall observe and comply with all such laws ordinances regulations orders and decrees and shall protect and indemnify the state and its representa tives against any claim or liability arising from the violation of any such law ordinance regulation order or decree whether by the contractor the subcontractors suppliers of materials or services or others engaged by the contractor or the employees of any of them .
if any discrepancy or inconsistency is discovered between the contract and any law ordinance regulation order or decree the contractor shall immediately report the same to the engineer in writing .
num the contractor shall execute and file such documents statements and affidavits required under applicable federal or state law or regulation affecting its proposal contract or the prosecution of the work .
the contractor shall permit the examination of any records made subject to such examination by federal or state law or by regulations promulgated thereunder by any state or federal agency charged with the enforcement of such law .
num specific statutes required to be inserted .
every contract for the construction of public works by the state or by persons or organizations contracting with the state for such construction shall contain the following provisions from the general laws of rhode island a .
title num chapter num sections num num and num respectively of the general laws of rhode island num entitled labor and debts of contractors read as follows num .
payment for trucking or materials furnished withholding of sums due .
a contractor or subcontractor on public works authorized by a proper authority shall pay any obligation or charge for trucking and material which have been furnished for the use of such contractor or subcontractor in connection with the public works being performed by him within ninety num days after such obligation or charge is incurred or the trucking services has been performed or the material has been delivered to the site of the work whichever is later .
when it is brought to the notice of the proper authority in a city or town or the proper authority in the state having supervision of such contract that such obligation or charge has not been paid by the contractor or subcontractor the proper authority may deduct and hold for a period not exceeding sixty num days from sums of money due to the contractor or subcontractor the equivalent amount of such sums certified by a trucker or materialman creditor as due him as provided in this section and which the proper authority determines is reasonable for trucking performed or materials furnished for such public works .
num .
ascertainment of prevailing rate of wages .
before awarding any contract for public works to be done the proper authority shall ascertain from the director of labor the general prevailing rate of the regular holiday and overtime wages paid and the general prevailing payments on behalf of employees only to lawful welfare pension vacation apprentice training and educational funds payments to said funds must constitute an ordinary business expense deduction for federal income tax purposes by contractors in the city town village or other appropriate political subdivision of the state in which the work is to be performed for each craft mechanic teamster laborer or type of workman needed to execute the contract for the public works and shall specify in the call for bids for the contract and in the contract itself the general prevailing rate of the regular holiday and overtime wages paid and the payments on behalf of employees only to such welfare pension vacation apprentice training and education funds existing in the locality for each craft mechanic teamster laborer or type of workman needed to execute the contract or work .
num .
applicability and determination of prevailing rate of wages .
every call for bids for a every contract in excess of num to which the state of rhode island or any political subdivision thereof is party for construction alteration andor repair including painting and decorating of public buildings or public works of the state of rhode island or any political subdivision thereof and which requires or involves the num employment of employees shall contain a provision stating the minimum wages to be paid various types of employees which shall be based upon the wages that will be determined by the director of labor to be prevailing for the corresponding types of employees employed on projects of a character similar to the contract work in the city town village or other appropriate political subdivision of the state of rhode island in which the work is to be performed and every contract shall contain a stipulation that the contractor or his subcontractor shall pay all said employees employed directly upon the site of the work unconditionally and not less often than once a week and without subsequent deduction or rebate on any account the full amounts accrued at time of payment computed at wage rates not less than those stated in the call for bids regardless of any contractual relationships which may be alleged to exist between the contractor or subcontractor and such employees and that the scale of wages to be paid shall be posted by the contractor in a prominent and easily accessible place at the site of the work and the further stipulation that there may be withheld from the contractor so much of accrued payments as may be considered necessary to pay to such employees employed by the contractor or any subcontractor on the work the difference between the rates of wages required by the contract to be paid said employees on the work and the rates of wages received by such employees and not refunded to the contractor subcontractors or their agents b the term wages scale of wages wage rates minimum wages and prevailing wages shall include num the basic hourly rate of pay and num the amount of a the rate of contribution made by a contractor or subcontractor to a trustee or to a third person pursuant to a fund plan or program and b the rate of costs to the contractor or subcontractor which may be reasonably anticipated in providing benefits to employees pursuant to an enforceable commitment to carry out a financially responsible plan or program which was communicated in writing to the employees affected for medical or hospital care pensions on retirement or death compensation for injuries or illness resulting from occupational activity or insurance to provide any of the foregoing for unemployment benefits life insurance disability and sickness insurance or accident insurance for vacation and holiday pay for defraying costs of apprenticeship or other similar programs or for other bonafide fringe benefits but only where the contractor or subcontractor is not required by other federal state or local law to provide any of such benefits provided that the obligation of a contractor or subcontractor to make payment in accordance with the prevailing wage determinations of director of labor insofar as this chapter of this title and other acts incorporating this chapter of this title by reference are concerned may be discharged by the making of payments in cash by the making of contributions of a type referred to in paragraph num a or by the assumption of an enforceable commitment to bear the costs of a plan or program of a type referred to a paragraph num b or any combination thereof where the aggregate of any such payments contributions and costs is not less than the rate of pay described in paragraph num plus the amount referred to in paragraph num .
num b .
title num chapter num section num of the general laws of rhode island num entitled license required for operation of hoisting machinery public contracts reads as follows num .
no persons shall operate or be in direct charge of a hoisting or excavation gasoline steam diesel electric or compressed air hoist shovel crane excavator of five horsepower or more without obtaining a license to do so as provided in this chapter .
no user or agent of use of any such described steam gasoline diesel electric or compressed air hoisting machinery shall permit it to be operated unless it is operated by a duly licensed person as hereinafter provided by this chapter .
c. chapters num num and num of the public laws or rhode island num section num of the aforesaid chapters defines the authority of director of department of public works and use of federal assistance and provides in part that in the event that federal funds or federal assistance are made available to the state for use in carrying out highway projects said projects shall be carried out and executed in all respects subject to the provisions of the appropriate federal law providing for the construction of such projects and the rules and regulations made pursuant thereto and to such terms conditions rules and regulations not inconsistent with such federal law rules and regulations as said director may establish to ensure the proper execution of said projects therefore any provisions of the state laws that conflict with the federal laws rules and regulations are not applicable to projects financed in whole or in part with federal aid highway funds .
d. public law chapter num entitled work for which license required reads as follows no person firm or corporation shall enter into engage in or work at the business of installing wire conduits apparatus fixtures and other appliances for carrying or using electricity for light heat or other purpose unless such person firm or corporation shall have received a license and a certificate therefore issued by the state board of examiners of electricians .
num permits licenses and taxes .
the contractor shall procure all permits except those specifically provided in the contract documents and licenses pay all charges fees and taxes and give all notices necessary and incidental to the due and lawful prosecution of the work .
these costs shall be included in the unit prices bid for the various items of the contract work .
num patented devices materials and processes .
if the contractor employs any design device material or process covered by letters of patent or copyright the contractor shall provide for such use by suitable legal agreement with the patentee or owner .
the contractor and the surety shall indemnify and save harmless the state any affected third party or political subdivision from any and all claims for infringement by reason of the use of any such patented design device material process trademark or copyright .
the contractor shall indemnify the state for costs expenses and damages which it may be obligated to pay by reason of any infringement thereof during the prosecution or after the completion of the project .
num num restoration of surfaces opened by permit .
the right to construct or reconstruct any utility service in the highway or street or to grant permits for same is expressly reserved by the department for the proper authorities of the municipality in which the work is performed .
the contractor shall not be entitled to damages either for digging up the street or for any delay occasioned thereby unless otherwise provided for under subsection num differing site conditions .
any individual firm or corporation wishing to make an opening in the highway must secure a permit from the department .
the contractor shall allow parties bearing such permits and only those parties to make openings in the highway .
when ordered by the engineer the contractor shall make all necessary repairs necessitated by such openings .
such necessary work will be paid for as either extra work or as otherwise provided in these specifications .
all repair work will be subject to the same conditions as applied to original work .
num federalaid participation .
when the united states government participates in the cost of the work covered by the contract the work shall be performed under the supervision of the department but otherwise subject to the inspection and approval of the appropriate officials of the united states government .
such inspection shall neither make the federal government a party to this contract nor interfere with the rights of either party to said contract .
when any federal laws rules or regulations are in conflict with any provisions of a federallyassisted contract the federal requirements shall prevail take precedence and be in force over and against any such conflicting provisions .
num sanitary health and safety provisions .
the contractor shall observe rules and regulations of federalstate and local health officials .
the contractor shall not require any worker to work in surroundings or under conditions which are unsanitary hazardous or dangerous to health or safety .
the contractor shall admit without delay and without the presentation of an inspection warrant any inspector of the occupational safety and health administration or other legally responsible agency involved in safety and health administration upon presentation of proper credentials .
num public convenience and safety .
the contractor shall conduct the work to assure the least possible obstruction to traffic .
the safety and convenience of both the general public and the residents along and adjacent to the highway as well as the protection of persons and property shall be provided by the contractor as specified under subsection num maintenance of traffic or as the engineer may direct .
the contractor shall comply with the safety provisions of all laws rules codes and regulations applicable to the type of work being performed .
the engineer will suspend the work of the contract if the contractor fails either to comply with said safety provisions or provide adequate protection for inspection of the work by the engineer or hisher authorized representatives .
num a .
accident reports .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer with two copies of a report of any accident occurring on the project that involves num .
personal injury requiring treatment by a physician .
num .
loss of time on the job .
num .
public liability or property damage .
accident reports shall be submitted on forms acceptable to the engineer .
num barricades and warning signs .
the contractor shall provide erect and maintain all necessary barriers barricades lights danger signals signs and other traffic control devices and shall take all necessary precautions for the protection of the work and the safety of the public .
highways or bridges closed to traffic shall be protected by effective barricades .
suitable warning signs and protective devices shall be provided to properly control and direct traffic .
barricades warning signs lights temporary signals and other protective devices must conform with the manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways published by the u.s. government printing office .
num use of explosives .
when explosives are necessary for the prosecution of the work the contractor shall not endanger life property or new work .
the contractor shall be responsible for damage resulting from the use of explosives .
the contractor shall comply with all laws and ordinances as well as with title num and title num of the code of federal regulations and the safety and health regulations for construction of osha whichever is the most restrictive in the use handling loading transportation and storage of explosives and blasting agents .
a .
additional specific requirements .
the contractor shall comply with the following num .
the contractor shall be solely responsible for employing such plant equipment and construction methods necessary to accomplish the work of this contract with complete safety and without damage to persons existing buildings structures facilities and utilities .
num .
the contractor shall furnish the services of technical representatives of the manufacturer of the explosive materials .
such individuals shall be experienced in the use of high explosives in blasting operations under the circumstances to be encountered in the work of this contract .
the contractor shall furnish the services of the explosive manufacturers representatives for such lengths of time prior to starting blasting operations as is necessary to determine the proper equipment devices materials methods and procedures to be used for the proper performance of the work .
the contractor shall also furnish the services of the explosive manufacturers representatives during the preparation for and progress of blasting operations for such lengths of time and as frequently as necessary to assure that blasting operations shall be performed in a safe and proper manner .
num num .
prior to commencement of work the contractor shall meet and confer with the engineer at which time the contractor shall outline in detail his proposed administration of an overall safety program which program shall at all times be satisfactory to the engineer .
the contractor shall furnish to the engineer copies of the current safety program and procedures for the safety and prevention of injury to persons and the prevention of damage to property and the work .
the contractor shall comply with this program at all times during the prosecution of the work .
num .
all operations involving explosives andor blasting agents shall be in accordance with the suggested code for the manufacture transportation storage and use of explosives and blasting agents published by the institute of makers of explosives as amended .
wherever the code and the rhode island standard specifications conflict the code shall apply .
the contractor shall be responsible for developing techniques necessary to obtain the required ledge slopes consistent with maximum safety requirements .
b .
care in blasting .
it is especially required that blasting operations shall be conducted with all possible care and in such a manner as to prevent injury to persons and property .
a sufficient warning shall be given to all persons in the vicinity of the work before blasting .
no blasting will be allowed within num feet of an existing building or inservice underground utility line .
c. power of explosives .
the explosives employed in the work shall be of such power and placed in such quantities and positions that will not num .
unduly enlarge the excavation .
num .
unnecessarily shatter the rock upon or against which the work will be installed .
num .
injure work already in place .
d. transportation handling and storage .
explosives must be carefully transported stored handled and used as required by applicable state and local ordinances and laws .
the necessary permits for such transportation storage handling and use shall be obtained by the contractor .
the contractor shall show such permits to the engineer before any blasting will be allowed .
the contractor shall keep on the job only such quantity of explosives as may be needed for the work underway and only during such time as they are being used .
explosives shall be stored in a secure manner and separately from all tools .
caps or detonators shall be stored separately and at a point over num feet distant from the explosives .
when the need for explosives is ended all such material remaining on the job shall be promptly removed from the premises .
e. approval of the engineer .
the approval of the engineer shall first be obtained before blasting is permitted .
if in the opinion of the engineer blasting is unsafe or dangerous to persons or to existing structures and utilities the contractor shall employ pneumatic tools drilling and splitting mechanically or by hand or by other such means that do not require the use of explosives for the removal of rock boulders or ledge all at no additional expense to the state .
num f. notification of local authorities .
before any dynamite or detonator caps are stored or used under this contract the contractor shall contact the police and fire departments of the city or town in which the project is located for instructions relative to the regulations for possession and use of explosives in that community .
the contractor shall obtain all required permits or licenses for possession and use of explosives on the site or sites of construction under this contract .
in addition the contractor shall be responsible num .
for designating an individual who shall be responsible for the explosive materials at all times .
num .
for the immediate reporting to the police department of the cities or towns in which the project is located of all unaccounted for explosive materials .
g. records .
the contractor shall keep a complete record of blasting operations noting the date exact location with reference to a datum weight of charge and whether the firing was instantaneous or delayed .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer with a complete record of operations during the preceding weekly period .
num .
records shall indicate by date the quantity and type of explosive materials delivered to the construction sitess the quantity of explosive material used and the quantity of such material subsequently removed from the construction sites .
num .
all records related to the possession and use of explosive materials shall be open for inspection by the engineer and the police departments of the cities and towns in which the project is located .
num .
the contract prices for the various items of work shall include full compensation for providing a complete record of blasting operations .
h. repairs .
the contractor is cautioned that it will be responsible for any damage to existing roadway surfaces drainage lines structures or other objects as a result of blasting operations .
the contractor will be required to repair such damage as may be directed by the engineer in accordance with prevailing rhode island special provisions or standards for the particular type of work involved .
the contractor shall assume the full cost of making such repairs .
num protection and restoration of property and landscape .
the contractor shall be responsible for the preservation of all public and private property and shall protect carefully from disturbance or damage all land monuments and property marks until the engineer has witnessed or otherwise referenced their location .
the contractor shall not move such monuments and marks until so directed .
when the contractors operations encounter remains of prehistoric dwelling sites or artifacts of historical or archaeological significance the operations shall be temporarily discontinued .
the engineer will contact archaeological authorities to determine the disposition thereof .
when directed by the engineer the contractor shall excavate the site to preserve the artifacts and shall remove and deliver them to the custody of the proper state authorities .
such excavation will be paid for as hereinafter provided in subsection num differing site conditions changes extra work and force account work .
num the contractor shall be responsible for all damage or injury to public or private property resulting from any act omission neglect or misconduct in of either the contractors or its subcontractors manner or method of executing the work or in consequence of the nonexecution thereof .
furthermore the contractor shall be responsible for all such damage due to defective materials .
the contractor shall restore at its own expense such property to a condition similar or equal to that existing before such damage or injury was done by repairing rebuilding or otherwise restoring as directed by the engineer .
should the contractor enter into either directly or indirectly an agreement with a property owner within the project limits the contractor must first obtain the signature of the property owner on the so called letter to the property owner to be provided by the department .
this document explains that the state is not a party to the agreement between the contractor and the property owner and must be signed by the property owner and returned to the resident engineer .
if the agreement affects or changes the design of the roadway the contractor must first submit these modifications via shop drawings to the chief engineer for approval .
num forest protection .
in carrying out work within or adjacent to state or national forests the contractor shall comply with all regulations of the state fire marshall conservation commission forestry department or other authority having jurisdiction governing both the protection of forests and the prosecution of work within such forests .
the contractor shall observe all sanitary laws and regulations with respect to the performance of work within or adjacent to such forest areas .
the contractor shall maintain the areas in an orderly condition dispose of all refuse obtain permits for the construction and maintenance of all construction camps stores warehouses residences latrines cesspools septic tanks and other structures in accordance with the requirements of the forest supervisor .
the contractor shall take all reasonable precaution to prevent and suppress forest fires .
furthermore the contractor shall require its employees and subcontractors both independently and at the request of forest officials to do all reasonably within their power to prevent and suppress and to assist in preventing and suppressing forest fires and to make every possible effort to notify a forest official at the earliest possible moment of the location and extent of any fire observed by them .
num responsibility for damage claims .
a. indemnification .
the contractor shall defend indemnify and hold harmless the state the department its officers and employees from any and all suits actions claims losses expenses damages and any and all other liabilities of any character resulting in any injuries or damage to any person entities or property arising out of or which may be claimed to arise out of any act andor omission of the contractor or its subcontractors in performance of work covered by the contract andor in consequence of any neglect in safeguarding the work andor through use of unacceptable materials in constructing the work andor because of any neglect or misconduct of the contractor andor because of any claims or amounts recovered from any infringements of patent trademark or copyright andor from any claims or amounts arising out of or recovered under the workers compensation act or any other law ordinance order or decree .
the state may retain for its exclusive use without recourse by the contractor or anyone claiming under the contractor any and all amounts due the contractor as provided under the contract documents to assure the contractors compliance with this section .
in the event no money is due or the retained sums are insufficient to fully indemnify the state hereunder the surety shall num be held liable with the contractor until this section is complied with in full except that money due the contractor will not be withheld when satisfactory evidence is produced that the contractor is adequately protected by public liability and property damage insurance the insurer has been given proper timely notice of any claims arising from the work performed by the contractor pursuant to the contract and the insurer has assumed defense of the claim .
the contractor shall provide written confirmation satisfactory to the department that all such actions have been properly addressed prior to final payment under subsection num .
notwithstanding the foregoing nothing herein contained shall be deemed to constitute a waiver of the sovereign immunity of the state which immunity is hereby reserved by the state .
b .
liability insurance .
the contractor shall procure and maintain at the contractors own expense until final acceptance of contract insurance coverage for damages assumed by contract or imposed by law of the kinds and in the amounts specified with insurance companies authorized to do business in the state .
the insurance shall cover all operations performed under the contract whether by the contractor or by subcontractors .
before commencing the work the contractor shall furnish certificates of insurance in the form satisfactory to the department certifying that the policies will not be changed or canceled until numdays written notice has been given to the department .
the types and limits of insurance are as follows num .
workers compensation insurance .
coverage shall be in accordance with prevailing laws .
num .
liability and property damage insurance .
each policy shall name the department as an additional insured and shall include a provision requiring the insurer to investigate and defend the department against any and all claims for death bodily injury or property damages even if groundless .
coverages shall be in the following amounts a bodily injury liability num each person .
num each occurrence .
b property damage liability num each occurrence .
num aggregate .
c. insurance covering special hazards .
special hazards shall be covered by either riders to the liability andor property damage policy or policies hereinabove specified or by separate policies of insurance as follows num .
property damage liability arising out of the collapse of or structural injury to any building or structure due to a excavation including borrowing filling or backfilling in connection therewith tunneling pile driving cofferdam work or caisson work or num b moving shoring underpinning raising or demolition of any building or structure or removal or rebuilding of any structural support thereof .
num .
property damage liability for injury to or destruction of property arising directly or indirectly from blasting or explosions however caused other than explosions of air or steam vessels piping under pressure prime movers machinery or power transmitting equipment .
num third party beneficiary clause .
it is specifically agreed between the parties executing this contract that it is not intended by the provisions of the contract to create the public or any member thereof a third party beneficiary hereunder or to authorize anyone not a party to the contract to maintain a suit for personal injuries or property damage pursuant to the provisions of the contract .
num personal liability of department employees .
the director engineer ridot employees or their authorized representatives are acting solely as agents and representatives of the department when carrying out and exercising the power or authority granted to them under the contract .
num no waiver of legal rights .
upon completion of the contract the department will expeditiously make final inspection and notify the contractor of acceptance .
final acceptance however shall neither preclude the department from correcting any measurement estimate or certificate made before or after completion of the contract nor prevent the department from recovering from the contractor or surety or both overpayments sustained by failure on the part of the contractor to fulfill the obligations under the contract .
a waiver on the part of the department of any breach of any part of the contract shall not be held to be a waiver of any other or subsequent breach .
the contractor without prejudice to the terms of the contract shall be liable to the department for latent defects fraud or such gross mistakes as may amount to fraud or as regards the departments rights under any warranty or guaranty .
num hazardous material .
if the contractor encounters or exposes during construction any abnormal condition which indicates the presence of a hazardous material or toxic waste it shall immediately suspend work in the area and notify the engineer .
the contractors operation in this area shall not resume until so directed by the engineer however the contractor shall continue working in other areas of the project unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
abnormal conditions shall include but shall not be limited to the following presence of barrels obnoxious odors excessively hot earth smoke or any other condition which could be a possible indicator of hazardous material or toxic waste .
the conditions shall be treated with extreme caution .
disposition of the hazardous material or toxic waste shall be made in accordance with the requirements and regulations of the rhode island department of environmental management .
where the contractor performs necessary work required to dispose of these materials the work will be performed under a supplemental agreement .
should the disposition of waste material require special procedures by num certified personnel the department will make arrangements with qualified persons to dispose of the material .
num civil rights .
the contractor shall comply with federal state and local laws rules and regulations which set forth unlawful employment practices including that of discrimination because of race religion color sex or national origin and which define actions required for affirmative action and minority disadvantaged business programs .
section num prosecution and progress num subletting of contract .
the contractor shall not sublet sell transfer assign or otherwise dispose of the contract or contracts or any portion thereof or of its right title or interest therein without written consent of the engineer .
if such consent is given the contractor will only be permitted to sublet a portion thereof .
the contractor will be required to perform with its own organization work amounting to not less than num percent of the adjusted contract cost .
the adjusted contract cost is the total contract cost less the total cost of subcontract specialty items listed in the proposal .
specialty items are defined in subsection num .
no subcontracts or transfers of contract shall relieve the contractor of liability under the contract and bonds .
a copy of written agreements with subcontractors must be submitted when making application to sublet any work under the contract .
furthermore no agreements between the contractor and its subcontractors or vendors shall create any third party relationships between said subcontractors or vendors and the state .
the contractor shall provide written notice to and obtain prior written consent from the engineer before allowing any subcontractor to sublet any portion of its work to a lowertier contractor .
num notice to proceed .
the notice to proceed will stipulate the date the contractor is expected to begin the construction and from which date contract time will be charged .
commencement of work by the contractor constitutes a waiver of this notice .
num prosecution and progress .
a .
general requirements .
num .
project schedule program all construction projects require an integrated schedule management and controls program that the contractor shall comply with through completion .
a critical path method cpm schedule must be developed and maintained for all projects .
the contractor shall be required to participate in schedule development meetings facilitating knowledgesharing and updating of schedules .
an integrated stepped schedule development process will begin once the apparent low bidder letter is sent to the contractor .
num the level of detail and schedule submission requirements will be based on the schedule level a b or c which shall be defined in the special provisions of the contract documents .
schedule level a projects with a high level of complexity impact to the motoring public or community andor larger size projects .
schedule level b projects of average to moderate complexity moderate impact to the motoring public or community andor average size .
schedule level c smaller projects with minimal to no complexity and minimal impact to the community .
typical examples would be resurfacing maintenance and landscaping projects .
the cpm schedule shall be the contractors primary tool to organize and communicate their plan for the timely completion of the project .
the schedule will be used to assess progress delays projection of time required contractor and ridot resources requirements and any mitigation if necessary .
the schedule shall include all the work to be performedrequired by the primary contractor subcontractors equipment vendors suppliers utility companies regulatory agencies owner review and other work that is interrelated to the contractors work .
the cpm schedule shall accurately portray the work planned and executed and shall reflect coordination of work .
the following schedule submittals are required for all projects a .
preliminary project schedule b. baseline project schedule c. status schedule updates recovery schedules will be required if requested by ridot .
the project schedules shall be used by the engineer and contractor for the following purposes as well as those stated in these specifications to identify the critical path and its specific activities .
to identify any changes in proposed work that differs from the specifications or the plans i.e .
alternate phasing value engineering proposals .
to document the actual progress of work and evaluate the time impact of changes in the work .
allow the department the opportunity to mitigate the impact of unforeseen events .
to enable the engineer to track and prioritize the review of shop drawings and submittals .
to evaluate resource requirements of the contractor and the engineer level a .
to coordinate the work of numrd party contractors into the sequencing of the contractors work where necessary .
having a timely scheduleschedule update affects the engineers decision making .
the department shall not be liable for delays to the contractors work when the contractor has failed to provide a schedule update in accordance with the requirements of the contract documents .
progress num payments may be withheld if the contractor fails to submit required schedule submissions .
this includes but is not limited to schedule development schedule updates and recovery schedule submissions .
additional requirements for schedule level a the contractor shall retain a schedulers dedicated to the project with a minimum of three num years experience on projects similar in size and scope .
the scheduler shall be responsible for developing updating and maintaining the schedule .
the contractor shall submit the resume of the proposed schedulers to the engineer for acceptance within num days of receiving the apparent low bidder letter .
determination of the schedulers acceptability is made at the discretion of the engineer .
the scheduler shall be present at all required meetings including but not limited to the schedule development schedule update and any other meetings which may affect the projects schedule .
num .
software the software used to generate the cpm schedule shall be capable of producing schedules in accordance with the requirements of the contract documents and fully compatible with software utilized by the engineer currently primavera project planner pnum .
the contractor shall purchase and maintain a valid software maintenance agreement for each license of software necessary to produce and maintain the project schedules .
unless specified elsewhere in the contract documents the contractor shall comply with the terminology defined by the primavera project management manual .
b .
schedule development .
num .
schedule development submittals the scheduling requirements and submittals will be based on the defined schedule level .
the schedule development process will commence on the date that the apparent low bidder letter is mailed to the contractor which will be considered day num for all scheduling submittals .
the table below details the required submissions and their corresponding submission due dates for each schedule level .
schedule level step step description a b c engineer review deadline after receipt of submission step num schedulers resume day num num days step num initial schedule framework day num num days step num complete schedule framework day num day num num days step num preliminary schedule day num day num day num num days step num baseline schedule day num day num day num num days step num bid item loaded baseline schedule day num day num day num num days step num resource loaded schedule day num num days step num finalized baseline day num day num day num num days required by day num but no earlier than num days after ntp all days are calendar days num refer to section d for technical scheduling requirements refer to the special provisions for project specific information including project groups id standards milestones and activity data .
the requirements for each schedule development submission are listed below .
meetings will be held on a weekly basis or as necessary to facilitate the schedule development .
each submission shall incorporate the accepted components and address the comments from the previous submissions .
if any schedule development step submission does not conform to specification and is therefore unacceptable the contractor shall revise and resubmit this for acceptance prior to proceeding to the next step .
each submission shall include three num paper and num two electronic files in their corresponding format .
step num schedulers resume step num initial schedule framework submittal a work breakdown structure wbs b activity codes all contractor defined activity code values .
c calendars all contractor defined calendars d contractors submittal list including all required contractor submittals e potential value engineering or alternate sequencingmethods .
step num complete schedule framework submittal a all requirements of step num with prior comments addressed .
b activity data for all milestones submittals procurement and work by others .
data includes num activity id num wbs id num responsibility code num activity type and num calendar ids .
c resource definitions levels a only labor resources work types and equipment resources detailed by crews incorporating all engineer comments to date .
step num preliminary schedule submittal a all requirements of step num with prior comments addressed .
b activity data including all logic for all work required to be performed within the first num days after the ntp .
c all work after the first num days from ntp shall be shown in summary activities summary activities shall not have durations greater than num days .
d narrative explaining the sequence of the work and all critical submittals and activities .
step num baseline schedule submittal a all requirements of step num with prior comments addressed .
b completed schedule showing all work activities and logic for the complete contract .
c narrative report .
step num bid item loaded schedule submittal a all requirements of step num with prior comments addressed .
b complete bid item loaded schedule .
c schedule narrative which shall explain the use of resources and an explanation of all logic changes since the baseline schedule submittal .
step num resource loaded schedule submittal level a only a all requirements of step num with prior comments addressed .
b resource loading completed for all activities in the schedule for the entire project num c schedule narrative which shall explain the use of resources and an explanation of all logic changes made since the baseline schedule submittal .
step num finalized baseline schedule submittal the contractor shall revise the original baseline schedule submittal until the schedule conforms to the plans and specifications .
no additional changes shall be made .
the revised baseline schedule submittal shall be revised and resubmitted until accepted by the engineer .
num. review and acceptance of project schedule submittals the engineer shall review schedule submittals for conformance with the requirements of the contract documents .
the planning scheduling and execution of the work and the accuracy of any project schedule shall remain the responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor is also responsible for errors in any previously accepted project schedule including but not limited to activity durations relationships between activities resource allocation or any float suppression techniques .
schedules that do not accurately reflect the work may be identified at any time .
once identified they shall be addressed by the contractor at no additional cost to the state .
the acceptance of any project schedule by the engineer does not constitute acceptance or approval of any change to the requirements of the contract documents including but not limited to any mandated construction sequences .
such acceptance shall not relieve the contractor of any responsibility under the contract for the successful completion of the work .
c. project schedule updates .
schedule update meetings shall be held every two weeks from notice to proceed to the completion of the project .
the contractor shall be required to attend each meeting with all their update information data as of the data date compiled in advance .
the contractor shall have a complete and accurate report of the current progress and depiction of how future work plans shall meet the contract completion dates .
failure to attend meetings or submit schedule updates may result in progress payments being withheld .
the contractor shall provide a sufficient number of copies of the updated schedules at the meetings .
the format of this update form shall be provided by the engineer at the schedule development meeting .
schedule update submittals shall be submitted to the engineer every two weeks on the scheduled meeting dates or no later than two num working days after the project schedule update meeting .
if a meeting is not held updates shall still be submitted .
the engineers review period for the schedule update submittal is five num working days .
three copies of the schedule updates shall be submitted to the engineer with the following components num .
a schedule narrative detailing the current milestone status critical path and all changes made to the schedule including actual dates calendar and duration changes and logic revisions as defined in section enum of this specification .
num .
activity columnbar chart diagram utilizing the layouts provided by the department at the first schedule development meeting .
this will highlight the past period progress and be utilized for the update information .
num .
copies of the current rfi and submittal logs .
num .
any other documents andor reports requested by the engineer .
num num .
computer disks with record schedule incorporating all submitted schedule update data uxxx .
all schedule data logic or duration changes or any modifications to the schedule shall be addressed and discussed with the engineer at the project schedule update meeting .
this shall be done prior to the contractor submitting their final schedule updates .
changes to the accepted baseline schedule shall be detailed in the schedule update narrative .
the acceptance and inclusion of these changes shall not be the sole basis of acceptance or entitlement to any time extensions or costs .
schedule update submittals shall never be used as the sole basis for any adjustment in the contract times regardless of any acceptance or approval by the engineer .
any acceptance or approval of the schedule update submittal by the engineer either expressed or implied shall only apply to the issue of progress and not to any issue of acceptability or accuracy of the schedule update submittal for use as a basis for measuring adjustments in contract times .
d. technical schedule requirements .
for the purpose of enabling both the engineer and the contractor to readily evaluate cpm schedules including derived data and reports the schedules shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements .
the contractor will have access to templates of these requirements during schedule development .
all cpm schedules shall utilize a workbreakdown structure wbs which shall be developed by the contractor during schedule development .
the following is the basic dictionary for the wbs which may be appended with engineers acceptance when further detail is required .
title case shall be utilized in the development of the wbs descriptions .
the wbs will be the primary code for displaying and organizing the graphical output schedules utilized for the project unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
num .
basic structure for wbs xx.num contract name xx.num milestones xx are contract specific alphanumeric xx.num summary activities characters that will be defined by the engineer .
xx.num procurementshop drawings xx.num utilityrr work by others xx.num construction num .
project naming standards preliminary project schedule psnum baseline schedule blnum biweekly status schedules uxxx recovery schedule rxxx num .
project milestones .
num the contractor shall include milestones as specified in the special provisions of the contract documents .
late finish constraints shall be assigned to the milestones where applicable .
num .
activity id .
the activity ids shall be coded in accordance with the following convention xx _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ project specific wbs code contractor specific alphanumeric levels num alphanumeric example xx num num project specific wbs code contractor specific alphanumeric levels num alphanumeric example xxnum the first two characters shall be contract specific provided by the engineer xx next characters wbs codes levels num through num two to six digits assigned to the activity without the decimal points .
last two characters unique alpha numeric characters as designated by the contractor .
all num characters shall be used in the activity id .
num .
activity codes .
the cpm schedules shall contain activity code classifications and code values .
the contractor shall propose a coding structure for the engineers review and acceptance .
the activity code structure combined with the activity identification number shall provide the capability to organize information by location road or ramp structure work type subcontractor discipline etc .
as deemed necessary by the engineer .
the contractor shall reserve three num code classifications fields and a minimum of six num characters for the engineers use .
resp code will be utilized for identification of responsible party .
resp values shall be discussed at the schedule development meetings .
num .
activity descriptions .
each activity description shall have a narrative description consisting of verb or work function i.e .
form pour excavate etc .
object i.e .
slab footing wall etc .
and location i.e .
sta bridge pier or retaining wall number street ramp etc ..
there shall be no two activities with the same activity description .
for example an acceptable description would be pour footing ramp rt sta .
num to num .
the words miscellaneous or misc or other nonspecific terminology shall not be used in the activitys description .
any abbreviations used in the activity descriptions shall be consistent with the abbreviations used throughout the contract documents and should be listed therein .
the formatting of the activity description in the software shall be leftjustified and capitalized .
num .
activity durations .
num the cpm schedule shall have a minimal number of activities with durations less than two num a short duration and more than twelve num a long duration working days .
the contractor may request permission from the engineer to assign durations greater than twelve num working days .
if the engineer accepts the contractors request to use a long duration the reason for the request shall be detailed in the preliminary and baseline schedule narratives .
num .
activity type .
the following types of activities are required for use in the schedule a milestone activities only milestones that are defined in the contracts special provisions shall utilize these activity types .
b summary hammock schedule activities the contractor shall maintain a summary schedule of hammock activities .
these schedule activities must remain in all of the schedule submittals .
the hammocks predecessors and successors may be modified to include all those activities that are entered into the schedule and considered part of the respective hammock activitys scope of work .
c task activities this is the primary activity type .
all activities other than milestone and summary as defined above shall be task activities .
num .
activity dates .
activity early and late start and finish dates shall be calculated for each activity based upon the schedule data date actual dates schedule logic schedule constraints calendars and original duration or remaining duration in accordance with the scheduling parameters defined in this section .
actual dates shall be agreed upon by the engineer .
num .
cash flowactivity bid item loading .
the contractor shall allocate the quantity for all bid items listed in the proposal pages .
each bid item will be associated with the corresponding schedule activityies .
each bid item shall be allocated to an activity or distributed to a group of activities .
this shall be done through the use of primaveras resources dictionary and resource assignment .
the summed value of that portion of the activities allocated to each bid item shall equal the total value of the corresponding bid item .
the bid item loading will identify the quantity of the bid items associated with each schedule activity .
the result of this bid item loading will be an accurate portrayal of the owners cash flow requirements for the project .
num .
calendars .
the following calendars shall be used in the contractors schedule .
the contractor may request permission from the engineer to create additional calendars however use of these calendars is by engineers acceptance .
additionally the contractor may not schedule work during the winter shutdown period unless the contract specifically states that work will be performed at this time or it is later agreed to and documented .
it is the responsibility of the contractor to schedule their work during the time allotted in the contract .
the following calendars are calendar num numday workweek includes holidays and winter shut down calendar num procurement calendar num numday workweek includes holidays and winter shut down calendar num numday workweek includes holidays and winter shut down num calendar num numday workweek includes holidays and no winter shut down calendar num numday workweek includes holidays and no winter shut down calendar num numday workweek includes holidays and no winter shut down calendar num interstate numday workweek includes holidays winter shut down calendar num interstate numday workweek includes holidays winter shut down calendar a seeding calendar b wetland seeding calendar c plants bb num .
data date .
the following are the definitions of the data dates for the cpm schedules preliminary cpm schedule date of bid opening baseline cpm schedule date of bid opening status update schedules tbd at schedule development meeting num .
logic .
the logic in the schedules shall represent the progression of time and the sequence of work performed within the contract time .
the cpm schedules shall conform to the following requirements every activity shall have logically assigned predecessors and successors .
unless otherwise specified the activity bid opening shall be the only activity without a predecessor contract completion and each contract milestone shall be the only activities without successors .
the use of activity constraints is limited to the use of startnoearlierthan and finishnolater than for access restraints and completion milestones .
the contractor may request permission from the engineer to use these constraints for other activities but acceptance is required for incorporation in the cpm schedule .
the use of zero free float start on expected finish mandatory start or mandatory finish is strictly prohibited .
activity lag durations shall not have a negative value unless the contractor can convince the engineer that it best represents realistic conditions .
activity lags shall not be used in lieu of logic relationships .
redundant ties to preceding activities in a sequential series of activities will not be permitted .
for example activity c is a successor in a finishstart relationship to b activity b is a successor in a finishstart relationship to a activity shall not have redundant finishstart relations to c a tie representing a different constraint will not be considered redundant .
for example a logic tie showing the completion of the work scope of a predecessor is required before the successor can start is different from a logic tie representing a resource limitation and will not be considered redundant .
the critical path for a project shall be defined as the longest continuous series of activities progressing toward a contractual milestone or contract completion .
num outofsequence logic shall not be permitted to be included in a submitted cpm schedule .
the contractor is responsible for identifying correcting and updating any outofsequence logic in a schedule .
float is not for the exclusive use or benefit of either the engineer or the contractor .
it is an expiring resource available to all parties acting in good faith as needed to meet any contract milestones .
num .
schedule layout requirements .
the engineer will provide the contractor with the required layouts for the schedule .
num .
schedule calculations .
performing scheduling calculations requires the following settings turn off automatic scheduling and leveling .
when scheduling activities apply retained logic .
calculate the starttostart lag from early start .
schedule durations as contiguous .
show open ends as noncritical .
calculate total float as finish float .
summary calculations shall use calendar no .
num and the weighting factor for determining percent complete shall be duration .
set the autoinserting option on automatic with a minimum increment of three num .
initially set critical activities using defined critical as total float less than one num .
this option may be changed at the direction of the engineer .
set language for output as u.s. english .
num .
submittals and procurement .
all submittals and shop drawings will be represented in the contractors submittal list csl and shall be cross referenced in the project schedule utilizing the item codes from the specifications .
at a minimum each submittal in the csl will have a corresponding submittal preparation activity in the schedule .
each submittal activity will have corresponding review and approval activity .
each submittal item will also have a corresponding procurement activity identifying the duration for the procurement of the corresponding materials equipment etc .
the accuracy and completeness will be the responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor is responsible for any delays due to inaccuracies in identifying shop drawings submittals and procurement requirements .
e. schedule submission narratives .
num .
preliminary schedule narrative .
the preliminary schedule narrative shall contain the following information a .
identification of the data date and schedule file name .
num b .
a description of the planned flow of work identifying all key or driving activitiesresources for the first num days in detail and remaining project in summary .
summary activities shall not be greater than num calendar days in duration .
c. identify any alternates or substitutions .
d. response to all the owners comments .
the identification and explanation of all changes made to the schedule submission .
additional requirements for schedule level a e. a summary of planned labor utilization for the project for the first num days in detail .
this shall identify the average and maximum number of workers by craft designation on site each month based on the resource loaded project schedules and the shifts to be worked .
identify actual and potential labor resource limitations .
f. a summary of planned equipment utilization for the contract for the first num days in detail identifying each type of operated equipment to be used in the work the planned quantity of each type of operated equipment utilized each month and the criteria for mobilizing and demobilizing each piece of equipment to and from the site .
identify actual and potential labor resource limitations .
g. key constraints and potential problems affecting the contractors work must be identified construction interfaces with existing plant operations third parties at the project site temporary contractor plants facilities or fixed equipment planned for use whether within the contract row contract easement or offsite .
include length of time the plant is to be used any planned moves and any potential conflicts that could arise if the plan is not followed .
num .
baseline schedule narrative .
the baseline schedule narrative shall contain the following information a .
identification of the data date and schedule file name .
b .
a description of the planned flow of work identifying all key or driving resources .
c. identify any alternates or substitutions .
d. response to all of the owners comments and the identification and explanation of all changes made to the schedule submission .
e. an explanation of how adverse weather has been addressed in the baseline schedule .
identify any and all activities that contain contingency days for adverse weather .
lack of preparation for normal adverse weather is unacceptable .
additional requirements for schedule level a f. a summary of planned labor utilization for the project identifying the average and maximum number of workers by craft designation on site each month based on the resource loaded project schedules and the shifts to be worked .
g. identify actual and potential labor resource limitations .
num h. key constraints and potential problems affecting the contractors work must be identified construction interfaces with existing plant operations third parties at the project site temporary contractor plants facilities or fixed equipment planned for use whether within the contract row contract easement or offsite .
include length of time the plant is to be used any planned moves and any potential conflicts that could arise if the plan is not followed .
num .
schedule update narrative .
the schedule update narrative shall contain the following information a .
identification of the update period the data date and the schedule file name .
b .
narrative of work accomplished in the past two weeks and work planned for the next two weeks .
identify what planned work was not accomplished and why .
c. narrative of the current critical path to each contractual completion milestone .
d. identify any alternates or substitutions .
e. response to all of the owners comments and the identification and explanation of all changes made to the schedule submission .
f. elective change an elective change is defined as a revision to logic or durations by the contractor to effectively use labor and resources which have no adverse effect on the owner or contract .
the engineer may use this as a request to a change in the schedule .
mutual agreement on the change must be attained to implement either request .
the elective change narrative shall contain the following information num .
identification of the activities changed .
num .
a description of the scope of the elective change and identification of the advantages and disadvantages of implementing the change .
identify all driving resources if any .
identify key constraints influencing the contractors approach to the work .
additional requirements for schedule level a g. identification of activities with critical or near critical float within ten num working days of the critical path that were planned to occur during the update period but did not occur or occurred later than the scheduled late start or late finish date and an explanation of these delays .
identification of delays to activities taking place off the project site e.g .
submittal preparation fabrication and delivery activities .
h. provide a listing of all activities which have surpassed their planned duration by more than twenty num percent and any justification for maintaining original planned durations for future activities of like work .
i .
a summary of any changed plans for labor utilization for the project identifying the average and maximum number of workers on site each month .
identify actual and potential labor resource limitations .
a summary of the actual labor utilization used over the past month .
num j .
a summary of any changed plans for equipment utilization for the project identifying each type of operated equipment to be used on the work the planned quantity of each type of operated equipment utilized each month and all changes to the criteria for mobilizing and demobilizing each piece of equipment to and from the site .
identify actual and potential equipment resource problems .
a summary of the actual equipment utilized over the past month .
f. progress delays .
the contractor shall identify and promptly report to the engineer all schedule and progress delays during the prosecution of the work .
the contractor shall promptly take appropriate action to develop a recovery schedule in the form of a revised baseline schedule whenever the actual physical progress is behind schedule as compared to the current baseline schedule or whenever requested by the engineer .
at a minimum the contractor shall submit a recovery schedule whenever the project schedule update becomes thirty num or more days late to any milestones designated in section num milestones .
the proposed baseline schedule revision shall be in accordance with corresponding section contained herein .
the development and submission of a recovery schedule does not relieve the contractor from continuing with the submission of the project status schedule submittals .
the submission of the recovery schedule shall be at no cost to the engineer and shall be submitted within num days of the project schedule update .
the recovery schedule shall demonstrate a clear procedure for bringing the project into compliance with a time line acceptable to the engineer .
the department may request a recovery schedule due to a delay that is not the fault of the contractor .
cost associated with the development of these schedules will be considered a reimbursable expense .
normal adverse weather shall be anticipated by and planned for by the contractor .
delays due to such weather events are unacceptable .
failure to submit such a recovery plan shall provide a basis for future payment application withholdings either in whole or in part by the engineer .
num .
baseline schedule revisions .
in the event of a significant delay or changes to the projects schedule as determined by the engineer or any situation where time needs to be recovered a revised baseline schedule may be required .
baseline schedule revision submittals shall include a comprehensive listing of all activities added to or deleted from the current baseline schedule of record as well as a complete listing of all logic and activity relationship changes which have been made .
all changes in the schedule must be fully described in an accompanying narrative .
no baseline schedule revision submittal will be accepted unless it satisfies the following requirements any outofsequenced logic is corrected or explained to the satisfaction of the engineer .
start and finish dates are verified for accuracy .
the schedule accurately reflects the contractors plan including accurate logic and durations for completing the remaining work .
all changes from the accepted baseline schedule to the proposed revised baseline schedule must be identified and accepted by the engineer prior to incorporation into the revised schedule .
any num proposed changes andor revisions to the current baseline schedule accepted by the engineer pursuant to its review of a proposal schedule definition required submitted by the contractor shall be incorporated into the current baseline schedule and submitted as a baseline schedule revision submittal .
a baseline schedule revision submittal shall be due within num days following the engineers acceptance of the proposed schedule changes andor revisions as submitted in a proposal schedule and shall consist of the requirements of the baseline schedule as supplemented below .
the baseline schedule revision shall include a cost distribution for added work andor costs for review and acceptance by the engineer .
once a baseline schedule revision submittal is accepted by the engineer it shall become the current baseline schedule revision of record and be used for subsequent schedule update submittals and shall be referred to by its revision number .
except as otherwise designated by change order no current baseline schedule revision that extends performance beyond any contract time andor contract milestones shall qualify as a current baseline schedule revision of record that would allow it to be used to demonstrate entitlement to a time extension .
in no case shall a schedule update be construed as a baseline schedule revision of record unless it is specifically submitted and accepted as such by the engineer .
num limitation of operations .
the contractor shall conduct the work to assure the least interference with traffic .
the contractor shall have due regard to the location of detours and to the provisions for handling traffic .
the contractor shall not open up work to the prejudice or detriment of work already started or completed .
the engineer may require the contractor to finish a section on which work is in progress before work is started on any additional sections if the opening of such section is essential to public convenience .
any extra costs will be considered under subsection num alterations in the plans or details .
num character of workers .
the contractor shall employ sufficient labor supervision and equipment for prosecuting the several classes of work to full completion in the manner and time required by the contract .
all workers shall have sufficient skill and experience to perform properly the work assigned to them .
workers engaged in special work or skilled work shall have sufficient experience in such work and in the operation of the equipment required to satisfactorily perform such work .
any person employed by the contractor or by any subcontractor who does not perform the work in a proper and skillful manner or is intemperate or disorderly shall at the written request of the engineer be removed forthwith by the contractor or subcontractor employing such person and shall not be employed again in any portion of the work without the approval of the engineer .
should the contractor fail to remove such person or persons as required above or fail to furnish suitable and sufficient personnel for the proper prosecution of the work the engineer may withhold progress payments from the contractor which are or may become due and suspend the work by written notice until such orders are complied with .
num methods and equipment .
all equipment which is proposed to be used on the work shall be of sufficient size and in such mechanical condition as to meet requirements of the work and to num produce a satisfactory quality of work .
equipment used on any portion of the project shall not cause injury to the roadway adjacent property or other highways .
when the methods and equipment to be used by the contractor are not prescribed in the contract the contractor shall use any methods or equipment that will accomplish the contract work in conformity with the requirements of the contract .
when the contract specifies the use of certain methods and equipment these methods and equipment shall be used unless others are approved by the engineer .
if the contractor desires to use a method or type of equipment other than those specified in the contract it may request approval from the engineer for such use .
the request shall be in writing and shall include full description of the methods and equipment proposed for use and the reasons for making the change .
if approval is granted it will be on the condition that the contractor will be responsible for producing construction work in conformity with contract requirements .
if after trial use of the substituted methods or equipment the engineer determines that the work produced does not meet contract requirements the contractor shall discontinue the use of the substitute method or equipment and shall complete the remaining work with the specified methods and equipment .
the contractor shall remove the deficient work and replace it with work of specified quality or take such other corrective action as the engineer may direct .
no change will be made in the basis of payment for the construction items involved nor in contract time as a result of approving a change in methods or equipment .
num determination and extension of contract time .
a .
completion time .
the number of days allowed for the completion of work or date by which the work shall be completed will be stated in the proposal and contract agreement and will be known as the contract time .
the time for completion stated in the contract is expressed as a fixed calendar date and is based on the original quantities as defined in subsection num interpretation of quantities in bid schedule .
if satisfactory completion of the contract requires work to be performed in greater quantities than those set forth in the contract documents and the contractor shall show to the satisfaction of the engineer that the additional work effects his schedule and contract completion dates the time allowed for completion shall be increased on a basis corresponding with the new contract schedule .
the time for completion stated in the contract has been developed on the assumption that work will be suspended during winter shutdown i.e .
the period from december numth through the following april numth unless otherwise specified in the contract documents .
b .
delays .
if the contractor finds it beyond their control to complete the work within the contract time as specified or as extended in accordance with the provisions of this subsection the contractor may at any time prior to the expiration of the contract time make a written request to the engineer .
the contractors claim that insufficient time was specified is not a valid reason for extension of time .
the contractor shall be responsible for notifying the resident engineer within thirty num calendar days of any department action or omission which the contractor believes has delayed or may delay the project .
notification and documentation of the delays shall be in accordance with section num project delays .
such notification shall be a precondition to consideration of an extension of time .
num if the engineer determines that the work was delayed because of conditions beyond the control and without the fault of the contractor the time for completion may be extended for such period as conditions justify .
c. requirements for time extension request .
the contractors request shall be submitted as a comprehensive time extension request package .
it shall include a narrative project schedules copies of all supporting documentation and related correspondence .
the submissions shall be considered a single package and all information shall mutually substantiate the requested extension of time .
num .
at a minimum the narrative shall include the following a detailed project history including overall project performance by the contractor subcontractors the department and third parties that affected the necessity for the time extension request .
b identification description and documentation for each delay issue .
this shall include the circumstances which occurred resulting in the delay the responsible parties for the delay and when the contractor notified the department regarding the delay .
the number of calendar days each delay impacted each milestone shall be calculated and reported .
c identification description and documentation for each mitigation action .
this shall include the actions taken by each party to mitigate delays the dates of such actions and the resulted calendar days which were gained or mitigated by such actions .
num .
at a minimum project schedules shall be included in the time extension package to substantiate the delays and mitigation actions to the project .
engineer accepted schedules shall be referenced as is schedules either accepted as noted not accepted or rejected shall be corrected before for use in the delay analysis .
the number of days requested shall be substantiated by the project schedules .
num .
at a minimum the project documentation and correspondence shall be included in the submitted time extension package .
this documentation shall include letters memos directives field notes emails etc which substantiates any delays or mitigation detailed in the narrative .
num failure to complete on time .
a .
phased completion interim completion and substantial completion .
for each day including work days saturdays sundays and holidays that any unit or portion of the work shall remain uncompleted as defined by subsection num acceptance para .
a .
partial acceptance the applicable daily charge will be deducted from any money due the contractor not as a penalty but as liquidated damages .
the job specific phased and interim completion dates and associated liquidated damages are defined in special provision code num prosecution and progress .
an adjustment of the contract time for completion of the work granted under the provisions of subsection num hereto will be considered in the assessment of liquidated damages .
permitting the contractor to continue and finish the work or any part of it after the contract time or any extensions thereof has passed will not waive the departments rights under the contract .
unless otherwise specified liquidated damages will not be assessed during the winter shutdown period i.e .
december numth through the following april numth .
num b .
final completion .
for each day including work days saturdays sundays and holidays that any work shall remain uncompleted after the time established for completion of the work in subsection num acceptance para .
b final acceptance the applicable daily charge specified below will be deducted from any money due the contractor not as a penalty but as liquidated damages .
an adjustment of the contract time for completion of the work granted under the provisions of subsection num hereto will be considered in the assessment of liquidated damages .
permitting the contractor to continue and finish the work or any part of it after the contract time or any extensions thereof has passed will not waive the departments rights under the contract .
unless otherwise specified liquidated damages will not be assessed during the winter shutdown period i.e .
december numth through the following april numth .
rates for liquidated damages will be established in accordance with the schedule .
when the contract time is either the calendar day or fixed calendar day basis the schedule for calendar days shall be used .
when the contract time is on a work day basis the schedule for work days will be used .
schedule of liquidated damages original contract amount daily charge from to and calendar day more than including or fixed date work day num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num default of contract a .
conditions .
if the contractor num num .
fails to begin the work under the contract within the time specified in the notice to proceed or num .
fails to perform the work with sufficient workers and equipment or with sufficient materials to assure the prompt completion of said work or num .
fails to perform the work in accordance with the contract requirements andor refuses to remove and replace rejected materials or unacceptable work or num .
discontinues the prosecution of the work or num .
fails to resume work that has been discontinued within a reasonable time after notice to do so or num .
becomes insolvent or is declared bankrupt files a voluntary petition for bankruptcy under the federal bankruptcy act or commits any act of bankruptcy or insolvency or num .
allows any final judgment to remain unsatisfied for a period of num days or num .
is a party to fraud or num .
makes an assignment of the contract for the benefit of creditors or num .
fails to comply with contract requirements regarding minimum wage payments or eeo requirements or num .
fails to carry on the work in an acceptable manner in accordance with the contract requirements the engineer may declare the contractor to be in default of the contract and shall give notice in writing to the contractor and the surety of such default advising the contractor of actions required to remedy said default .
if the contractor or surety within a period of num days of receipt of such notice does not proceed in accordance therewith then the department will have full power and authority without violating the contract to assume prosecution of the work from the contractor .
the department may appropriate or use the contractors materials and equipment at the site as may be suitable for use in the project and may enter into an agreement with another contractor for the completion of said contract according to the terms and provisions thereof or use such other methods as in the opinion of the engineer will be required for the completion of contract .
all costs and charges incurred by the department as a result of the default including the cost of completing the work under contract and any applicable liquidated damages will be deducted from any monies due or to become due the contractor .
if such costs exceed the sum which would have been payable under the contract then the contractor and the surety shall be liable and shall pay to the department the balance of such costs in excess of the contract amount .
if it is determined after termination of the contractors right to proceed that the contractor was not in default the rights and obligations of the parties will be the same as if the termination had been issued for the convenience of the department in accordance with subsection num .
thus damages to num which a contractor may be entitled as a result of the improper default termination will be limited to appropriate amounts for the items listed in subsection num termination of contract .
num termination of contract .
a .
reasons for termination .
the department may terminate the entire contract or any portion thereof when the contractor is prevented from proceeding with the prescribed work for any of the following reasons num .
an executive order of the president of the united states with respect to the prosecution of war in the interest of national defense or any civil emergency or natural disaster .
num .
an executive order of the governor of the state with respect to a natural disaster or civil emergency .
num .
court orders relating to energy consumption and orders or injunctions obtained by third party action resulting from national or local environmental protection laws .
num .
discovery of unanticipated archaeological artifacts of a significant nature that would require extensive and timeconsuming delays in the work for the purposes of identification evaluation and possibly recovery .
num .
occurrence of an unanticipated environmental situation of a significant nature that would require extensive and timeconsuming delays in the work for the purposes of identification evaluation and possibly mitigation .
num .
any other circumstances beyond the control of either the department or the contractor that precludes the orderly prosecution or completion of the work and that is in the public interest .
the engineer shall terminate the contract by delivering to the contractor a notice of termination which shall specify the extent of the termination the reasons therefore and the effective date thereof .
b .
termination procedures .
after receipt of a notice of termination and except as directed by the engineer the contractor shall immediately proceed with the following obligations num .
stop work as specified in the notice .
num .
place no further subcontracts or orders referred to as subcontracts in this clause for materials services or facilities except as necessary to complete the continued portion of the contract .
num .
terminate all subcontracts to the extent they relate to the work terminated .
num .
with approval or ratification to the extent required by the engineer settle all outstanding liabilities and termination settlement proposals arising from the termination of subcontracts the approval or ratification will be final for purposes of this clause .
num num .
as directed by the engineer transfer title and deliver to the department the fabricated partially fabricated or unfabricated parts work in process completed work supplies and other material produced or acquired for the work terminated and the completed or partially competed plans drawings information and other property that if the contract had been completed would be required to be furnished to the department .
num .
complete performance of the work not terminated .
num .
take any action that may be necessary or that the engineer may direct for the protection and preservation of the property related to this contract that is in the possession of the contractor and in which the department has or may acquire an interest .
num .
at the direction of the engineer acceptable materials obtained by the contractor for the project but which have not been incorporated therein may be purchased from the contractor at actual cost delivered to a prescribed location or disposed of as mutually agreed .
when the department orders termination of a contract or portion thereof effective on a certain date all completed items of work as of that date will be paid for at the contract bid prices .
payment for partially completed work will be made either at agreed prices or in accordance with the subparagraph below entitled contractor and department fail to agree .
items that are eliminated in their entirety by such termination shall be paid for as provided in subsection num eliminated items .
the contractor shall submit within num days of the effective termination date a claim for additional damages or costs not covered above or elsewhere in the contract .
such claim may include such cost items as reasonable idle equipment time mobilization efforts bidding and project investigative costs overhead expenses attributable to the project terminated legal and accounting charges involved in claim preparation subcontractor costs not otherwise paid for actual idle labor cost if work is stopped in advance of termination date guaranteed payments for private land usage as part of the original contract and any other cost or damage for which the contractor feels reimbursement should be made .
the intent of negotiating this claim would be that an equitable settlement be reached with the contractor .
in no event will loss of anticipated profits be considered as part of any settlement .
the contractor and the department may agree upon the whole or any part of the amount to be paid because of the termination .
the amount may include a reasonable allowance for profit on work performed .
the contract shall be amended and the contractor paid the agreed amount .
c. contractor and department fail to agree .
if the contractor and the department fail to agree on the whole amount to be paid the contractor because of the termination of work the department shall pay the contractor the amounts determined as follows but without duplication of any amounts agreed upon above num .
for contract work performed before the effective date of termination the total of the following a the cost of this work b the cost of settling and paying termination settlement proposals under terminated subcontracts that are properly chargeable to the termination portion of the contract and num c a sum as profit on a above determined by the department to be fair and reasonable however if the contractor would have sustained a loss on the entire contract had it been completed the department shall allow no profit and shall reduce the settlement to reflect the indicated rate loss .
num .
the reasonable costs of settlement of the work terminated including a accounting legal clerical and other expenses reasonably necessary for the preparation of termination settlement proposals and support data b the termination and settlement of subcontracts excluding the amounts of such settlements and c storage transportation and other costs incurred reasonably necessary for the preservation protection or disposition of the termination inventory .
num .
except for normal spoilage and except to the extent that the department expressly assumed the risk of loss the department shall exclude from the amounts payable to the contractor the fair value as determined by the department of property that is destroyed lost stolen or damaged so as to become undeliverable to the department or to the buyer .
num .
in arriving at the amount due the contractor under this clause there shall be deducted a all unliquidated advance or other payments to the contractor under the terminated portion of this contract b any claim which the department has against the contractor under this contract and c the agreed price for or the proceeds of sale of materials supplies or other things acquired by the contractor or sold under the provisions of this clause and not recovered by or credited to the department .
d. partial termination .
if the termination is partial the contractor may file a proposal with the department for an equitable adjustment of the prices of the continued portion of the contract .
the department shall make any equitable adjustment agreed upon .
any proposal by the contractor for an equitable adjustment under this clause shall be requested within num days from the effective date of termination unless extended in writing by the engineer .
e. records .
the department may under the terms and conditions it prescribes make partial payments and payments against costs incurred by the contractor for the terminated portion of the contract if the department believes the total of these payments will not exceed the amount to which the contractor will be entitled .
the contractor shall maintain and make available all project cost records to the department for audit to the extent necessary to determine the validity and amount of each item claimed .
this includes all books and other evidence bearing on the contractors costs and expenses under this contract .
the contractor shall make these records and documents available to the department at the contractors office at all reasonable times without any direct charge .
if approved by the department photographs num microphotographs or other authentic reproductions may be maintained instead of original records and documents .
f. contractual responsibilities .
termination of a contract or portion thereof shall not relieve the contractor of contractual responsibilities for the work completed nor shall it relieve the surety of its obligation for and concerning any just claim arising out of the work performed .
section num measurement and payment num measurement of quantities .
work completed under the contract will be measured by the engineer according to united states standard measure or by the metric system when the contract so provides .
a station when used as a definition or term of measurement will denote num linear feet .
the method of measurement and computations to be used to determine quantities of materials furnished and work performed under the contract will be those methods generally recognized as conforming to good engineering practice .
unless otherwise specified longitudinal measurements for area computations will be made horizontally and no deductions will be made for individual fixtures in the roadway having an area of num square feet or less .
unless otherwise specified transverse measurements for area computations will be the neat dimensions shown on the plans .
structures will be measured according to neat lines shown on the plans or as altered to fit field conditions .
items which are measured by the linear foot such as pipe culverts curb guardrail underdrains etc .
will be measured parallel to the base or foundation upon which such structures are placed unless otherwise shown on the plans .
in computing volumes of excavation the average end area method or other acceptable methods will be used .
the thickness of plates and galvanized sheet used in the manufacture of corrugated metal pile metal plate pipe culverts and arches and metal cribbing will be specified and measured in decimal fractions of inches .
the term gauge shall mean the standard gauges as established by aashto astm u.s.a.s.i .
or manufacturers standards in the order of precedence listed .
the term ton will mean the short ton consisting of num pounds avoirdupois .
materials which are measured or proportioned by weight shall be weighed on accurate approved scales by competent qualified personnel at locations designated by the engineer .
if material is shipped by rail the car weight num may be accepted provided that payment is made only for the actual weight of such material .
however car weights will not be acceptable for material that is passed through mixing plants .
trucks used to haul material being paid for by weight shall be weighed empty daily at such times as the engineer directs .
each truck shall bear a plainly legible identification mark .
materials to be measured by volume in the hauling vehicle shall be hauled in approved vehicles and measured in such vehicles at the point of delivery .
vehicles for this purpose may be of any size or type acceptable to the engineer provided that the body is of such shape that the actual volume may be readily and accurately determined .
vehicles shall be loaded to at least their water level capacity and all loads shall be leveled when the vehicles arrive at the point of delivery .
however any heap above the water level line may be computed for quantity if authorized by the engineer .
when requested by the contractor and approved in writing by the engineer material specified to be measured by the cubic yard may be weighed and such weights will be converted to cubic yards for payment purposes .
factors for conversion from weight measurement to volume measurement will be determined by the engineer and shall be acceptable to the contractor before such method of measurement of quantities is employed .
bituminous materials will be measured as indicated in the proposal .
volumes will be measured at numof or will be corrected to the volume at numof using astm dnum for asphalts or astm dnum for tars .
net certified scale weights or weights converted from certified volumes in the case of rail shipments will be used as a basis of measurement .
such weights however shall be subject to correction whenever bituminous material has been lost from the car or the distributor wasted or otherwise not incorporated in the work .
when bituminous materials are shipped by truck or transport net certified weights or volume subject to correction for loss or foaming may be used for computing quantities .
cement will be measured by the pound .
timber will be measured by thousand footboard measure m.f.b.m .
actually incorporated in the structure .
measurement will be based on nominal widths and thicknesses and the extreme length of each piece .
the term lump sum when used in the bid schedule as an item of payment will mean complete payment for the work so described in the contract .
when a complete structure or structural unit in effect lump sum work is specified as the unit of measurement the unit will be construed to include all necessary fittings and accessories .
rental of equipment will be measured by time in hours of actual working time and necessary travel time within the limits of the project .
if special equipment has been ordered by the engineer in connection with force account work travel time and transportation to the project will be measured .
if equipment has been ordered held on the job on a standby basis by the engineer halftime rates for the equipment will be paid .
num when standard manufactured items are specified such as fence wire plates rolled shapes pipe conduit etc .
and these items are identified by gauge unit weight section dimensions etc .
such identification will be considered to be nominal weights or dimensions .
unless more stringently controlled by tolerances in cited specifications manufacturing tolerances established by the respective industries will be accepted .
scales for the weighing of highway and bridge construction materials that are required to be proportioned or measured and paid for by weight shall be furnished erected and maintained by the contractor or be certified permanently installed commercial scales .
scales shall be accurate within ½ of num percent of the correct weight throughout the range of use .
the contractor shall have the scales checked under the observation of the inspector before beginning work and at such other times as requested .
the intervals shall be uniform in spacing throughout the graduated or marked length of the beam or dial and shall not exceed num of num percent of the nominal rated capacity of the scale but not less than num pound .
the use of spring balances will not be permitted .
beams dials platforms and other scale equipment shall be arranged so that the operator and inspector can safely and conveniently view them .
scale installations shall have available ten standard num pound weights for testing the weighing equipment or suitable weights and devices for other approved equipment .
scales must be tested for accuracy and serviced before use at a new site .
platform scales shall be installed and maintained with the platform level and rigid bulkheads at each end .
scales over weighing indicating more than true weight will not be permitted to operate and materials received subsequent to the last correct weighing accuracy test will be reduced by the percentage of error in excess of ½ of num percent .
in the event inspection reveals the scales have been under weighing they shall be adjusted and no additional payment to the contractor will be allowed for materials previously weighed and recorded .
costs in connection with furnishing installing certifying testing and maintaining scales for furnishing check weights and scale house and for all other items specified in this subsection for weighing of highway and bridge construction materials for proportioning or payment shall be included in the unit contract prices for the various pay items of the project .
when the estimated quantities for a specific portion of the work are designated as pay quantities in the contract they shall be the final quantities for which payment will be made unless the dimensions of the work shown on the plans are revised by the engineer .
if revised dimensions result in an increase or decrease in the quantities of work the final quantities for payment will be revised in the amount represented by the authorized changes .
num scope of payment .
the contractor shall receive and accept compensation provided for in the contract as full payment for furnishing all materials and for performing all work under the contract in a complete and acceptable manner and for all risk loss damage or expense of whatever character arising out of the nature or prosecution of the work subject to the provisions of subsections num differing site conditions and num no waiver of legal rights .
num if the basis of payment clause in the specifications relating to any unit price in the bid schedule requires that the said unit price cover and be considered compensation for certain work or material essential to the item this same work or material will not also be measured or paid for under any other pay item which may appear elsewhere in the contract .
num compensation for altered quantities .
when the accepted quantities of work vary from the quantities in the bid schedule the contractor shall accept payment at the original contract unit prices for the accepted quantities of work performed .
no allowance will be made for any reason except as provided for in subsections num num and num differing site conditions extra work and significant changes in the character of the work respectively .
num differing site conditions changes extra work and force account work .
a .
methods of payment .
differing site conditions changes extra work and significant changes in the character of the work all performed in accordance with section num scope of work will be paid for in accordance with the following methods as appropriate num .
contract unit prices .
num .
unit prices agreed upon in the order authorizing the work .
num .
an agreed upon lump sum amount .
num .
if directed by the department on a force account basis to be compensated in the following manner a labor .
for all labor and foremen in direct charge of the specific operations the contractor shall receive the rate of wage actually paid as shown by its certified payroll which rate shall be at least the prevailing rate of wage or scale for each and every hour that said labor and foremen are actually engaged in the work .
no part of the salary or expenses of anyone connected with the contractors forces above the grade of foreman and having general supervision of the work will be included in the labor item as specified above .
the engineer reserves the right to determine the number and type of labor employed .
the contractor shall receive the actual costs paid to or in behalf of workers by reason of subsistence and travel allowances health and welfare benefits pension fund benefits or other benefits when such amounts are required by collective bargaining agreement or other employment contract generally applicable to the classes of labor employed on the work .
an amount equal to num percent of the sum of the above items will also be paid the contractor .
num b bond insurance and tax .
for property damage liability workers compensation insurance premiums unemployment insurance contributions and social security taxes incurred on force account work the contractor shall receive the actual cost to which cost a surcharge of numpercent will be added .
the contractor shall furnish satisfactory evidence of the rate or rates paid for such bonds insurances and taxes .
c materials .
for materials accepted by the engineer and used in the work the contractor shall receive the actual cost of such materials delivered to the site including transportation charges paid exclusive of machinery rentals as hereinafter set forth to which cost a surcharge of num percent will be added .
the contractor will not be reimbursed for any penalty or carrying charge incurred due to late or delayed payment for materials used in the work .
d equipment .
for any machinery or special equipment other than small tools including transportation cost the use of which has been authorized by the engineer the contractor shall receive either the hourly rental rates as prescribed herein by the department or the actual documented cost plus an amount equal to num percent of said actual documented cost whichever is less .
under no circumstance shall the payment exceed the replacement cost of the equipment .
all rental rates shall include the estimated operating cost as indicated for that equipment in either the rental rate blue book or the rental rate blue book for older equipment including the rate adjustment tables approved for projects wholly or partially funded by the federal highway administration fhwa .
operators wages are not included in the estimated operating cost and are paid separately except for certain specified equipment in which the operators wages are included .
the hourly rental rate for an individual piece of equipment shall be determined by dividing the associated monthly rate modified by the rate adjustment tables as contained in the rental rate blue book by one hundred seventysix num .
there will be no adjustment to the hourly rate for the period of use .
for rented equipment the cost shall be based on the actual documented cost plus an amount equal to numpercent of said actual documented cost subject to the conditions set forth below .
the actual documented cost shall consist of the paid invoice for rented equipment plus other documented operating costs i.e .
fuel maintenance repairs etc .. actual documented costs plus num percent of said costs shall not exceed the cost as calculated from the rental rate blue book or the rental rate blue book for older construction equipment .
the contractor shall submit documentation for both the hourly rental rates and actual documented costs to determine that the actual documented costs plus num percent of said costs does not exceed the calculated rental rate costs .
no percentage surcharges will be added to the blue book rates as prescribed herein for rented equipment .
for equipment which is already on the project the rental period shall start when such equipment is ordered to work by the engineer and shall continue until ordered to stop work .
for equipment which has to be brought to the project specifically for use on force account work the state will pay all loading and unloading costs and all transportation costs to and from the project including assembling and dismantling provided however that the cost of return transportation shall not exceed that of moving the equipment to the project .
loading unloading and transportation costs will not num be paid if the equipment is used for work other than force account work while on the project .
the rental period shall start at the time the equipment is ready for operation and shall extend during the period of time the equipment is actually utilized on force account work .
the rental period shall end when the equipment is released by the engineer .
all equipment including trucks shall in the judgment of the engineer be in good working condition and suitable for the purpose intended .
the engineer reserves the right to determine the number of units of the various types of equipment to be employed on force account work .
the manufacturers model identification shall be the basis for identifying the type of equipment for payment purposes .
certification for the model year of the equipment will be required .
e miscellaneous .
no additional allowance will be made for general superintendence the use of small tools or other costs for which no specific allowance is herein provided .
f compensation .
the contractors representative and the engineer shall daily compare records of work completed on a force account basis .
the engineer will then prepare the daily work sheets and said sheets will be signed by the contractors representative no later than noon of the next working day .
g statements .
no payment will be made for work performed on a force account basis until the contractor has furnished the engineer with six copies of itemized statements of the cost of such work incurred on a daily basis and detailed as follows num name classification date daily hours total hours rate and extension for each laborer and foreman .
num designation dates daily hours total hours rental rate and extension for each unit of machinery and equipment .
num quantities of materials prices and extensions .
num transportation of materials .
num cost of property damage liability and workers compensation insurance premiums unemployment insurance contributions and social security taxes .
statements shall be accompanied and supported by certified payrolls and receipted invoices for all materials used and transportation charges .
however if materials used on the force account work are not specifically purchased for such work but are taken from the contractors stock then in lieu of the invoices the contractor shall furnish an affidavit certifying that such materials were taken from its stock that the quantity claimed was actually used and that the price and transportation claimed represent the actual cost to the contractor .
num eliminated items .
should any items contained in the contract be found unnecessary for the proper completion of the work the engineer may upon written order to the contractor eliminate the items from the contract and the action shall not invalidate the contract .
when a contractor is notified of the elimination of items the contractor will be reimbursed for actual work performed and all costs incurred including mobilization of materials prior to said notification .
num num partial payments .
a .
amount .
partial payments will be made biweekly as the work progresses .
the amount of the partial payments shall be num percent of the contract price for the work performed during the previous payment period all as measured andor estimated and accepted by the engineer .
partial payment will be subject to a num percent retainage .
retainage will be released when all items on the punch list and the required documentation have been addressed to the satisfaction of the engineer .
no partial payments shall be made when in the judgment of the engineer the work has not proceeded according to provisions of the contract .
partial payments shall not be construed as an acceptance by the department of any materials furnished or work performed .
no partial payments shall be made on perishable plant materials until such plant materials are planted as specified in the contract .
upon written request from the contractor supported by delivery invoices and for those conditions outlined below the engineer may allow partial payment on such approved materials supplies and equipment as are delivered to an approved site in acceptable condition .
such materials supplies and equipment as yet not incorporated into the work shall be identified set aside and suitably stored at or near the site of the work .
b .
conditions .
the conditions under which the engineer may allow partial payments for those materials supplies and equipment not yet incorporated into the work include any of the following num .
the schedule of completion of the work has been terminated by authorized suspension of contract work pending final settlement or num .
the schedule of completion of the work has been hindered and delayed by seasonal closing of the project or by similar causes over which the contractor has no control or num .
when in the opinion of the engineer the advance delivery of such materials is in the best interest for the timely completion of the project .
c. maximum payment .
under these conditions partial payments for such materials supplies and equipment furnished at an approved site shall not exceed the lesser of the following amounts .
num .
num percent of the actual cost incurred by the contractor or num .
num percent of the amount generated by the quantity of materials so delivered and accepted multiplied by the unit price bid for such materials as contained in the bid schedule .
such payment shall be made as a partial payment under the related item or items by adjustment of the quantity progressively allowed .
the contractor must furnish a paid invoice for the furnished num materials supplies or equipment within thirty num days after receiving the partial payment .
otherwise the amount of the partial payment will be deducted from subsequent invoices .
num partial payment of lump sum items .
each biweekly period the engineer and the contractor will consult and subsequently agree on the progress of work performed under those lump sum items indicated in the bid schedule .
partial payments for the completed and accepted portions of such work will be made to the contractor based on the engineers estimate of the value of said completed work .
prior to award of the contract or in any case within ten num calendar days after the date of the notice of award the contractor shall submit to the engineer for approval two copies of the breakdown of each lump sum bid item that appears in the bid schedule excluding the mobilization item .
the breakdown of lump sumsuperstructure and lump sumsubstructure items shall include only those items listed on the plans and shall include the contractors verified quantities it used in preparing its bid .
all other additional costs such as engineering shop drawings formwork equipment etc .
to complete those items of work shall be included and distributed in the breakdown of those listed items .
for other lump sum items not identified on the plans the contractor shall provide a breakdown of the various items that constitute the respective lump sum work items .
the engineer will use as a guide the lump sum breakdowns submitted by the contractor if they fairly represent the cost of the various items of work .
if in the opinion of the engineer the prices submitted by the contractor do not fairly represent the cost of the various items of work the engineer may substitute other prices that do fairly represent the cost of such work .
num payment of withheld funds .
a .
payment .
upon request the department will make payment of funds withheld from progress payments if the contractor deposits in escrow securities eligible for the investment of state funds or bank certificates of deposit upon the following conditions num .
the contractor shall bear the expenses of the department and the state treasurer in connection with the escrow deposit made .
num .
securities or certificates of deposit to be placed in escrow will be subject to the approval of the department and unless otherwise permitted by the escrow agreement shall be of a value of at least num percent of the amounts of retention to be paid to the contractor pursuant to this section .
num .
the contractor shall enter into an escrow agreement satisfactory to the department .
num .
the contractor shall obtain the written consent of the surety to the agreement .
num acceptance and final payment .
when the project has been accepted as provided in subsection num the engineer will prepare the final estimate of work performed .
if the contractor approves the final estimate or files no claim or objection to the quantities therein within num days of receiving the final estimate the department will process the estimate for final payment .
with approval of num the final estimate by the contractor payment will be made for the entire sum found to be due after deducting all previous payments and all amounts to be retained or deducted under the provision of the contract .
if the contractor files a claim in accordance with contract requirements it shall be submitted in writing in sufficient detail to enable the engineer to ascertain the basis and amount of such claim .
upon final adjudication of the claim any additional payment determined to be due the contractor will be placed on a supplemental estimate and processed for payment .
all prior partial estimates and payments will be subject to correction in the final estimate and payment .
num compensation for project delays .
a. compensable delays .
the department will provide an equitable adjustment to the contractor for those delays created by the departments acts or omissions .
unless otherwise specified the contractor assumes the risk of damages from all other causes of delay .
the term delay shall be deemed to mean any event action force or factors which extends the contractors time of performance of the contract .
this subsection is intended to cover all such events actions forces or factors whether they be styled delay disruption interference impedance hindrance or otherwise .
strict compliance with the provisions of this subsection will be an essential condition precedent to any equitable adjustment for delays .
b .
limitation of costs .
only the additional actual costs associated with the following items will be recoverable by the contractor as an equitable adjustment for delays .
num .
documented and substantiated additional or escalated job site nonsalaried labor expenses .
num .
documented and substantiated additional or escalated costs for materials .
num .
documented and substantiated equipment costs or escalated equipment costs .
when measuring additional equipment expenses i.e .
ownership expenses arising as a direct result of a delay caused by the department use actual records kept in the usual course of business and measure increased ownership expenses pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles .
num .
documented and substantiated extended jobsite overhead to include those costs necessary to maintain the job site during the delay such as field office inclusive of equipment copy and fax machines computers etc field office utility bills i.e .
electricity gas water etc .
field office supplies and janitorial services and security .
under no circumstances will any of the contractors labor costs inclusive of extended field labor be paid under extended jobsite overhead .
labor costs are paid subject to the conditions of no.b.num and no.b.num of this section .
num .
an additional surcharge of num percent of the total of items num num num and num to account for home office overhead as well as all salaried labor both home office and extended field supervision and profit .
num note where documentation payment for equipment andor cost substantiation is specified the contractor shall adhere to the requirements in section num of these specifications .
payment for costs submitted for reimbursement will be made only to the extent that the requirements of section num are met to the satisfaction of the engineer .
c. waiver of liability .
the parties agree that in any adjustment for delay costs the department will have no liability for the following items of damages or expense num .
profit in excess of that provided herein num .
loss of profit num .
labor inefficiencies num .
home office overhead in excess of that provided herein num .
consequential damages including but not limited to loss of bonding capacity loss of bidding opportunities and insolvency num .
indirect costs or expenses of any nature num .
attorneys fees claims preparation expenses or costs of litigation .
num prompt payment procedures .
in accordance with title num chapter num of the general laws all invoice vouchers submitted by the contractor will be paid within thirty num days provided however that according to numbnum the thirty num day period will not commence until the department has reviewed and accepted all invoice documentation in its proper and approved form .
num subcontractor prompt payment .
the prime contractor shall make prompt payment for satisfactory subcontract work for which the department has made partial or full payment .
the term subcontractor as used herein is defined in subsection num subcontractor .
when a subcontractor has not received payment for work paid to the prime contractor within num days from receipt of the actual check by the prime contractor from the state a formal complaint may be filed under the following procedures a the subcontractor will send written notification to the department including contract item numbers date work performed a copy of the invoices from the subcontractor to the prime and a copy of the progress payment where payment to the prime contractor was included .
the latter item may be obtained from the departments field supervisor or construction office .
if the subcontractor has not provided a paymentperformance bond for this work to the contractor then the formal complaint must also include verification that all suppliers and other debts on these items have been paid or documented reasons for nonpayment acceptable by the department .
failure to provide this verification will be considered good cause for postponement of payment by the prime contractor .
b the department will notify the prime contractor of the formal complaint in writing within num days and will proceed to withhold an amount equal to the previous payments made to the prime num num contractor for the specific subcontractors work .
the prime contractor must submit written documentation to the department demonstrating good cause for not making the required payment within num days .
if the department does not receive the required documentation within the required num days or does not accept the contractors good cause justification the department will withhold or continue to withhold an amount equal to all previous payments to the prime contractor for the specific subcontractors work until the department has verified payment to the subcontractor .
if the department accepts the prime contractors good cause justification it will notify the subcontractor of its decision that this is categorized as a dispute and payment to the prime contractor will be released .
the subcontractor and prime contractor may solve their dispute in any fashion they so choose arbitration mediation litigation etc ..
the cost of any such arbitrationmediation shall be borne by both parties at an equal share or as otherwise provided for in any agreement between the parties .
c should the two parties enter into a payment agreementsettlement the department will only release previous monies held in accordance with the agreementsettlement .
should the prime contractor default again the department will contact the bonding company and request complete payment within num days .
should the bonding company andor prime contractor fail to make complete payment after a num day period all progress payments to the prime contractor will stop until the subcontractor is paid and the dispute is resolved to the satisfaction of the department .
any delays andor claims resulting from the actions taken by the department under this specification will not be the responsibility of the state .
num division ii construction details part num earthwork and erosion control section num site preparation num description .
this work consists of the performance of actions that are required to clear and prepare the site for subsequent construction operations .
these actions all have a common characteristic they involve the removal and legal disposal of both designated vegetative materials and manmade objects and facilities .
these actions include but are not limited to the following clearing and grubbing cutting and removing isolated trees and stumps partial or complete removal of isolated tree stumps trimming tree roots removal and disposal of culverts masonry drainage and utility structures pipe rigid and flexible pavement granite concrete and bituminous curbing fences and railings guardrail of all types underground and aboveground storage tanks miscellaneous items such as highway bounds and signs demolition of buildings and structures and all other obstructions or undesirable materials within the rightofway .
all such materials objects and facilities shall be removed and legally disposed of .
the contractor shall be compensated for clearing and preparing the site for construction operations through individual proposal items one such item for each removal and disposal action .
the following subsections contain descriptions of some of the most common removal and disposal actions .
num clearing and grubbing .
this work consists of cutting removing from the ground and disposing trees stumps brush shrubs hedges roots and other vegetation which occur within the rightofway and interfere with excavation embankment fencing clear vision or are otherwise considered objectionable .
this work also includes the preservation from injury or defacement of all vegetation and objects outside clearing limits .
num cutting and removing isolated trees and stumps .
this work consists of cutting and removing designated isolated trees and stumps in excess of num inches in diameter measured at num inches above existing ground which are located within the general area of construction work but which are not located within the areas specified for clearing and grubbing .
num partial removal of isolated tree stumps .
this work consists of the partial removal of designated isolated tree stumps which are located within the limits of the project .
num num metal frames covers or grates .
this work consists of the removal of metal frames covers or grates from existing utility and drainage structures .
num culverts drainage and utility structures .
this work consists of the removal in whole or in part of culverts drainage structures such as catch basins drop inlets and manholes utility structures such as gas electric and telephone boxes manholes and pits and sewer manholes .
the removal of metal frames covers or grates of drainage structures is not covered under this item but is included under subsection num above .
num pipe .
this work consists of removing all pipe of whatever nature and sizes indicated on the plans .
num pavement sidewalks and curbing .
this work consists of removing flexible and rigid pavement including surface base andor subbase courses granite concrete and bituminous curbing and concrete and bituminous sidewalks as shown on the plans .
num asbestos cement pipe .
this work consists of removing existing asbestos cement pipeduct bank of all types and sizes in strict accordance with these specifications .
num undergroundaboveground storage tanks .
this work consists of locating removing and disposing of existing gasoline and oil storage tanks previously abandoned and left in place and such other storage tanks as may be encountered in the work either above or below ground regardless of size and type .
all work will be performed in accordance with both the state of rhode island department of environmental management division of water resources regulations for underground storage facilities used for petroleum products and hazardous materials latest edition and all other applicable state and federal laws and regulations .
the removal of cesspools and septic tanks is not covered under this item but is included under subsection num demolition of buildings .
num fences railings and guardrail .
this work consists of removing all fences railings and guardrail of whatever type and sizes indicated on the plans to be removed .
num miscellaneous objects .
this work consists of removing miscellaneous objects such as mail boxes and posts road signs private signs highway bounds and any other objects not covered by any preceding subsection specifically indicated on the plans to be removed or required to be removed for the construction of the new work .
num demolition of buildings .
this work consists of the demolition of such buildings and their foundations as shown on the plans .
each such portion of the work shall include the disposal of all outbuildings such as garages and sheds adjacent to or a part of the unit desig nated unless such outbuildings are designated as separate units .
the work shall also include the removal of cesspools septic tanks distribution boxes and other such tanks as may be encountered .
the work shall include implementation of rodent control measures for each building before its demolition .
num num materials .
for the requirements relating to common borrow and gravel borrow see subsections num and num respectively of these specifications .
num construction methods .
the contract documents will provide all necessary information relating to rightofway and constructions lines and will designate all trees shrubs plants and other objects and facilities to remain within the project limits .
the contractor shall preserve everything designated to remain .
num clearing and grubbing .
all trees stumps brush shrubs hedges and roots not designated to remain but within the fill lines of embankments and less than num feet in height to subgrade shall be cleared and grubbed .
when authorized or when the height of embankment to subgrade exceeds num feet the contractor may leave stumps provided they do not extend more than num inches above the original ground or low water level .
after clearing and by the end of each days grubbing operation the contractor shall install erosion control measures that are indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
such erosion control measures shall be installed in strict accordance with the requirements of sections num num and num of these specifications perimeter erosion controls check dams and temporary dewatering basins respectively .
the engineer may permit sound stumps to be cut off not more than num inches above the ground and to be left outside of the construction limits of cut and embankment areas except in the area to be rounded at the top of back slopes where stumps are to be cut off flush with or below the surface of the final slope line .
except in areas to be excavated stump holes and other holes from which obstructions are removed shall be backfilled with material acceptable to the engineer and compacted in accordance with subsection num compaction general of these specifications .
a .
disposal of perishable materials .
no burning of trees brush shrubs or perishable material will be allowed on any construction project site .
the contractor will not be allowed to haul trees brush shrubs or perishable material from the project for the purpose of burning .
the contractor must dispose of the trees brush shrubs or other perishable material by any of the following methods num .
the contractor may sell or salvage all merchantable timber in the clearing and grubbing area which has not been removed from the rightofway prior to the beginning of construction .
num .
the contractor may chip trees on the site .
all wood chips will become the property of the contractor and must be removed promptly from the site .
when the project plans call for the use of wood chips the contractor may stockpile the required quantity on the site at a location approved by the engineer .
num .
unless otherwise specified in the contract documents all trees brush shrubs and other perishable material shall be legally disposed of at locations off the project site .
such disposal shall require the written permission of the property owner on whose property the materials are to be buried and if necessary the rhode island department of environmental management .
the contractor shall make all necessary arrangements with the property owners and obtain necessary permits for obtaining suitable disposal locations and the contractor shall num supply the engineer with a copy of the written permission for such disposal from the property owner before any disposal may take place .
b .
low hanging branches .
low hanging branches and unsound or unsightly branches on trees and shrubs designated to remain shall be removed as directed .
branches of trees extending over the road surface shall be trimmed to give a clear height of num feet above the road surface .
all trimming shall be done by skilled workmen in accordance with sound tree surgery practices and under the supervision of a licensed arborist .
cut or scarred surfaces of trees or shrubs shall be treated with an approved waterproof antiseptic tree paint .
c. diseased vegetation .
all elm trees trimmings or branches of same or other wood designated by the rhode island department of environmental management as a host of a serious plant disease or disease carrier as indicated on the plans shall be buried at a sanitary landfill location within fortyeight hours after cutting .
mechanical chipping of small branches and brush may also be employed where disposal area space limitations require such measures .
the resulting chips need not be buried .
num cutting and removing isolated trees and stumps .
the isolated trees and stumps to be removed will be designated on the plans .
those sodesignated shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor in accordance with the provisions of subsection num of this section .
num partial removal of isolated tree stumps .
the isolated tree stump to be partially removed will be designated by the engineer .
those sodesignated shall be removed to num inches below final grade by the contractor .
the resulting hole shall then be filled in with like materials as required .
num frames covers or grates shall be removed and either legally disposed of or stacked and stockpiled for subsequent reuse .
num culverts drainage and utility structures .
a. culverts and drainage structures .
unless otherwise directed the substructures of existing structures shall be removed down to the natural stream bottom and those parts outside of the stream shall be removed down one foot below natural ground surface .
where such portions of existing structures lie wholly or in part within the limits of a new structure they shall be removed as necessary to accommodate the construction of the proposed structure .
b .
utility structures .
sewer and utility structures which are designated to be removed or which interfere with the new construction shall be removed .
when existing sewers or utilities are to be extended or otherwise incorporated into the new work only such part of the existing lines shall be removed as to provide a proper connection with the new work .
c. backfilling .
no portions of the existing structures shall be used to backfill the excavations required for the removal of such structures .
excavations shall be backfilled with gravel borrow placed in numinch layers and compacted to num percent of maximum density in accordance with aashto tnum .
num d. bridges .
bridges shall be removed as specified under section num removal of existing bridges .
num pipe .
all pipe designated to be removed shall be soremoved and legally disposed of .
the contractor is allowed to dispose of concrete pipe in an embankment within the project limits provided that the pipe is broken up into sufficiently small pieces to preclude the formation of voids .
num pavement sidewalks and curbing .
all pavement base course sidewalks curbs gutters of whatever nature designated to be removed shall be soremoved and legally disposed of .
when specified ballast gravel bituminous material or other surfacing or pavement materials shall be removed and stockpiled as required .
otherwise such material shall be legally disposed of .
where the remainder of the existing pavement or sidewalks are to remain undisturbed a clean saw cut shall be made to separate the remaining pavement from that being removed .
num asbestos cement pipe .
a .
approved disposal sites .
asbestos cement pipe shall be removed and disposed of at landfill sites approved for such purpose by both the united states environmental protection agency and the rhode island department of environmental management .
a partial list of sites which are believed to accept asbestos cement material for disposal is set forth in special provision code num of the contract .
any disposal site chosen by the contractor must have a license from the appropriate state and federal agency to accept this material .
a copy of the license or approval must be given to the resident engineer .
said license must be valid at the time of disposal in the selected landfill .
the contractor shall coordinate with the authorities in charge of the landfill for specific details on acceptability of the disposal of the asbestoscement material .
b .
construction methods removal and disposal procedures .
removal and disposal of asbestos cement pipeduct bank all types and sizes shall be performed in the following manner num .
the qualifications of personnel required for the removal and disposal operation must be approved by the engineer .
num .
any required materials or equipment such as overalls gloves air respirator and etc .
for persons involved in the handling of the ac material must meet the u.s. department of labor occupational safety and health administration osha standard num cfr num .
num .
the contractor will excavate the trench to the necessary width on either side and to the depth which will not exceed the bottom of the pipe while maintaining a safe angle of repose .
the pipe should not be disturbed in any way during excavation .
the ac material may have to num be wetted with water prior to breakingcutting depending on the requirements set forth by the selected landfill .
num .
the asbestos landfill sites listed in the special provisions may have different restrictions on the length of the ac pipeduct bank which they accept for disposal .
if the contrac tor chooses to break or cut the ac pipeduct bank to meet the length requirement of the accepted landfill it shall be done inside the trench area before the pipe is removed .
num .
the ac pipeduct bank shall be completely covered with a minimum nummil polyethylene sheet andor bag fastened with high strength duct tape .
the free ends of the sheeting or the end of the bag shall be folded outside and over the pipeduct bank and be sealed transversely with the duct tape .
num .
the polyethylene sealed asbestos cement pipe shall be lifted intact without additional breaking and placed in a transport vehicle box type trailer which completely contains the wrapped and sealed portion of pipeduct bank on all sides .
a box trailer with tarpaulin top is not acceptable .
num .
any remaining portions of ac material i.e .
pieces fragments collars rubber gaskets etc .
in the trench overburden or work area will be carefully collected and placed in a nummil polyethylene bag or sheeting .
the bags or sheeted materials will be then placed in the manner of transport mentioned above .
if the polyethylene bag or sheet is torn or punctured the contractor must repeat the above process to assure a sealed mode of handling at no additional cost to the department .
num .
all of the removal and placement of the ac material into the transport truck shall be accomplished with the departments assigned resident engineer andor designated representa tive present at the site .
num .
the contractor shall notify the resident engineer one week prior to the implementation of removal disposal and transport operations .
num .
no dumping of ac material will be permitted under any circumstances at any site except the approved asbestos landfill .
num .
the contractor shall also monitor the air quality based on the requirement as set forth by the u.s. department of labor osha num cfr numf .
num undergroundaboveground storage tanks .
a .
removal procedures .
the procedures for tank removal are briefly outlined below num .
a permanent closure application must be submitted to the department of environmen tal management division of groundwater and freshwater wetlands at least ten days prior to the proposed closure .
num .
the contractor must confirm the closure with ridem in full accordance with their regulations .
num .
the contractor must coordinate with the appropriate city of town office to assure compliance with local requirements .
num num .
the tank must be purged and cleaned in accordance with ridem requirements .
num .
the tank all associated appurtenances and any tank residue must be disposed of by a licensed hazardous waste hauler in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations .
num .
all excavation and backfill will be in accordance with the applicable requirements of subsections num and num excavation and compaction respectively .
num removal of fences railings and guardrail .
all fences railings and guardrail designated to be removed shall be soremoved and legally disposed of at an approved offsite location .
num removal of miscellaneous objects .
all miscellaneous objects designated to be removed shall be soremoved and legally disposed of .
num demolition of buildings and structures .
a .
general .
all buildings and contents thereof shall become the property of the contractor with the exception of materials or contents claimed by owners as part of land damage settlement or agreement with the state as indicated on the plans .
the state assumes no responsibility for said materials or contents .
drain pipes or any other pipes ducts etc .
disconnected and deemed advisable to remain in the earth shall be plugged with concrete except that metal pipes may be capped with screwtype plugs or caps or otherwise sealed as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall cooperate with the city town and utility companies so that the demolition work may be per formed in accordance with their regulations and with the approval of the engineer .
if any concrete cesspools septic tanks galleys or distribution boxes are present they shall first be pumped out and then broken up into pieces sufficiently small to preclude the formation of voids .
the resulting depression shall then be backfilled with common borrow and compacted all to the satisfaction of the engineer .
stone cesspools will be treated in a similar manner .
if steel septic tanks are present the covers shall be removed and the interiors pumped out and subsequently completely filled with common borrow .
no building or structure shall be razed or demolished until the contractor has made provision for proper rodent control in accordance with the requirements of the town or city in which the work is being performed or as required by the engineer .
b .
methods of removal .
the building to be demolished and disposed of shall be razed according to the most practical conventional method as approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall take whatever precautions are necessary and shall use sufficient water on nonsalvable materials to prevent excessive spreading of dust during demolition operations .
no blasting will be permitted unless authorized in writing by the engineer and then only after the contractor has received proper permission to do so from the appropriate state andor local authority .
for special provisions regarding the use of explosives see subsection num of these specifications .
under no circumstances will burning be permitted .
num the demolition work shall include the proper disposal of steps building foundations platforms floors cellar floors walls and any and all other parts of such building or structure and such outbuildings as may be indicated adjacent to or connected as a part of said building or structure .
debris of any nature shall not be allowed to accumulate in the streets sidewalk areas or ground surrounding the demolition work .
upon completion of the work the site shall be left in a clean and safe condition .
concrete basement floors shall be broken up into segments no larger than numsquare yards each prior to filling .
basements or cavities left by structure removal shall be filled with common borrow to the level of the surrounding ground and if within the highway prism of construction shall be compacted in accordance with subsection num compaction of these specifica tions .
the contractor shall shore up brace underpin and protect all walls and other parts of existing structures adjacent to the demolition area which may be affected in any way by the demolition operations .
c. disposal of tanks .
the disposal of storage tanks including excavation and backfill and all other incidentals pertaining to this work shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num of this section .
d. temporary fencing .
when cellar holes pits or other hazardous depressions or excavations are adjacent to or within the vicinity of a pedestrian accessway a temporary guard fence shall be immediately erected for the protection of pedestrians .
the fencing material shall be free from nails fastenings or splinters and shall present a reasonably smooth surface on the sides of possible contact .
such temporary fences shall be left in place and shall be properly maintained until their removal is authorized by the engineer .
e. watchman .
the contractor shall at all times provide a sufficient number of watchmen and guards as may be necessary to properly safeguard the public from his operations .
the contractor will receive no extra compensation for such watchmen or guards .
num method of measurement .
the several removal and disposal actions required to clear and prepare the site for construction will be measured for payment as follows num clearing and grubbing .
clearing and grubbing will be measured by the number of square yards hundred square yards or acres actually cleared and grubbed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num cutting and removing isolated trees and stumps .
cutting and removing isolated trees and stumps will be measured by the number of trees and stumps or the number of stumps alone if there are no trees actually cut and removed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num partial removal of isolated tree stumps .
partial removal of isolated tree stumps will be measured by the number of stumps actually removed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num num removal of frames covers or grates .
removal of frames covers or grates will be measured by the number of such units actually removed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num removal of culverts drainage and utility structures .
removal of culverts drainage and utility structures will be measured by the number of such structures actually removed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num removal of pipe all sizes .
removal of pipeall sizes will be measured by the number of linear feet of such pipe actually removed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num removal of pavement sidewalks and curbing .
removal of pavement and sidewalks will be measured by the number of square yards of such pavement actually removed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
removal of curbing will be measured by the number of linear feet of such curbing actually removed in accordance with the plans andor as specified by the engineer .
num removal of asbestos cement pipe .
removal of asbestos cement pipe will be measured by the number of linear feet of such pipe actually removed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num removal of undergroundaboveground storage tanks .
removal of under groundaboveground storage tanks will be measured by the number of such tanks actually removed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num removal of fences railings and guardrail .
removal of fences railings and guardrail will be measured by the number of linear feet of such fencing actually removed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num removal of miscellaneous objects .
removal of miscellaneous objects will be measured by the number of such objects actually removed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num demolition of buildings and structures .
demolition of buildings and structures will be measured by the number of such buildings or structures actually demolished in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the several removal and disposal actions required to clear and prepare the site for construction will be paid for as follows num clearing and grubbing .
the accepted quantity of clearing and grubbing will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard hundred square yards or acre as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num cutting and removing isolated trees and stumps .
the accepted quantities of cutting and removing isolated trees and stumps will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices per each as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete num compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num partial removal of isolated tree stumps .
the accepted quantity of partial removal of isolated tree stumps will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num removal of frames covers or grates .
the accepted quantities of removal of frames covers or grates will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num removal of culverts drainage and utility structures .
the accepted quantities of removal of culverts drainage and utility structures will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num removal of pipe all sizes .
the accepted quantity of removal of pipeall sizes will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear feet as listed in the proposal .
the price so stated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num removal of pavement sidewalks and curbing .
the accepted quantities of removal of pavement and sidewalks will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the accepted quantities of removal of curbing will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
saw cutting associated with removal of pavement sidewalks or curbing will be paid for separately under the appropriate work items as listed in the proposal .
num removal of asbestos cement pipe .
the accepted quantity of removal of asbestos cement pipe will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed on the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num removal of undergroundaboveground storage tanks .
the accepted quantities of removal of undergroundaboveground storage tanks will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each as listed on the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num removal of fences railings and guardrail .
the accepted quantities of removal of fences railings and guardrail will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensa num tion for all labor materials and equipment and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num removal of miscellaneous objects .
the accepted quantities of removal of miscellaneous objects will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num demolition of buildings and structures .
the accepted quantities of demolition of buildings and structures will be paid for at the respective contract unit price per each such building or structure as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for demolition and removal including disposal of surplus and waste materials excavation backfilling rat eradication pumping out breaking up and backfilling of cesspools and septic tanks all expenses incidental to procurement of health fire and police certificates fencing and fence materials and watchmen or guards cleanup and all labor equipment materials and incidentals necessary to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num excavation and embankment num description .
this work consists of excavation and the satisfactory placement and compaction or disposal of all materials encountered within the limits of the work and which are necessary for the construction of the roadway .
excavation and embankment shall be in reasonably close conformity with the dimensions and sections indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
excavation will be classified as earth excavation rock excavation rock excavation mechanical muck excavation channel excavationearth channel excavationrock channel excavation rockmechanical loam excavation and unclassified excavation all as hereafter described .
num earth excavation .
earth excavation shall include the removal of suitable and unsuitable soils not otherwise classified herein and the removal of boulders and rock fragments less than num cubic yard in volume from the following areas a .
within the design excavation section .
b .
beyond the design excavation section of the roadbed or side slopes where unsuitable materials are encountered .
c. beyond the design excavation section of shallow embankments when unsuitable materials are encountered .
num presplitting bedrock .
this work shall consist of producing a plane of split rock prior to any drilling or blasting for roadway rock excavation .
this plane will be formed to follow the design of rock slope lines and shall be extended from the top of the bedrock surface to the num proposed rock shelf levels and to the toe of finished rock slope to the invert of side drains or to the depths specified on the plans .
num rock excavation .
rock excavation shall consist of the removal of intact bedrock and boulders or detached bedrock fragments which have a volume of num cubic yard or more .
boulders and detached rock fragments which have a volume of less than num cubic yard are considered earth excavation .
num rock excavation mechanical .
this classification of rock excavation shall be employed in areas where blasting is prohibited .
rock excavated under this classification shall be removed by employing hydraulic splitters air rams paving breakers or any other mechanical method approved by the engineer .
num unsuitable soils .
unsuitable soils shall include and are hereby defined as those soils other than muck which due to their consolidation properties degree of saturation gradation or other deleterious characteristics will not provide a stable subgrade or side slopes can not be used as or support embankment or can not be placed and compacted as backfill or do not otherwise conform to the requirements of these specifications .
num muck excavation .
muck excavation shall consist of the removal and disposal of deposits of saturated or unsaturated mixtures of soils and organic matter not suitable for foundation material regardless of moisture content .
the excavated muck shall be stockpiled at approved locations within the rightofway andor legally disposed of .
num channel excavation earth .
channel excavation earth shall include all materials other than water or channel excavation rock removed from existing new or temporary water courses as indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num channel excavation rock .
channel excavation rock shall include intact bedrock and boulders num cubic yard or more in volume removed from existing new or temporary water courses as indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num channel excavation rock mechanical .
this classification of rock excavation shall be employed in channel construction areas where blasting is prohibited .
rock excavation under this classification shall be removed by employing hydraulic splitters air rams paving breakers or any other mechanical method approved by the engineer .
num loam excavation .
loam excavation shall include loam or topsoil removed between the limits indicated and the depths specified on the plans or directed by the engineer .
the excavated loam shall be stockpiled at approved locations within the rightofway .
num unclassified excavation .
unclassified excavation shall consist of the excavation stockpiling andor removal and legal disposal of a composite mixture of various types of materials which the engineer has determined to be impractical to segregate into separate classifications .
num embankment construction .
embankment construction shall consist of constructing roadway embankments including preparation of the areas upon which they are to be placed the benching of embankments the construction of side slopes and toe drainage ditches the construction of dikes within or outside the rightofway the placing and compacting of approved material within roadway areas where unsuitable material has been removed and the placing and num compacting of embankment material in holes pits and other depressions within the roadway area .
only approved materials shall be used in the construction of embankments and backfills .
num materials .
num common borrow .
common borrow shall consist of approved material required for the construction of embankments or for other portions of the work .
common borrow shall be obtained from approved sources and shall meet the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num gravel borrow .
gravel borrow shall meet the requirements of subsection m.num gradation of aggregates table i column i .
num construction methods .
num excavationgeneral .
the contractor shall remove all soil rock and other material and utilize or dispose of these materials as required by the plans and these specifications .
the excavation for the roadway intersections and entrances shall be finished to reasonably smooth and uniform surfaces .
all rock cuts shall be thoroughly cleaned and scaled of all loose fragments .
no materials shall be wasted without permission of the engineer .
excavation operations shall be conducted so that material outside of the limits of slopes will not be disturbed .
prior to beginning excavation operations in any area all necessary work in that area shall have been performed in accordance with section num site preparation and all erosion and pollution controls shall have been installed in accordance with the applicable requirements of sections num through num of these specifications .
the contractor shall maintain slopes crowns berms and ditches on all excavations to insure satisfactory drainage at all times to protect the work and maintain safe working conditions .
when the contractors excavating operations encounter remains or artifacts of potential historical or archaeological significance the operations shall be temporarily discontinued .
the contractor will immediately contact the engineer who will determine the disposition thereof .
when directed by the engineer the contractor shall excavate the site in such a manner as to preserve the artifacts encountered and shall remove them for delivery to the custody of the proper state authorities .
such excavation will be considered and paid for as extra work in accordance with subsection num of these specifications .
a .
rock excavationgeneral .
should bedrock be encountered above the design finish grade the contractor shall immediately notify the engineer of the change in classification .
the contractor shall then continue soil excavation to expose the bedrock surface and to allow the engineer to perform the necessary elevation survey and take crosssectional measurements .
prior to removal of overburden or presplitting and blasting to excavate to the design rock slope face the contractor shall locate the presplit line and the intersection of the crest of the design slope with existing ground surface .
elevations of existing ground surface along this intersection alignment shall be established at onehalf station intervals or as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall install marker stakes at the directed station intervals offset as directed by the engineer .
num rock excavation may be performed by blasting where not prohibited or by mechanical methods .
however where blasting is allowed whatever the method used bedrock removal shall be classified measured and paid for as rock excavation .
the contractor shall be required to submit a blasting plan prior to the performance of any drilling or blasting .
the plan shall include as a minimum full details of drilling and blasting patterns and techniques proposed for controlled and production blasting .
the blasting plan is for quality control and record keeping purposes .
review of the blasting plan does not relieve the contractor of the responsibility to use existing drilling and blasting technology and for obtaining the desired results .
the contractor shall be required to employ a qualified blasting supervisor with presplitting experience acceptable to the engineer .
this supervisor shall be available as required throughout the duration of presplitting and fragmentation blasting rock excavation .
unless otherwise specified material classified as rock shall be excavated to a minimum depth of num inches below subgrade within the limits of the roadbed and the excavation backfilled with material as designated on the plans or approved by the engineer .
rock removal in excess of num inches below subgrade will not be paid for but will be measured by the engineer to determine excess backfill volume said volume to be deducted from that backfill measured for payment .
all backfilling in excess of the numinch depth shall be performed at the expense of the contractor .
num .
rock excavationpresplitting .
when required the contractor shall presplit the rock along the designated cut face to produce a uniform plane of rupture so that the resulting face will not be affected by subsequent fragmentation blasting and excavation operations all in accordance with the limits designated or indicated on the plans .
presplitting shall be used whenever the intended exposed rock slope exceeds num feet in vertical height .
rock cuts more than num feet in vertical height may be presplit in stages lifts at the option of the contractor provided however that no stage shall be less than num feet in depth and further provided that no payment will be made for additional excavation quantities caused by the offsetting of presplitting holes beyond the specified face in the top or successive stages .
presplitting holes in successive stages shall be offset not more than num feet inside of the previously presplit stage face .
when drilling and blasting behind existing previously drilled and blasted rock faces to widen the rock cut the contractor shall presplit along the new design rock face alignment and exercise all due care to prevent overblasting of the new rock face .
if after excavating the blasted rock it is not possible to hold a true and neat faceofrock then the contractor will excavate all loose and unstable fractured or seamed rock to an agreed stable face of rock behind the neat lines as ordered by the engineer .
the drilled presplitting holes shall follow the required rock slope lines and inclinations .
unless otherwise permitted by the engineer presplitting holes shall have a maximum spacing of num feet centertocenter and a diameter not greater than num inches .
presplitting holes shall be extended from the top of solid bedrock surface to num feet below the design toe of finished bedrock slope unless different depths are specified on the plans .
the proper angle of drilling shall be maintained at all times so that all presplit holes lie essentially in num the same plane and are parallel to each other .
no hole shall deviate more than one halffoot at any place in the plane of the specified slope line nor in its vertical alignment .
num .
rock excavationfragmentation blasting .
the contractor shall adjust his blasting operations according to the characteristics and structure of the rock formation to obtain the required slope without fracturing rock beyond the presplit face .
a fragmentation blast holes shall be positioned so that no portion of any blast hole num inches or less in diameter shall be within num feet of the designated presplit face .
no portion of any blast hole greater than num inches in diameter shall be within num feet of the designated presplit face .
b the contractor shall inspect and test each hole for its entire depth to determine the possible presence of any obstruction prior to placing the charge .
no loading shall be permitted until the hole is clear of all obstructions for its entire depth .
all necessary precautions shall be used in placing the charge to prevent cavein of material along the sidewall of the hole .
all space in each hole not occupied by the explosive charge shall be filled with numinch size clean stone chips .
no other material or type of stemming will be permitted .
c blasting for presplitting shall precede fragmentation blasting .
d remove the blast rock and expose the presplit face such that the surfaces of slopes in rock cuts are free from all loose stone or shattered edges .
all unsuitable material breakage and slides even though located beyond the payment lines shall be removed as directed .
b. excavation of unsuitable materials .
where unsuitable soils are encountered within the excavated section and above the design finish grade excavation shall be suspended to allow area measurements and survey of elevations across the exposed surface .
excavation of unsuitable soils shall then proceed until either a change of excavation classification occurs or until the excavation reaches a stable base or as otherwise directed by the engineer .
if a change in classification occurs a second set of surveyed elevations shall be obtained .
the engineer shall determine the required transverse spacing and station intervals of survey points .
where excavation to the designed subgrade elevation results in a subgrade or slopes of unsuitable soil the engineer shall require the contractor to remove the unsuitable materials and backfill and compact to the designed subgrade elevation with approved material .
the contractor shall conduct his operations in such a way that the engineer can take the necessary crosssectional measurements before the backfill is placed .
material designated as unsuitable shall be legally disposed of at no additional cost to the state .
prior to placing of any subbase base or pavement courses all surplus excavated material including stumps earth rock etc .
shall be removed and the shoulders ditches and slopes graded to approximate final lines .
num c. muck excavation .
if the unsuitable material involved is muck the excavation will be accomplished without entrapping muck within the backfill .
the backfilling of the excavation area shall proceed immediately behind the muck excavation so material that is displaced by the backfill can be removed .
the excavation will be backfilled to the ground level or num feet above water level whichever is higher with rock or other suitable granular material selected from the roadway excavation .
if suitable material is not available from the excavation it will be obtained from other approved sources .
d. haulage .
compensation for haulage of earthwork materials within the project limits shall not be paid for separately but shall be deemed to be included in the contract unit prices for the respective items .
num embankment constructiongeneral .
embankment construction for roadways and associated ramps dikes and berms shall consist of the placement and compaction of suitable earth and rock excavation materials or borrow material as required .
construction of embankment may continue during cold weather however frozen soils shall be removed and shall not be permitted as fill for embankment .
rocks broken concrete or other solid materials shall not be placed in embankment areas where piling guardrail electrical poles conduits etc .
are to be driven or placed .
a .
preparation of foundation .
after cleaning and removal of topsoil where necessary the contractor shall notify the engineer and prepare the embankment foundation as follows num .
where embankment will be greater than num feet in height above existing ground the engineer shall determine whether preparation of the foundation will be necessary .
num .
for embankment less than num feet in height above existing ground completely break up the cleared ground surface to a minimum depth of num inches by plowing or scarifying .
compact the existing ground surface in accordance with subsection num .
num .
where unsuitable soils occur at existing ground surface excavate and replace unsuitable soils with excavation or approved borrow material and compact in accordance with the applicable provisions of subsection num .
num .
where embankment is less than num feet in height above an existing road surface scarify or pulverize the existing roadway to a depth of num inches below the pavement surface .
reduce all particles to a maximum size of num inches and produce a uniform material .
compact the roadway surface in accordance with the applicable provisions of subsection num. b. roadway embankmentearth .
roadway embankments may consist of earth excavation common borrow gravel borrow or a combination thereof .
unless the department mandates the sequencing of materials in the embankment borrow material shall not be placed until all suitable and accessible materials from all structure trench and roadway excavations have been placed .
if the contractor places more borrow than is required and thereby causes a waste of excavation the amount of such waste will be deducted from the borrow volume as measured .
when borrow material is required to construct embankment the contractor shall make his own arrangements to procure the borrow or open a borrow source .
the contractor shall also determine the suitability of the borrow material for use in embankment by appropriate laboratory testing .
num roadway earth embankments shall be placed in horizontal layers not exceeding num inches after compaction and shall be compacted as specified in subsection num before the next layer is placed .
all earth embankment material shall be placed to the full width unless otherwise directed .
the entire area of each layer shall be uniformly compacted to at least the required minimum density by use of compaction equipment consisting of rollers compactors or a combination thereof .
earthmoving and other equipment not specifically manufactured for compaction purposes shall not be considered as compaction equipment .
as the compaction of each layer progresses continuous leveling and manipulating will be required to attain uniform density .
water shall be added or removed if necessary in order to obtain the required density .
construction equipment shall be routed uniformly over the entire surface of each layer .
if the naturalinplace moisture of the excavated material makes it impractical to compact the soil the contractor shall dry the soil by disking harrowing blading or other approved means .
if these methods do not produce the specified compaction the contractor shall strip and replace the soil .
the embankment shall be crowned to shed runoff and constructed such that side slopes are protected from erosion .
c. roadway embankmentrock .
rock fragments or boulders to be used in the con struction of embankments shall be reduced to segments with the maximum dimension not exceeding num inches .
the rock fragments and boulders shall be so shaped and proportioned that they can be effectively bedded in the top of the existing ground surface or the preceding embankment layer .
the rock fragments and boulders must be fully embedded in the placement layer which is not to exceed num feet in depth .
each rock fill layer shall be compacted using suitable equipment as described in subsection num para .
a .
individual boulders may be placed in embankment .
however boulders shall not be nested and the contractor shall use appropriate methods and equipment as required to satisfactorily embed boulders in soil lifts and to compact adjacent fill .
each layer shall be leveled with suitable equipment and the interstices filled with finer fragments and earth .
the rock lifts shall not be constructed above an elevation num feet below the finished subgrade .
the balance of the embankment shall be composed of suitable material compacted as specified herein .
d. excess materials .
all excess or unsuitable excavated material including rock and boulders that can not be used in embankments may be placed in a satisfactory manner on the side slopes of the nearest fill .
in case it is impossible to dispose of all such material in the manner described above the remainder shall be legally disposed of by the contractor at no additional cost to the state .
num e. benching existing embankments .
when embankment is to be placed and compacted against either an existing embankment or slope steeper than numtonum horizontal benches shall be cut into the existing slopes to a sufficient width to accommodate placing and compaction operations and equipment .
the contractor shall bench the slope as each embankment layer is placed and compacted .
each bench shall begin at the intersection of the original ground and the vertical cut of the previous bench .
benches may be cut to a maximum height of num feet .
embankment layers shall be placed and compacted in accordance with the applicable provisions of subsection num .
there will be no separate payment for providing benches other than under the appropriate excavation classification .
f. embankment against structures .
if embankment can be deposited on one side only of abutments wing walls piers or culvert headwalls care shall be taken that the area immediately adjacent to the structure is not compacted to the extent that it will cause overturning of or excessive pressure against the structure .
when noted on the plans the fill adjacent to the abutment of a bridge shall not be placed higher than the bottom of the backwall of the abutment until the superstructure is in place .
when embankment is to be placed on both sides of a concrete wall or box type structure operations shall be so conducted that the embankment is always at approximately the same elevation on both sides of the structure .
in addition to these requirements refer to subsection num backfilling of these specifications .
g. embankment below prevailing water level .
backfilling and compacting excavated muck areas below prevailing water level may be accomplished as directed by the engineer until the excavated area is backfilled to an initial loose state level not more than num feet above the prevailing water level .
embankments to an elevation num feet above the free water surface at the time of filling shall be constructed of rock or a freedraining granular material as approved by the engineer .
where filling in numinch layers is impracticable as may be the case of filling in water the engineer may allow embankment to be constructed in one layer to the minimum elevation at which equipment can be operated .
above this elevation the embankment shall be constructed as specified in subsections numb and num. h. drainage extension embankment detail .
on projects which call for the extension of existing drainage lines in excavation and embankment areas the contractor shall maintain the flow of water throughout the construction process .
in such cases the following method of construction shall apply up to a minimum height of num feet above the outside diameter of the pipe num .
embankment will be constructed to an elevation equal to the invert elevation .
num .
trench excavation will be performed in the compacted embankment for the placing of pipe bedding .
the width of trench excavation will be governed by the dimensions specified in section num trench excavation .
num .
a layer of bedding material will be placed against the outside of the pipe its width governed by the horizontal pay limits of trench excavation .
outside of these limits common num borrow will be placed .
each fill layer will not exceed a thickness of num inches measured after compaction .
num .
the bedding material will extend to the height specified under section num culverts and storm drains .
num compactiongeneral .
each layer shall be uniformly compacted to the specified density before the next layer is placed .
the specified density shall be obtained by utilizing any approved compaction equipment such as pneumatic tired compaction equipment or three wheeled power rollers or vibratory sheepsfoot or tamping rollers or other approved types of compaction equipment .
dumping and rolling areas shall be kept separate and no lift shall be covered by another until the compaction requirements of this subsection have been met .
hauling and leveling equipment shall be routed and distributed over each layer of the fill so as to make best use of that compaction effort .
a. densities .
num .
maximum density will be determined by aashto tnum .
num .
field density of soil in place shall be determined by either aashto tnum or a nuclear moisture density gauge conforming to aashto tnum and tnum .
num .
the method of correcting for oversize particles in soil compaction test results shall conform to aashto tnum .
b. compaction of earth embankment .
num .
subgrade .
the resulting subgrade surface shall be compacted as required to not less than num percent of maximum density measured to a depth of num inches below the surface .
num .
embankment sections .
earth in embankment sections below a plane of three feet below subgrade shall be compacted to not less than num percent of maximum density .
the remainder of the roadway section up to subgrade shall be compacted to num percent of maximum density .
c. compaction of rock embankment .
rock fill layers shall be sized placed and choked as described in subsection num para .
c. num method of measurement .
num excavationgeneral .
the types of excavation specified in this section will be measured on a volume basis as computed from the area in its original position .
the volume will be determined by differencing the area to be excavated from its original position before excavation is begun to the design subgrade after excavation is completed .
differencing will be accomplished by taking cross sections at intervals stated herein by standard field survey techniques .
two sets of cross sections will be taken over the area to be excavated one set of num the area in its original position and a final set after completion of excavation .
intermediate sets of cross sections may be authorized for progress payment purposes .
should the final set of cross sections indicate unauthorized excavation below the design subgrade the excess excavation shall not be measured for payment .
however the excess excavation shall be replaced by available suitable excavation or borrow material all provided placed and compacted at no cost to the state .
the final set of cross sections may include an amount for overbreakage or slides as subsequently defined which in the judgment of the engineer were not caused by any carelessness on the part of the contractor .
the cross sections will then be plotted and the volume determined by either the average endarea method or such other equivalent method acceptable to the engineer .
a .
earth excavation .
earth excavation shall be measured by the cubic yard as calculated by differencing the area excavated from its original position before earth excavation is begun to its position when num .
there has occurred a change in classification of excavation or num .
the design subgrade elevation has been reached or num .
the approved limits of excavation of unsuitable soils below design subgrade elevation or behind design side slopes are reached or num .
the approved limits of excavation of unsuitable soils under shallow embankment have been reached .
area differencing shall be conducted by taking cross sections as described above in this subsection num. b .
presplit bedrock .
presplitting of bedrock shall be measured by the number of square yards of area of presplit rock face along the alignment at the inclination designated on the plans .
this area shall be measured and calculated as follows at onehalf station locations the distance from the top of the presplit face to the toe of the presplit face including toe drain shall be measured using a steel tape held taut and against the top and toe of slope .
onehalf station areas shall be calculated by multiplying the average of adjacent onehalf station measurements by a onehalf station horizontal distance .
the total measurement for presplitting will be calculated by summing the onehalf station areas .
c. rock excavation and rock excavation mechanical .
when rock surface occurs above the design grade of bottom of excavation the contractor shall immediately notify the engineer so that determinations of the initial surface elevation and area of rock exposure can be made for preparation of cross sections for measurement for payment .
cross sections for rock excavation measurement shall be prepared at maximum spacing of onehalf stations num feet .
at the completion of rock excavation and clearing of loose fragments a second set of elevations shall be determined for the excavated and cleared rock surface .
num the volume of rock excavation and rock excavationmechanical to be measured for payment shall be calculated from the difference between the crosssectional surface elevations using the average endarea method or such other equivalent method acceptable to the engineer .
volume calculated for payment shall include overbreakage of up to num inches below the design bottom of excavation in rock as described in subsection num para .
a .
should the cross sections indicate bottom overbreakage and excavation in excess of the numinch allowance the contractor shall not be paid for rock excavation in excess of the overbreakage allowance .
however he shall provide place and compact fill andor borrow required to replace the excess overbreakage at no cost to the state .
except for presplit areas measurement for payment for rock excavation or rock excavationmechanical shall include an allowance for overbreakage along rock side slopes to an amount not to exceed in any halfstation of num feet num percent of the actual quantity of rock excavation measured and calculated for that halfstation .
rock side slope overbreakage in excess of the allowance will not be included for payment and shall be removed by the contractor at no cost to the state .
this subsection num para .
c also applies to channel rock excavation and channel rock excavationmechanical .
rock excavation in presplit areas shall be measured to the presplit face or design limits whichever is less .
overbreakage from blasting will not be measured for payment but shall be removed as directed at no additional cost to the state .
num embankments .
when the contract specifically provides for payment for embank ments or when embankments are constructed with material obtained from sources other than excavation embankment will be measured by the number of cubic yards of material actually placed and compacted within the limits of the design embankment section .
the inplace volume will be calculated by differencing cross sections taken along the original ground from those taken along the top of the completed embankment .
the two sets of cross sections will then be plotted and the volume determined by either the average endarea method or such other equivalent method approved by the engineer .
all boulders and detached stones which have a volume in excess of num cubic yard and which the contractor desires to incorporate into embankment construction must first be broken up into fragments whose respective volumes are num cubic yard or less .
there will be no additional payment for breaking up such boulders and stones .
when the contract does not specifically provide for payment for embankment or when embankments are constructed with material obtained solely from excavation the work of embankment construction will not be measured or paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the various classifications of excavation .
however when embankment is constructed from excavation material and there is required borrow material to complete the embankment this borrow material shall be measured for payment .
num appurtenances structures pipes and drainage structures less than num cubic yards in volume shall not be deducted from embankment volumes for measurement of embankment or measurement of borrow for embankment .
num measurement of borrow .
common borrow gravel borrow or other borrow approved for use to replace unsuitable materials removed by excavation or to construct embankment shall be measured by the cubic yard as inplace and compacted .
this volume shall be determined by area differencing using cross sections as described in subsection num excavationgeneral .
num basis of payment .
num excavation .
the accepted quantities of earth excavation rock excavation rock excavation mechanical muck excavation channel excavation earth channel excavation rock channel excavation rock mechanical loam excavation and unclassified excavation will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per cubic yard as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including excavation within the prescribed limits of the work formation of embankments grading compaction disposal of surplus materials preparation of subgrade and shoulders and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num presplitting bedrock .
the accepted quantity of presplitting bedrock will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num borrow .
if specifically called for in the contract for embankment construction or if approved for replacement of unsuitable soils in excavation or under shallow embankment common borrow andor gravel borrow will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per cubic yard as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all fees leases permits and equipment labor and operating costs associated with procuring clearing working and restoring a borrow pit all labor materials and equipment hauling formation of embankments grading compaction disposal of surplus materials preparation of subgrade and shoulders and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num structure excavation and backfill num description .
this work consists of the removal and disposal of all material of whatever nature necessary for the construction of all structures and incidental foundations not included elsewhere in these specifications .
the work includes preserving channels shoring and bracing constructing cofferdams sealing foundations dewatering excavating preparing foundations backfilling and subsequent removal of safety features and cofferdams .
finally this work shall include all necessary onsite or borrow backfill as hereinafter specified .
num the material to be excavated is that which is included within the pay lines indicated on the plans and as hereinafter defined and which is not otherwise classified in either section num earthwork and embankment or section num trench excavation .
structure excavation and backfill will be subdivided into the following six classifications num .
structure excavation earth .
structure excavation earth shall include all excavation not classified as rock rockmechanical masonry or unclassified excavation .
num structure excavation rock .
structure excavation rock shall include the removal of bedrock or boulders and detached bedrock fragments over num cubic yard in volume when encountered within the limits of structure excavation .
boulder and rock fragments less than num cubic yard volume are considered structure excavation earth .
num structure excavation rock mechanical .
this classification of structure excavation rock shall be employed in areas where blasting is prohibited .
rock excavated under this classification shall be removed by employing hydraulic splitters air rams paving breakers or any other mechanical methods approved by the engineer .
num structure excavation masonry .
masonry excavation shall include the removal of all concrete or stone masonry built either with or without mortar includes incidental structures in excess of num cubic yard wherever they are encountered within the limits of structure excavation provided that such masonry has not been included under any applicable provision of section num site preparation of these specifications .
num unclassified structure excavation .
unclassified structure excavation shall include the removal and disposal of that composite mixture of various types of materials for which the engineer determines it is impractical to classify into separate classifications for payment and which is encountered within the designated pay lines .
num crushed stone fill under structures .
this work shall consist of providing one or more courses of crushed stone fill and filter fabric under structures footings on prepared subgrade surfaces in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades thickness and typical cross sections indicated on the plans .
num materials .
backfill materials as specified in the contract documents shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num borrow and aggregates of these specifications .
num crushed stone fill under structures .
crushed stone shall conform to the gradation requirements of subsection m.num table i column ii of these specifications .
filter fabric shall be one of those materials included on the departments approved materials list .
num cofferdams .
the requirements for structural materials for cofferdams such as tremie concrete steel sheet piling and steel bracing will be provided in the special provisions of the contract .
num num construction methods .
num excavation .
a .
notification .
the contractor shall notify the engineer sufficiently in advance of the beginning of excavation and immediately when it believes there is a change in classification of structure excavation in order that crosssectional elevations and measurements may be taken of the undisturbed ground .
b. dimensions of excavation .
the excavation for footings shall be of sufficient size to accommodate both the placement of the structure as indicated on the plans and the placement and compaction of backfill .
excavation shall extend at least num feet horizontally beyond the vertical face of footings and a minimum of num inches below the base of footings .
c. change in elevation or dimension of excavation .
the elevation of the bottoms of excavations shall be as indicated on the plans .
however the engineer may direct the contractor to make such changes in the elevation or dimensions of the excavation as may be necessary to secure a satisfactory foundation .
whenever such additional work as described above effects changes in quantities involving items designated in the contract the provisions relating to such items as specified under section num scope of work will apply .
d. approval of foundation .
no formwork or permanent work shall commence until after the engineer has approved the depth and dimensions of the excavation the character of the material and the condition of the foundation .
sounding rods shall be driven at such points and to such depths as may be directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall provide assistance to the engineer as may be necessary to make an adequate inspection of the foundation material .
no extra compensation will be allowed for providing this assistance .
all unsheathed excavation shall have sufficient side slopes to prevent earth sliding in on the work .
e. utilization of excavated materials .
all suitable excavated material shall be utilized as backfill or in embankments .
surplus excavation or unsuitable materials may be either disposed of in noncritical areas within the project limits or legally disposed of .
f. blasting .
all blasting in connection with rock excavation within project limits shall be completed before the placing of any structure concrete unless an exception is granted by the engineer in writing .
g. alternatives unsatisfactory bearing surfaces .
whenever in the opinion of the engineer the natural foundation material is inadequate to safely support the structure the contractor shall proceed with alternative methods as directed by the engineer .
where not otherwise listed in the proposal such operations shall be considered extra work and paid for in accordance with subsection num of these specifications .
h. water .
when water is encountered provisions shall be made for draining or dewatering within the excavation .
the dewatering work shall be accomplished by means that will num prevent disturbing the bottoms of excavations or adjacent structures .
when foundation material is relatively impermeable such that water accumulations tend to soften the cementing material or puddle the surface provisions shall be made to drain the excavation by suitable channels outside of and slightly below the footing level .
these channels shall conduct the water to outfalls or sump pumps .
foundation material unduly disturbed or softened by the use of equipment or by inadequate handling of water shall be removed and replaced with material satisfactory to the engineer and at the contractors expense .
i .
preparation of bearing surface .
all rock or other hard foundation material shall be freed from all loose material cleaned and cut to a firm surface either level stepped or serrated as directed by the engineer .
all seams shall be properly cleaned out and filled with concrete mortar or grout .
all shaping of ledge rock shall be carefully executed to avoid any unnecessary excavation of sound rock .
no payment for overbreak will be allowed except as provided under subsection num method of measurement .
num cofferdams .
cofferdams shall be utilized when the bottoms of excavation are below the prevailing water surface .
cofferdams when specified or required in order to dewater such excavations shall consist of timber steel sheet piling cylindrical metal shells or other structural components .
earthen embankments and dikes will not be classified as cofferdams .
a .
shop drawings .
for substructure work the contractor shall submit drawings showing his proposed method of cofferdam construction and other details left open to his choice or not fully shown on the plans .
such drawings shall be approved by the engineer before construction is started but such approval shall not in any way relieve the contractor of his responsibility under the contract to secure a safe and satisfactory cofferdam .
shop drawings shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with subsection num plans and shop drawings of these specifications .
b .
construction .
cofferdams for foundation construction shall in general be well braced and as watertight as practicable .
the interior dimensions of cofferdams shall be such as to give sufficient clearance for the construction of forms and the inspection of their exteriors and to permit dewatering outside of the forms .
where piles are required the cofferdam shall be of sufficient size to permit the driving of the piles in the exact positions shown on the plans without interference from the wales or bracing or requiring excessive rebracing .
cofferdams which are tilted or moved laterally during the process of installation shall be righted reset or enlarged to provide the necessary clearance .
these corrective measures shall be made at the sole expense of the contractor .
cofferdams shall be constructed and dewatered to protect green concrete against damage from water and to prevent damage to the foundation by erosion .
no construction materials shall be left in cofferdams in such a way as to extend into the substructure masonry .
c. tremie seal .
cofferdams shall be dewatered and the foundations shall be placed in the dry .
well point systems and methods will be approved at suitable locations if required .
however when conditions are anticipated which would render it impractical to dewater the cofferdam before placing masonry a tremie seal shall be placed both in accordance with subsection num para .
f of these specifications and to the dimensions shown on the plans .
num during the placing of a tremie seal and until the seal has set the elevation of the water inside the cofferdam shall be controlled to prevent any flow through the seal .
pumping to dewater a sealed cofferdam of the gravity type shall not commence until the concrete seal has been in place for at least num days for spread footing foundations and at least num days for pilesupported foundations .
after dewatering the balance of the foundations shall be placed in the dry with such modifications as may be necessary for structural purposes .
d. removal of cofferdams .
unless otherwise provided cofferdams including all sheeting and bracing shall be removed by the contractor as directed by the engineer .
the removal operation shall be effected in such manner to not disturb or otherwise damage the work .
the contractor shall not remove cofferdams without prior notification and approval of the engineer .
if the cofferdam is to remain in place it shall be vented or ported below low water level when dewatering is no longer necessary .
num dewatering .
dewatering from the interior of any foundation enclosure shall be carried out in such manner as to preclude the possibility of movement of water through any fresh concrete .
no pumping will be permitted during the placing of concrete or for a period of at least num hours thereafter unless it be done from a suitable sump separated from the concrete work by a mortartight form bulkhead or other effective means .
num embankments under structure foundations .
embankments under stub abutments walls culverts footings and other foundations where stability requirements are essential shall be constructed of gravel borrow conforming to subsection m.num table i column i except that the material shall not contain particles greater than num inches maximum dimension .
embankments shall be constructed such that side slopes are sufficiently stable and such that the widths of embankments shall extend horizontally num feet beyond the vertical faces of footings .
the gravel borrow shall be placed in layers not exceeding num inches in depth before compaction and shall be compacted to num percent of maximum density as determined by aashto tnum .
embankments under pile supported foundations shall be compacted to num percent of maximum density as determined by aashto tnum .
num backfilling .
a .
protection of structures during backfilling .
no fill material shall be placed against any structure until permission to place fill has been granted by the engineer and in no case until the masonry has obtained the numday compressive strength or unless otherwise specified in the special provisions .
in all cases proper precautions shall be taken to assure that the method of backfilling does not cause movement of or undue strain on any part of the structure .
fill material shall be deposited and compacted behind abutments walls and miscellaneous structures as hereinbefore specified .
special precautions shall be taken when placing fill around slender foundations rigid frame legs piers or over and around arches and box culverts to deposit the num material on both sides of such structures to approximately the same elevation at the same time .
backfill materials shall be carefully placed to avoid damage to masonry and waterproofing treatments .
if backfilling or other operations do in fact damage masonry or waterproofing the contractor shall remove the backfill and replace or repair the damaged work or waterproofing at the direction of the engineer .
all such repairs replacement of materials and labor shall be provided at no additional cost to the state .
b. pervious fill adjacent to structures .
the material placed adjacent to or in contact with arches culverts retaining walls wingwalls secondary structures and other areas indicated on the plans shall be pervious fill .
pervious fill shall be placed in layers not over num inches in depth before compaction and shall be compacted to num percent of maximum density as determined by aashto tnum .
in those locations not accessible for normal placing and rolling and for minor operations pervious fill shall be placed in lifts not to exceed num inches and compacted by means of mechanical tampers or suitable vibratory equipment .
for minor operations hand tamping with heavy iron tampers may be used .
c. common backfill .
all spaces excavated and not occupied by permanent works pervious fill or gravel borrow shall be backfilled with suitable material such material to be compacted in numfoot lifts up to the surface of the surrounding ground .
suitable material shall be free of vegetative matter organic or compressible soils and shall meet the requirements for common borrow except that the material shall not contain particles larger than num inches .
the engineer may approve excavated soil for reuse as suitable material .
the surface shall then be neatly graded .
backfill shall be compacted to num percent of maximum density as determined by aashto tnum .
no separate payment will be made for this work .
num crushed stone fill under structures .
the crushed stone shall be placed and compacted on a prepared surface to the required thickness indicated on the plans .
a filter fabric must be placed between the crushed stone and surrounding soils .
the surface of the crushed stone must be placed in such a manner that a reasonably uniform texture is provided .
the surface will have a tolerance of ½inch plus or minus to the grade indicated on the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
num structure excavation .
structure excavation of the various classifications will be measured by the number of cubic yards of the respective materials actually removed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
the volume will be computed by taking the difference in elevation between the existing ground surface or the bottom of roadway excavation or channel excavation whichever is lower and the surface of the completed structure excavation at plan grade or approved revised plan grade all between the designated horizontal pay lines .
num structure excavation in roadway cuts or embankment areas where the removal of muck is indicated on the plans shall include only that portion below the bottom of the muck .
structure excavation in roadway cuts shall include only that portion below the subgrade shoulder foundations and cut slope lines or as specifically indicated on the plans .
when bedrock boulders or masonry are encountered the contractor shall notify the engineer and shall expose the same to such an extent that in the engineers opinion the necessary measurements can be taken for structure excavation .
if the contractor shall fail to give such notice or notices or removes any material prior to the taking of measurements the engineer shall presume that measurements taken at the time the engineer first sees the material in question will give the true quantity of excavation .
a .
pay lines .
horizontal payment limits will be measured between plumb lines and num feet outside of the neat lines of the original foundations only as shown on the plans .
however should the size of the footing be increased more than num feet in any direction the area of the footing that extends beyond the original payment lines as established hereinbefore will be used for determining the additional amount of excavation .
no allowance for rock overbreak will be made beyond the above limits or more than num inches below bottom of footing unless indicated otherwise on the plans .
num pervious fill gravel borrow and common borrow .
pervious fill gravel borrow and common borrow will be measured by the number of cubic yards actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num crushed stone fill under structures .
crushed stone fill under structures will be measured by the number of cubic yards actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num cofferdams .
cofferdams do not require a measurement for payment .
num tremie seals .
when underwater concrete is specified the horizontal and vertical payment limits will be those specified for the tremie seal as indicated on the plans .
when underwater concrete is not specified but is required the horizontal payment limits will be extended to the actual inside face of the cofferdam and the vertical payment limits will be established by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
num structure excavation .
the accepted quantities of structure excavation earth structure excavation rock structure excavation rock mechanical structure excavation masonry and unclassified structure excavation will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per cubic yard as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including dewatering removal within the prescribed limits backfilling and disposal of surplus material and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num pervious fill gravel borrow and common borrow .
the accepted quantities of pervious fill gravel borrow and common borrow will be paid for at their respective num contract unit prices per cubic yard as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including stockpiling hauling placing compaction and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num crushed stone fill under structures .
the accepted quantity of crushed stone fill under structures will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including stockpiling hauling placing and compaction preparation of the subgrade filter fabric and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num cofferdams .
cofferdams will be paid for at their respective contract lump sum prices as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num tremie seals .
the accepted quantity of concrete tremie seals will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and compete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num trimming and fine grading num description .
this work consists of the trimming and fine grading of all shoulders ditches side slopes sidewalks and subgrade whether in excavation or embankment .
in the case of the subgrade surface the work also includes the compaction of the surface upon which the pavement structure shall be placed .
all such work shall be to the dimensions and details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction methods .
the areas to be graded shall be cleared of unsatisfactory material and shall then be compacted as directed within the areas of the proposed pavement structure .
a tolerance of a maximum of num inch plus or minus shall be allowed provided that this plus or minus deviation from grade shall not continue for more than num feet in any direction .
any depressions which may occur during compaction shall then be filled with additional suitable material .
the surface shall then be regraded and compacted true to the lines and grades as required .
num the subgrade upon which the pavement structure and sidewalk are placed shall be graded and compacted to num percent of maximum density in accordance with subsection num of these specifications .
this operation shall be performed prior to pavement structure construction .
all slopes shall be graded and finished to conform with the lines and grades as indicated on the plans .
areas to be loamed shall be trimmed and graded to the lines and grades as indicated on the plans or as directed .
num method of measurement .
trimming and fine grading will be measured by the number of square yards actually graded in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num area to be measured .
in general the areas of trimming and fine grading to be measured will be the products of the appropriate lengths and widths as defined below a .
length all roadway sections .
the length shall be the length of the contract measured along the roadway centerline .
b. widths .
the width shall be the sum of the lengths of the line segments both straight and curved which are designated as the trimming and fine grading line for representative roadway sections as illustrated on the following page .
num resurfacingreconstruction projects .
on resurfacing or reconstruction type projects lesser limits may be applicable .
in such cases measurement limits will be as shown on the plans or determined by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of trimming and fine grading will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed on the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num section num trench excavation num description .
this work consists of the excavation dewatering and backfill or disposal of all materials required for the construction of box culverts pipe culverts storm drains drainage structures utilities utility structures and ditches in reasonably close conformity with the dimension and details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
trench excavation also includes the provision of temporary or permanent trench protection as indicated on the plans and as specified herein .
trench excavation will be subdivided into the following four classifications num trench excavation earth .
trench excavation earth shall consist of all trench excavation not otherwise classified .
num trench excavation rock .
trench excavation rock shall consist of the removal of bedrock and boulders or detached rock fragments which have a volume of ½ cubic yard or more .
boulders and detached fragments which have a volume of less than ½ cubic yard are considered trench excavation earth .
num trench rock excavation mechanical .
this classification of trench rock excavation shall be employed in areas where blasting is prohibited .
trench rock excavated under this classification shall be removed by employing hydraulic splitters air rams paving breakers or any other mechanical methods approved by the engineer .
num ditches .
ditches at inlets and outlets of culverts and any other ditches and waterways except those within normal cut and fill slopes indicated in the plans shall be excavated under the applicable trench excavation items .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction methods .
num excavation of trenches .
all unsuitable material shall be excavated to a minimum depth of num inches below the design invert elevation or as directed by the engineer .
for all pipe up to num inches in diameter the width of the trench shall extend num feet beyond each side of the inside diameter of the pipe .
for pipe greater than num inches in diameter trenches shall be excavated to num inches on each side of the inside diameter of the pipe .
the material to replace this excavation shall consist of suitable bedding placed and compacted under and around the pipe to the horizontal and vertical dimensions indicated on the plans or stated in the special provisions .
bedding material may be from suitable trench or roadway excavation material .
backfill placed above the bedding may be from suitable trench or roadway excavation material provided it meets the minimum requirements for common borrow .
num common borrow will be used to replace unsuitable material when no excess suitable material is available from onsite .
the contractor shall shape the surface of bedding material along the bottom of the trench to fit the bell of pipes to a depth equal to the thickness of the pipe or bell as directed by the engineer .
num trench protection .
should trench protection be required in accordance with either osha regulations or for the protection of the roadway or utilities the contractor will be required to provide adequate timber sheeting steel sheeting or steel box type sheeting acceptable to the engineer .
should the contract specifically require trench protection of any nature for drainage trenches not requiring protection under osha regulations such use will be specified on the construction plans .
sheeting shall be either timber of numinch minimum thickness steel sheet piling or a fabricated steel trench box .
except when fabricated steel trench boxes have been approved for use by the engineer the contractor shall submit to the engineer for approval shop drawings and computations showing the method and design of the sheeting proposed for use .
shop drawings shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with subsection num plans and shop drawings of these specifications .
sheeting and supporting systems shall be designed to meet acceptable engineering criteria and must be certified by a rhode island registered professional engineer .
the engin eers approval of shop drawings shall not relieve the contractor of its responsibility under the contract for successful completion of the work .
the engineers written approval of a sheeting design will be required prior to the use of any sheeting on the project and prior to commencement of any drainage or underground utility work .
in all cases where sheeting is to be left in place it shall be cut off a distance of num feet below subgrade unless otherwise required to support adjacent utilities and structures whose elevation is above the aforementioned cut off .
the contractor will not be allowed to use fabricated steel trench boxes where the contract requires the use of either permanent steel or permanent timber sheeting .
the contractor will be required to protect any and all structures drainage or otherwise and unsupported utilities encountered in the trench .
unless otherwise indicated on the plans or directed by the engineer all sheeting and bracing used in conjunction with trench excavation shall be removed by the contractor following the completion of the work .
num open cuts in lieu of trenches .
should the contractor elect to excavate to the angle of repose as specified in osha num excavation and trenching operations and the lines of angle of repose intersect the ground beyond the pay limits of trench excavation as described subsequently in subsection num any required additional excavation disposal of unsuitable material backfill borrow compaction replacement of pavement structure curb sidewalk lawn area etc .
will be completely at the contractors expense .
all replacement work shall match the existing in kind .
this provision is applicable only if the requirements for the maintenance and protection of traffic are met to the satisfaction of the engineer and when trench protection is not indicated on the plans .
num num dewatering .
trench excavation shall be maintained dry at all times and all construction work shall be performed in the dry unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall remove by pumping draining bailing well points deep wells or other approved method any water which may accumulate in the trenches formed under this contract and shall form all pump wells sumps dams flumes or other works required to keep the trenches clear of water while pipe and structures are being constructed .
the contractor shall exercise caution to avoid loss of fines into bedding boiling up of the trench bottoms or other disturbances that may cause subsidence or loss of strength of the underlying natural soils .
if the dewatering procedure being used results in boiling loss of fines or other detrimental effects the contractor shall modify its operations to correct the situation .
damage caused by the dewatering operation will be repaired at the contractors expense .
all water from the trench excavations including water discharged from pumping systems and underdrains shall be removed and legally disposed of .
num backfill and compaction .
backfill shall consist of suitable bedding and soil materials placed and compacted in layers .
these layers shall be compacted to not less than num percent of maximum density according to aashto tnum and shall be no more than num inches thick after compaction .
compaction shall be achieved in accordance with the applicable provisions of subsection num of these specifications .
unless otherwise directed the backfill shall be brought to the surface level of the surrounding ground and neatly graded .
no backfill shall be placed against newly constructed masonry or concrete structures unless authorized by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
num trench excavation earth .
trench excavation earth will not be measured for payment .
num trench excavation rock and trench rock excavation mechanical .
trench excavation rock and trench rock excavation mechanical will be measured by the cubic yard in its original position within the following horizontal and vertical pay limits a. horizontal pay limits .
for all pipe up to and including num inches in diameter measurement will be made between parallel vertical planes located num feet on each side of the inside diameter of the pipe .
for all pipe greater than num inches measurement will be made between parallel vertical planes located num inches on each side of the inside diameter of the pipe .
the length of the trench will be measured from num foot beyond the outside face of a drainage structure to num foot beyond the outside face of the adjacent drainage structure .
b. vertical pay limits in cut areas .
within the limits of roadway excavation payment lines will extend vertically from one foot below the pipe to the subgrade .
num outside the limits of roadway excavation payment lines will extend vertically from one foot below the pipe to existing ground surface .
c. vertical pay limits in fill .
within the limits of fill areas payment lines will extend vertically from invert elevation to a maximum cover of approximately num feet of fill over the pipe .
num sheeting for trench protection .
a .
steel sheeting .
temporary steel sheeting temporary steel sheeting abandoned in place andor permanent steel sheeting will be measured for payment only if such sheeting is specifically called for on the plans .
in such cases temporary steel sheeting temporary steel sheeting abandoned in place andor permanent steel sheeting will be measured by the number of square feet calculated according to the following dimensions the height shall be the distance from the ground surface or the top of sheeting whichever is less to num feet below the bottom of the excavation .
the length of steel sheeting shall be the continuous length measured as described below in para .
c of this subsection .
b .
timber sheeting .
temporary timber sheeting andor permanent timber sheeting will be measured for payment only if such sheeting is specifically called for on the plans .
in such cases temporary timber sheeting andor permanent timber sheeting will be measured by the number of square feet calculated according to the following dimensions the height shall be the distance determined using the vertical pay limits described above in para .
a of this subsection .
the length of timber sheeting shall be the continuous length measured as described below in para .
c of this subsection .
c. prohibition against odd shapes .
the inside face of sheeting will be the plane of the horizontal pay limit for trench excavation as noted in subsection num para .
a .
regardless of the type of sheeting used timber or steel measurement will be on the horizontal plane area not on any odd shapes developed by the sheeting by virtue of its crosssectional configurations .
d. open cuts in lieu of trenches .
no measurement will be made for additional excavation disposal of unsuitable material borrow compaction or replacement of site features should the contractor elect to excavate to the angle of repose in lieu of installing trench protection .
num basis of payment .
num trench excavation earth .
there will be no direct payment for trench excavation earth required for the installation of drainage pipes pipe culverts ditches utilities or minor structures such as drop inlets manholes and catch basins or for shaping trenches relative to drainage installations .
the cost of such excavation including dewatering shall be included in the respective contract unit prices listed in the proposal for the various classifications of pipe ditches and drainageutility structures .
num trench excavation rock and trench rock excavation mechanical .
the accepted quantities of trench excavation rock or trench rock excavation mechanical will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per cubic yard as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and num equipment dewatering and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num backfilling of trenches .
the cost of placing and compacting backfill in trenches is not included in any of the classifications of trench excavation .
these costs shall be included in the respective contract unit prices listed in the proposal for the various classifications of pipe and drainageutility structures .
excavated material which the engineer determines to be unsuitable or not appropriate for backfilling around or above utilities shall be either removed to stockpile at the direction of the engineer or legally disposed of .
any additional borrow material required for trench backfill will be paid for at the contract unit price as listed in the proposal .
if no such unit price is stated in the proposal such additional borrow material will be paid for under the provisions of subsection num extra work of these specifications .
num sheeting for trench protection .
temporary trench protection required for drainage or utility installations shall not be paid for separately unless specifically called for on the plans .
the cost of said trench protection shall be included in the respective contract unit prices listed in the proposal for the various classifications of pipe and drainageutility structures .
if fabricated steel trench box type sheeting is used there will be no separate payment .
the cost of fabricated steel trench box type sheeting shall be included in the respective contract unit prices listed in the proposal for the various classifications of pipe and drainageutility structures .
fabricated steel trench box type sheeting will not be allowed where either permanent timber sheeting or permanent steel sheeting is specified on the plans or special provisions .
a .
steel sheeting .
if specifically called for on the plans the accepted quantities of temporary steel sheeting temporary steel sheeting abandoned in place andor permanent steel sheeting will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per square foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including driving bracing cutting and removal of excess quantities removal of temporary steel sheeting and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
b .
timber sheeting .
if specifically called for on the plans the accepted quantities of temporary timber sheeting andor permanent timber sheeting will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per square foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including driving bracing cutting off and removal in the case of temporary sheeting and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num bedding and backfill borrows .
if specifically called for on the plans or if required to replace unsuitable materials bedding and backfill borrows will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per cubic yard as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
if no such unit price is listed in the proposal and if such material is required then bedding and backfill borrows will be paid for under the provision of subsection num extra work of these specifications .
num section num perimeter erosion controls num description .
this work consists of the provision of perimeter erosion controls in reasonably close conformity with the dimensions and details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
perimeter erosion controls consist of the following two types .
num baled hay erosion checks .
baled hay erosion checks shall consist of baled hay or straw each bale of which is embedded and attached to the ground with wood stakes and are constructed as indicated on the plans .
num silt fence .
silt fencing shall consist of oak fence posts to which are attached industrial support netting and sediment control filter fabric and are constructed as indicated on the plans .
num materials .
num baled hay erosion checks .
baled hay or straw shall be baled within twelve months of use .
bindings shall be sufficiently strong to act as handles when placing bales in position by hand .
the minimum dimension of any bale shall be num inches .
wood stakes shall be oak numinch by numinch in section and at least num feet in length .
num silt fence .
the filter fabric shall be a material suitable for erosion control applications and shall be one of those included on the departments approved materials list .
wood posts shall be oak numinch by numinch in section and at least num feet in length .
support netting shall be heavyduty plastic mesh .
for prefabricated silt fence numinch by numinch wood posts will be permitted .
num construction methods .
those erosion and pollution controls indicated on the plans shall be installed and approved by the engineer before the commencement of any drainage roadway or bridge construction .
num baled hay erosion checks .
a .
installation .
baled hay erosion checks shall be constructed at the locations and in accordance with the details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the following stipulations also apply num .
bales shall be placed in a single row lengthwise on the contour with ends of adjacent bales tightly abutting one another .
num .
the erosion check shall be entrenched and backfilled .
the trench shall be excavated the width of the bale and the length of the check to a minimum depth of num inches .
after the bales are staked and chinked the excavated soil shall be backfilled against the check .
backfill shall conform to the ground level on the downhill side and shall be built up to num inches against the uphill side .
num num .
the bales are to be installed so that the bindings are oriented around the sides of the bales rather than along their tops and bottoms .
num .
each bale shall be securely anchored by at least two stakes driven through the bale .
the first stake in each bale should be driven toward the previously laid bale to force the bales together .
num .
the gaps between bales shall be chinked filled by wedging with straw to prevent water from escaping between bales .
loose straw shall be scattered over the area immediately uphill from the bale erosion check to increase efficiency .
num .
at approximate intervals of num feet one bale is to be placed against those bales positioned along the limit of clearing .
this bale is to be placed at a right angle to the line of the toe of slope all as indicated on the plans .
b .
removal .
all stakes must be removed from the haybales at a time designated by the engineer .
in general the bales will be allowed to rot in place .
if the contract requires the haybales to be removed they may be removed only when the adjacent exposed area has been stabilized i.e .
the area has an established grass or stone cover or has been paved and is free from future uncontrolled discharges .
prior to such removal however all silt mud and debris entrapped by the haybales shall be removed and the area cleaned up in accordance with the applicable provisions of section num of these specifications .
immediately upon removal of the bales the remaining exposed areas under the bales will be backfilled raked and graded as necessary to match the surrounding grade and then seeded .
num silt fence .
a .
installation .
silt fence shall be constructed at the locations and in accordance with the details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the following stipulations also apply num .
a numinch by numinch minimum trench shall be dug where the fence is to be installed .
num .
the fence shall be positioned in the trench with the fence posts set at num feet on center maximum .
num .
the sedimentation control fabric and the industrial netting shall be stapled to each post .
when joints are necessary filter fabric shall be spliced together only at support posts .
splices shall consist of a numinch overlap and shall be securely sealed .
num .
each wood post with industrial support netting and filter fabric attached shall be driven into the undisturbed soil in the trench as indicated on the plans .
num .
the trench shall be backfilled and the soil compacted over the filter fabric .
num .
the installed height of the fence shall be num½ feet minimum .
however height shall not exceed num inches since higher barriers impound volumes of water sufficient to cause failure of the fence structure .
b .
removal .
this work will include the removal of the silt fence erosion checks and posts .
silt fence will not be left to rot in place .
the silt fence may be removed only when the num adjacent exposed area is stabilized i.e .
the area has an established grass or stone cover or has been paved and is free from future uncontrolled discharges .
prior to such removal however all silt mud and debris entrapped by the silt fence shall be removed and the area cleaned up in accordance with the applicable provisions of section num of these specifications .
immediately upon removal of the silt fence the remaining exposed areas will be finished as specified above in para .
b of subsection num .
num method of measurement .
num baled hay erosion checks .
baled hay erosion checks will be measured by the number of linear feet actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
a .
removal .
if required by the contract removal of baled hay erosion checks will be measured by the number of linear feet actually removed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num silt fence .
silt fence erosion checks will be measured by the number of linear feet actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
num baled hay erosion checks .
the accepted quantity of baled hay erosion checks will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price so stated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including excavation haybales stakes removal of stakes and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
a .
removal .
if required by the contract the accepted quantity of removal of baled hay erosion checks will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including removal of hay grading raking and seeding necessary to match the surrounding area and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num silt fence .
the accepted quantity of silt fence erosion checks will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including excavation filter fabric industrial netting posts removal of fence grading raking and seeding necessary to match the surrounding area and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num cleaning and maintenance .
the cleaning and maintenance of baled hay erosion checks and silt fence erosion checks will be paid for under the provisions of section num maintenance and cleaning of erosion and pollution controls .
num section num check dams num description .
this work consists of the provision of check dams and dikes in reasonably close conformity with the dimensions and details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
check dams consist of the following four types num baled hay ditch and swale erosion checks .
baled hay ditch and swale erosion checks consist of baled hay or straw each bale of which is embedded and attached to the ground with wood stakes and constructed as indicated on the plans .
num log and hay check dams .
log and hay check dams consist of baled hay placed inside a log enclosure and held in place and otherwise stabilized by the placement of stones and constructed as indicated on the plans .
num sand bag erosion dikes .
this work consists of the placement of sand bags across either riprap or earth ditches thereby forming a dike to create temporary stilling basins for pollution control and constructed as indicated on the plans .
num stone check dams .
this work consists of the placement of stone in ditches or drainage swales and constructed as indicated on the plans .
num materials .
num baled hay ditch and swale erosion checks .
baled hay or straw shall be baled within twelve months of use .
bindings shall be sufficiently strong to act as handles when placing bales in position by hand .
the minimum dimension of any bale shall be num inches .
wood stakes shall be oak numinch by numinch in section and at least num feet in length .
num log and hay check dams .
baled hay or straw shall conform to the requirements of subsection num above .
wire spikes shall be of a quality acceptable to the engineer .
crushed stone shall meet the requirements of subsection m.num table i column ii of these specifications .
other natural materials such as rocks and cut logs shall both conform to the dimensions and sizes indicated on the plans and be acceptable to the engineer .
num sand bag erosion dikes .
the sand bags and the sand material shall be of a quality acceptable to the engineer .
dumped stone when required shall meet the requirements of subsection m.num for modified nsa class rnum riprap .
the filled sand bags will weigh a minimum of num pounds .
num stone check dams .
the stone shall meet the requirements of subsection m.num table i column v for filter stone .
num construction methods .
those erosion and pollution controls indicated on the plans shall be installed and approved by the engineer before the commencement of any drainage roadway or bridge construction .
num num baled hay ditch and swale erosion checks .
a .
installation .
erosion checks shall consist of two or more bales placed and staked perpendicular to the flow line of a ditch formed by the intersection of its slopes and constructed as indicated on the plans .
the following stipulations also apply num .
a pair of erosion checks shall be placed a minimum of num feet apart at each location .
num .
the ditch erosion checks shall be entrenched and backfilled .
the trench shall be excavated the width of the bales and the length of the check to a minimum depth of num inches .
after the bales are staked and chinked the excavated soil shall be backfilled against the check .
backfill shall conform to the ground level on the downhill side and shall be built up to num inches against the uphill side .
num .
the bales are to be installed so that the bindings are oriented around the sides of the bales rather than their tops and bottoms .
num .
the edges of overlapped bales shall overlap in such a manner that there will be no opening between the bales .
where bales butt together the gap between bales shall be chinked with loose straw to prevent water from escaping .
num .
each bale shall be securely anchored by a least two stakes driven through the bale .
the first stake in each bale should be driven toward the previously laid bale to force the bales together .
num .
all earth ditch areas are required to have the protection of baled hay ditch erosion checks prior to their outfall onto existing ground or natural or manmade water courses .
num .
the haybale barrier shall be extended such a length that the bottoms of the end bales are higher in elevation than the top of the lowest middle bale .
this configuration will insure that the sediment laden runoff will flow either through or over the barrier but not around it .
b .
removal .
bales of hay used in this work will not normally be left to rot in place .
the bales may be removed only when the adjacent exposed area is stabilized i.e .
the area has an established grass or stone cover or has been paved and is free from future uncontrolled discharges .
prior to such removal however all silt mud and debris entrapped by the respective erosion checks shall be removed and the area cleaned up in accordance with the applicable provisions of section num of these specifications .
immediately upon removal of the bales the remaining exposed areas under the bales will be backfilled raked and graded as necessary to match the surrounding grade and then seeded .
num log and hay check dams .
a .
installation .
log and hay check dams will be constructed perpendicular to the stream flow line .
the bales of hay shall be placed between numinch log walls nailed braced and weighted with stone as indicated on the plans .
b .
removal .
log and hay check dams will be removed prior to the completion of the project at a time designated by the engineer .
prior to such removal however all silt mud and num debris entrapped by the check dam shall be removed and the area cleaned up in accordance with the applicable provisions of section num of these specifications .
immediately upon removal of the check dams the exposed and disturbed areas will be backfilled raked and graded as necessary to match the surrounding area and then seeded .
num sand bag erosion dikes .
a .
installation .
sand bag erosion dikes shall be constructed as indicated on the plans .
the sand bags will be placed a minimum of four layers high .
over the center of the ditch the top layer of sand bags will have a weir opening equal to one half the bottom ditch width .
the sand bags shall be extended such a length that the bottom of the end sand bags are higher in elevation than the top of the lowest middle sand bag .
when the sand bag dike is constructed across an earth ditch the down stream side of the dike at the weir opening is to be protected with modified nsa class rnum dumped riprap .
b .
removal .
sand bag erosion dikes will be removed prior to the completion of the project at a time designated by the engineer .
prior to such removal however all silt mud and debris entrapped by the erosion dike shall be removed and the area cleaned up in accordance with the applicable provisions of section num of these specifications .
num stone check dams .
a .
installation .
stone check dams shall be constructed as indicated in on the plans .
the stone shall be placed across the ditch or swale to achieve complete coverage and shaped to the required configuration by the use of hand tools .
the stone shall be sloped from the sides of the ditchswale towards the center such that the center is num inches lower than the stone at the sides of the ditchswale .
the check dam shall have num horizontal to num vertical side slopes and shall not exceed num feet in height .
b .
removal .
stone check dams will be removed prior to the completion of the project at a time designated by the engineer .
prior to such removal however all silt mud and debris entrapped by the check dam shall be removed and the area cleaned up in accordance with the applicable provisions of section num of these specifications .
num method of measurement .
num baled hay ditch and swale erosion checks .
baled hay ditch and swale erosion checks will be measured by the number of linear feet of hay bales actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num log and hay check dams .
log and hay check dams will be measured by the number of linear feet actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num sand bag erosion checks .
sand bag erosion checks will be measured by the number of sand bags actually provided in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num num stone check dams .
stone check dams will be measured by the number of cubic feet of stone actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
num baled hay ditch and swale erosion checks .
the accepted quantity of baled hay ditch and swale erosion checks will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including excavation hay bales stakes the subsequent removal of bales and stakes backfill grading seeding and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num log and hay check dams .
the accepted quantity of log and hay check dams will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price so stated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including hay bales logs nails crushed stone wedge ballast stones the subsequent removal of the log and hay dam grading seeding and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num sand bag erosion checks .
the accepted quantity of sand bag erosion checks will be paid for at the contract unit price per each bag as listed in the proposal .
the price so stated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor equipment and materials including bags sand the subsequent removal of sand bags and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num stone check dams .
the accepted quantity of stone check dams will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment the subsequent removal of the stone and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num cleaning and maintenance .
the cleaning and maintenance of baled hay ditch and swale erosion checks log and hay check dams sand bag erosion checks and stone check dams will be paid for under the provisions of section num maintenance and cleaning of erosion and pollution controls .
section num temporary dewatering basins num description .
this work consists of the provision of temporary dewatering basins for the purpose of controlling water pollution caused by sedimentladen discharge from excavation sites .
the basins shall be constructed in reasonably close conformity with the dimensions and details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
temporary dewatering basins consist of the following two types num dewatering basin .
the basin consists of a rectangular concrete barrier enclosure the bottom and sides of which are lined with filter fabric .
the bottom fabric is stabilized with filter num stone .
the basin is divided into the required number of numfoot sections by stone berms approximately num inches high .
the entire unit is constructed as indicated on the plans .
num filter fabric retention basin .
the basin consists of a rectangular enclosure formed by a numfoot high chain link fence .
both the fence and the bottom of the enclosure are lined with filter fabric which is stabilized by a layer of rock riprap .
the entire unit is constructed as indicated on the plans .
num materials .
num dewatering basins .
precast concrete barrier units shall conform to details indicated on the plans and to the applicable requirements of section num of these specifications .
filter fabric shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num silt fence of these specifications .
filter stone shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num table i column v of these specifications .
sand bags shall be of a quality acceptable to the engineer .
hay bales and wood stakes shall conform to the requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
num filter fabric retention basins .
the fence shall conform to the requirements for type i chain link fence as set forth in section num of these specifications .
wood posts shall be numinch by numinch oak and at least num feet in length .
filter fabric shall conform to the requirements for same as set forth in subsection num of these specifications .
the layer of stone over the bottom of the basin shall meet the requirements of subsection m.num for modified nsa class rnum riprap .
num construction methods .
those erosion and pollution controls indicated on the plans shall be installed and approved by the engineer before the commencement of any drainage roadway or bridge construction .
num dewatering basin .
a .
installation .
dewatering basins shall be constructed at the locations and in accordance with the details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the following stipulations shall also apply num .
the precast concrete barrier units shall be placed on level or nearly level ground .
num .
filter fabric shall be placed on the bottom of the entire area enclosed by the concrete barrier units .
if more than one sheet of fabric is required the adjacent section shall be overlapped a minimum of num inches to insure full coverage .
filter fabric shall be turned up along the inside face of the concrete barriers to the top of same there to be folded across the top of the barriers .
the fabric will be maintained in position by the placement of sand bags endtoend along the top of the concrete barrier enclosure .
num .
a minimum layer of num inches of filter stone shall be spread over the bottom of the basin .
stone berms shall be constructed at numfoot intervals along the length of the basin .
b .
removal .
the dewatering basin will not be removed until all dewatering operations are complete .
prior to such removal however all accumulated sediment within the basin shall num be removed and legally disposed of in accordance with the applicable requirements of section num of these specifications .
the area covered by the basin shall be seeded and mulched immediately after the basin is removed .
num filter fabric retention basin .
a .
installation .
retention basins shall be constructed at the locations and in accordance with the details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the following stipulations shall also apply num .
the filter fabric retention basin will be placed on stabilized and level or nearly level ground to prevent erosion by water exiting the basin .
num .
a numinch by numinch minimum trench shall be dug where the basin is to be constructed .
num .
the filter fabric and wire backing shall be num feet wide minimum positioned in the trench and secured to metal posts positioned num feet on center maximum .
num .
the metal posts shall be driven into undisturbed soil next to the trench to a minimum depth of num inches .
num .
place fill material in the trench and compact .
num .
the installed height of the fence shall be num feet minimum .
num .
a minimum layer of num inches of filter stone modified nsa class rnum riprap shall be spread evenly over the bottom of the basin .
b .
removal requirements for the filter fabric retention basin are the same as set forth above for the dewatering basin .
num method of measurement .
dewatering basins and filter fabric retention basins will be measured by the number of square feet of each such basin actually provided in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
area will be computed based on the outside dimensions of the basin enclosures .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of dewatering basins and filter fabric retention basins will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per square foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including installation subsequent removal and restoration of basin areas and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num cleaning and maintenance .
the cleaning and maintenance of dewatering basins and filter fabric retention basins will be paid for under the provisions of section num mainte nance and cleaning of erosion and pollution controls .
num section num storm drain protection num description .
this work consists of the provision of temporary storm drain protection facilities constructed in reasonably close conformity with the dimensions and details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
storm drain protection facilities consist of the following three types .
num sandbag gutter inlet sediment barrier .
this work consists of placing a sandbag barrier upstream of a gutter inlet prior to the placement of roadway pavement .
sediment barriers shall be constructed as indicated on the plans .
num silt fence catch basin inlet protection .
this work consists placing a temporary filter fabric fence around inlet grates .
silt fence inlet protection shall be constructed as indicated on the plans .
num baled hay catch basin inlet protection .
this work consists of placing baled hay around catch basin inlets .
baled hay inlet protection shall be constructed as indicated on the plans .
num materials .
num sandbag gutter inlet sediment barrier .
the sandbags and the sand material shall be of a quality acceptable to the engineer .
num silt fence catch basin inlet protection .
the filter fabric shall be a material suitable for erosion control applications and shall be one of those included on the departments approved materials list .
wood posts shall be oak numinch by numinch in section and at least num½ feet in length .
support netting shall be heavyduty plastic mesh .
for prefabricated silt fence numinch by numinch wood posts will be permitted .
num baled hay catch basin inlet protection .
baled hay or straw and wood stakes shall conform to the requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
num construction methods .
those erosion and pollution controls indicated on the plans shall be installed and approved by the engineer before the commencement of any drainage roadway or bridge construction .
num sandbag gutter inlet sediment barrier .
a .
installation .
sandbag sediment barriers shall be constructed as indicated on the plans .
the following stipulations shall also apply num .
the sandbags will be placed in a curved row extending from the curb or berm .
the row shall be at least num feet upstream of the inlet and should overlap the curb or berm .
num num .
place several layers of sandbags over the first layer to a height of at least num foot .
the bags shall be overlayed and packed tightly together .
num .
a gap of one sandbag should be left in the middle of the top row to serve as a spillway .
the spillway shall be a least num inches high .
num .
additional sediment storage capacity can be obtained by constructing a series of these barriers along the gutter upstream of the inlet .
b .
removal .
the sandbag sediment barrier will be removed prior to the completion of the project at a time designated by the engineer .
prior to such removal however all silt mud and debris entrapped by the sediment barrier shall be removed and the area cleaned up in accordance with the applicable provisions of section num of these specifications .
num silt fence catch basin inlet protection .
a .
installation .
the silt fence inlet protection shall be constructed as indicated on the plans .
the following stipulations shall also apply num .
posts shall extend at least num foot below grade .
num .
the filter fabric shall extend to a height at least num inches above the top of the inlet grate but shall not exceed num feet in height .
num .
the support netting shall extend to the full height of the filter fabric .
num .
a trench shall be excavated approximately num inches wide and num inches deep around the outside perimeter of the stakes .
the filter fabric and support netting shall extend at least num inches into the trench .
after the fabric and support netting are fastened to the stakes the trench should be backfilled and compacted to original grade .
num .
the filter fabric and support netting fence shall be securely fastened to the stakes using heavy duty wire staples at least num inch long .
ends of the filter fabric must meet at a stake be overlapped folded and stapled to the stake .
b .
removal .
the silt fence inlet protection shall be removed and the area prepared for pavement construction once the contributing drainage area is free from future uncontrolled discharges .
prior to such removal however all silt mud and debris entrapped by the silt fence shall be removed and the area cleaned up in accordance with the applicable provisions of section num of these specifications .
num baled hay catch basin inlet protection .
a .
installation .
the baled hay inlet protection shall be constructed as indicated on the plans .
the following stipulations shall also apply num .
the bales shall be entrenched and backfilled .
the trench shall be excavated the width of the bale and the length of the check to a minimum depth of num inches .
after the bales are staked and chinked the excavated soil shall be backfilled against the check .
backfill shall conform to the ground level on the inside and shall be built up to num inches around the outside .
num num .
the bales are to be installed so that the bindings are oriented around the sides of the bales rather than along their tops and bottoms .
num .
each bale shall be securely anchored by at least two stakes driven through the bale .
the first stake in each bale should be driven toward the previously laid bale to force the bales together .
num .
the gaps between bales shall be chinked filled by wedging with straw to prevent water from escaping between bales .
b .
removal .
the baled hay inlet protection shall be removed and the area prepared for pavement construction the contributing drainage area is free from future uncontrolled discharges .
prior to such removal however all silt mud and debris entrapped by the baled hay shall be removed and the area cleaned up in accordance with the applicable provisions of section num of these specifications .
num method of measurement .
num sandbag gutter inlet barrier .
sandbag gutter inlet sediment barriers will be measured by the number of sandbags actually provided in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num silt fence catch basin inlet protection .
silt fence catch basin inlet protection will be measured by the number of linear feet of such protection actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num baled hay catch basin inlet protection .
baled hay catch basin inlet protection will be measured by the number of linear feet of hay bales actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
num sandbag gutter inlet sediment barriers .
the accepted quantity of sandbag gutter inlet sediment barriers will be paid for at the contract unit price per each bag as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor equipment and materials including bags sand the subsequent removal of sandbags and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num silt fence catch basin inlet protection .
the accepted quantity of silt fence catch basin inlet protection will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including excavation stakes support netting filter fabric backfill the subsequent removal of the entire temporary facility and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num baled hay catch basin inlet protection .
the accepted quantity of baled hay catch basin inlet protection will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including excavation haybales stakes backfill the subsequent removal of the num entire temporary facility and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num cleaning and maintenance .
the cleaning and maintenance of sandbag gutter inlet sediment barriers silt fence catch basin inlet protection and baled hay catch basin inlet protection will be provided and paid for under the provisions of section num maintenance and cleaning of erosion and pollution controls .
section num stilling basins for water pollution control num description .
this work consists of the provision of temporary andor permanent stilling basins in reasonably close conformity with the dimensions and details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
the various materials required for the construction of stilling basins will be indicated on the plans .
num construction methods .
the stilling basins will be constructed in such a manner to allow any material which may cause a natural water course or the surrounding environment to be damaged to be retained in the basin .
during the life of the contract the contractor will be required to periodically clean the pool and to maintain the basin both as directed by the engineer .
if the basin is temporary the contractor will be required to fill the basin with suitable material and to restore the area in which the basin was located to either its original condition or to the require ments of the contract .
in all cases the stilling basins are to be constructed immediately after the clearing and grubbing operation and before commencement of any excavation andor embankment .
the single exception to this requirement is the construction of a leveling course to create a work platform .
excavation for stilling basins is to take place from the downstream end of the basin and to proceed upstream .
prior to the start of excavation temporary baled hay ditch erosion checks andor hay log check dams are to be constructed immediately beyond the downstream end of the basin .
when the basin is complete the above temporary erosion control measures are to be removed .
num method of measurement .
stilling basins for water pollution control will not be measured by a single unit of measurement usually associated with a specific proposal item .
rather each individual item of work required to provide such basins will be measured by their respective units of measurement for the quantity actually provided in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
stilling basins for water pollution control will not be paid for as completed facilities .
rather such basins will be paid for at the contract unit prices listed in the proposal for those various items of work required to both construct the facility and in the cases num of temporary basins those items of work necessary to remove the basin and restore the area to its original or proposed condition .
num cleaning and maintenance .
the cleaning and maintenance of stilling basins will be paid for under the provisions of section num maintenance and cleaning of erosion and pollution controls .
section num construction accesses num description .
this work consists of the provision of stabilized stone pads located at points of vehicular ingress and egress on construction sites .
num planning considerations .
public roads adjacent to a construction site shall be clean at the end of each day .
this section num provides for an area where mud can be removed from the tires of construction vehicles before such vehicles enter a public road .
the action of vehicles traveling over a stabilized stone pad will remove most of the mud from tires .
construction accesses shall be used in conjunction with the stabilization of construction roads to reduce the amount of mud picked up by construction vehicles .
num materials .
crushed stone shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num table i column ii of these specifications .
filter fabric shall conform to the requirements for same as set forth in subsection num of these specifications .
num construction methods .
stabilized stone pads employed as construction entrances shall be constructed as indicated on the plans .
num entrance dimensions .
a. thickness .
the thickness of the stabilized stone pad shall be a minimum of num inches .
b. width .
the width shall not be less than the full width of the respective points of ingress or egress .
c. length .
the length of construction entrances shall be at least num feet where the soils are sands or gravels except where the traveled length is less than num feet .
where soils are clays or silts the length of construction entrances shall be at least num feet except where the traveled length is less than num feet .
num installation requirements .
the area of the construction entrance shall be cleared of all vegetation roots stumps or other objectionable material .
the area shall then be excavated to subgrade and graded .
filter fabric shall be placed on the prepared subgrade prior to the placement of the stone pad .
the stone shall be placed according to the specified dimensions .
num num method of measurement .
construction accesses will be measured by the number of square yards of stabilized stone pads actually installed for this purpose in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of construction accesses will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor material and equipment including excavating filter fabric stabilized stone pad and subsequent removal of same and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num maintenance and cleaning of erosion and pollution controls num description .
this work consists of the maintenance and cleaning of erosion and pollution control facilities in accordance with these specifications and as directed by the engineer .
num applicable controls .
the specific erosion and pollution control facilities to be cleaned and maintained under this section consist of the following a. perimeter controls .
num .
baled hay erosion checks subsection num num .
silt fence subsection num b .
check dams .
num .
baled hay ditch and swale erosion checks subsection num num .
log and hay check dams subsection num num .
sand bag erosion dikes subsection num num .
stone check dams subsection num c. temporary dewatering basins .
num .
dewatering basins subsection num num .
filter fabric retention basins subsection num d. storm drain protection .
num .
sandbag gutter inlet sediment barrier subsection num num num .
silt fence catch basin inlet protection subsection num num .
baled hay catch basin inlet protection subsection num e. stilling basins .
subsection num num definitions .
a .
cleaning .
cleaning consists of removing debris and accumulated sedimentladen deposits from the upstream side of perimeter controls check dams and temporary drainage protection and from the bottom of temporary dewatering basins and stilling basins .
all material soremoved shall be legally disposed of .
b .
maintenance .
maintenance consists of the repair and restoration to original configuration of damage sustained by erosion and pollution controls caused by normal rainfall events .
abnormal weather events are defined in subsection num failure of erosion and pollution controls .
num materials .
materials required to repair and restore damaged erosion and pollution controls shall meet the applicable requirements of subsections num num num num and num for perimeter erosion controls check dams temporary dewatering basins storm drain protection and stilling basins respectively of these specifications .
num construction methods .
erosion and pollution controls shall be maintained by the contractor to the satisfaction of the engineer .
erosion and pollution controls must be able to prevent under normal weather conditions both the movement of soil materials and the intrusion of sedimentladen discharges into environmentally sensitive areas .
construction shall not commence or continue until all specified erosion and pollution controls are in place properly installed and accepted by the engineer .
erosion and pollution controls shall be routinely inspected by the engineer .
the engineer shall notify the contractor immediately if problems develop .
the contractor shall commence cleaning and maintenance measures no later than the next consecutive calendar day after receiving a directive from the engineer to perform such measures .
the contractor shall aggressively and expeditiously perform such cleaning and maintenance work until the original problem is remedied to the complete satisfaction of the engineer .
in the event of a weekend storm the contractor must have resources available to restore and if necessary to replace any damaged controls .
num threshold for cleaning erosion controls .
erosion and pollution controls will be cleaned when directed by the engineer after a rainstorm and when sediment deposits reach the heights indicated in the following table num a. perimeter controls height num .
baled hay erosion checks ½ bale height num .
silt fence num inches b .
check dams num .
baled hay erosion checks ½ bale height num .
log and hay check dams ½ bale height num .
sand bag erosion dike ½ dike height num .
stone check dam ½ dam height c. temporary dewatering basins num .
dewatering basins ½ original basin height num .
filter fabric retention basin ½ original basin height d. storm drain protection num .
sandbag gutter inlet sediment barrier ½ dike height num .
silt fence catch basin inlet protection num inches num .
baled hay catch basin inlet protection ½ bale height e. stilling basins ½ depth below outlet elevation num other requirements .
a. perimeter controls check dams and storm drain protection .
the following requirements apply num .
damaged controls will be repaired or replaced after each storm events or as directed by the engineer .
num .
before controls are removed all accumulated sediment on the upstream side shall be removed and legally disposed of .
num .
erosion controls shall not be removed until the adjacent exposed areas are relatively free from future uncontrolled discharges .
num num .
the engineer has the authority to verify enforce and to specify maintenance activities and to ensure that erosion and pollution controls have been properly maintained .
b .
temporary dewatering basins and stilling basins .
the following requirements apply num .
the basins will be periodically inspected for signs of erosion around the basin and downslope area .
num .
repairs will be promptly carried out as directed by the engineer .
num .
the engineer has the authority to verify enforce and to specify maintenance activities and to ensure that controls have been properly maintained .
num failure to maintain erosion and pollution controls .
if the engineer decides on any given day that those erosion and pollution controls specified in the contract are not in place or have not been adequately maintained as specified in this section the daily charge set forth in special provision code num will be deducted from monies due the contractor as a charge for failure to comply with this specification .
moreover the stated daily charge will continue each consecutive calendar day thereafter until the deficiencies noted have been corrected to the complete satisfaction of the engineer .
num failure of erosion and pollution controls .
this section num maintenance and cleaning of erosion and pollution controls is based on the concept that erosion and pollution controls will essentially remain intact under normal rainfall events and that any damage sustained by said controls under normal rainfall may be repaired under the maintenance provisions set forth herein .
however under abnormal weather events it is possible that erosion and pollution controls may be damaged to the extent that the engineer may direct that they be replaced in their entirety .
under such abnormal conditions the contractor will replace the particular facilities and be compensated for same under the applicable provisions of sections num num num num and num perimeter controls check dams temporary dewatering basins storm drain protection and stilling basins respectively of these specifications .
a. abnormal weather conditions .
for the purposes of this subsection num abnormal weather events are defined as follows num .
for a duration of num hour rainfall equal to or greater than ½inch .
num .
for a duration of num hours rainfall equal to or greater than num inches .
num .
for a duration of num hours rainfall equal to or greater than num inches .
num .
extreme weather conditions such as hurricanes tornadoes floods blizzards etc .
daily rainfall records may be obtained from the national weather service .
num num method of measurement .
num perimeter controls check dams temporary dewatering basins and storm drain protection .
these items do not require a measurement for payment .
num stilling basins .
maintenance and cleaning stilling basins will be measured by the number of such stilling basins actually maintained and cleaned in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
num perimeter controls check dams temporary dewatering basins and storm drain protection .
maintenance and cleaning of erosion and pollution controls will be paid for at the contract lump sum price as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment for maintaining and cleaning any and all of the controls so designated complete and accepted by the engineer .
num stilling basins .
the accepted quantity of maintenance and cleaning of stilling basins will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price so stated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num placement of millings beneath guardrail num description .
this work consists of the placement of bituminous millings from cold planing operations at all guardrail locations less than num feet from the edge of the existing pavement or as indicated on the plans andor as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
millings shall consist of bituminous material removed from the project roadway during cold planing operations and ground or crushed such that num percent of the material passes a numinch sieve .
millings shall be obtained from stockpiled locations on the project site and shall be free of debris topsoil and soil clumps .
millings may not be obtained from off site sources unless specifically authorized by the engineer .
num construction methods .
the contractor shall grade beneath the guardrail such that the finish surface of the millings is flush with the bituminous berm or edge of pavement .
the millings shall be placed to a point num foot behind the guardrail post and shaped compacted and sloped to drain away from the pavement .
the contractor will not be allowed to dismantle the guardrail to perform any work associated with this item .
the stockpiling of millings shall be restricted to approved onsite locations and in no instance will stockpiling of millings be allowed on the roadway shoulder or immediately adjacent to a travel lane .
num the contractor shall use a suitable means to excavate and remove the material beneath the guardrail such that damage to the guardrail does not result and to place the millings as indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
all material that is removed from beneath the guardrail including excess millings shall be legally disposed of .
num method of measurement .
placement of millings beneath guardrail will be measured by the number of linear feet of guardrail for which millings were actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of placement of millings beneath guardrail will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor equipment and tools including removal and disposal of the existing material and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num containment system for control of hydrodemolition runoff and maintenance and disposal of hydrodemolition runoff num description .
this work consists of the provision of an onsite containment system for runoff from hydrodemolition operations a system which shall provide for the temporary storage of discharge from the hydrodemolition operations allow for the settlement of suspended materials from the hydrodemolition runoff and enable the collection of sediments and other materials from the containment system for offsite disposal .
num materials .
any use of materials not specifically included on the plans andor in this specification shall require the prior approval of the engineer .
num construction methods .
at least thirty num days prior to starting hydrodemolition operations the contractor shall submit for the engineers approval the proposed storage area and maintenance plan for the hydrodemolition runoff .
the submission shall consist of two elements the containmentsedimentation system and the maintenance procedures .
num containment system for control of hydrodemolition runoff .
if the project is within the jurisdiction of the rhode island department of environmental management ridem or the coastal resources management council crmc the containment system must be constructed in accordance with permit conditions and approved plans .
otherwise the contractor shall be responsible for obtaining the necessary approvals prior to beginning hydrodemolition activities .
copies of all such approvals shall be provided to the department .
a .
minimum requirements .
the containment system shall meet the following minimum requirements num num .
it shall be one of the following structures a an open basin formed of natural topography lined with an impermeable fabric .
b an area where excavated material can be placed to form a temporary earth berm lined with an impermeable fabric .
c a manmade portable structure which can be placed onsite for the duration of the hydrodemolition process .
num .
the submittal shall consist of computations accompanied by the hydrodemolition equipments operating specifications demonstrating that the sedimentation area is capable of holding the maximum discharge from eight num hours of hydrodemolition operations and a minimum of three thousand num gallons .
num .
the containment system shall be located within the available infields of the project and shall not encroach on the pedestrian or travel ways .
the location of the facility shall be surrounded by a temporary snow fence to discourage unauthorized entry .
num .
if disturbance of the original soil is required for the establishment of the containment system a row of haybales shall be placed five num feet downslope from the edge of disturbance and shall remain in place through the hydrodemolition process .
subsequent site restoration shall be required .
num maintenance and disposal of hydrodemolition runoff .
the contractor shall develop a method by which the temporary sedimentation basin is to be maintained cleaned and emptied prior to the start of any work .
no work within areas of ridem or crmc jurisdiction or which is outside of approved limits of disturbance will be authorized by the engineer .
a .
requirements .
the disposal of the liquid and solid discharge elements of the hydrodemolition operations shall conform to the following requirements num .
the contractor shall not commence hydrodemolition operations on a given workday until the containment system has been cleaned to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num .
liquid runoff may be removed and discharged in accordance with ridem or crmc approval only after a settling period of not less than six num hours .
hydrodemolition runoff may not be discharged into any area of ridem or crmc jurisdiction or into any storm drain which outfalls to any such area without prior approval of ridem or crmc .
the contractor shall be responsible for obtaining all such approvals and forwarding copies to the department .
the water may not drain across unpaved surfaces but shall be pumped siphoned or conducted along a temporary paved waterway .
haybales shall be required for any process requiring disturbing earth or discharge over unpaved surfaces .
num .
any solid debris collected in the bottom of the basin shall be removed and legally disposed of by the contractor .
b .
damaged facilities .
the contractor shall be required to replace rebuild or repair the basin or any part thereof which is damaged or otherwise rendered inoperative to the extent that it does not perform its intended function at no additional cost to the state .
such efforts include but are not limited to snow fence repair structure repair and maintaining haybales .
num num method of measurement .
num containment system for control of hydrodemolition runoff does not require a measurement for a lump sum payment .
num maintenance and disposal of hydrodemolition runoff will be measured by the number of days where actual hydrodemolition takes place in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
num containment system for control of hydrodemolition runoff will be paid for at the contract lump sum price as set forth in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full compensation for establishing a suitable sedimentation basin for the hydrodemolition runoff all materials labor tools equipment and earthwork associated with providing the basin erosion control snow fence removal of all materials and restoration of all ground surfaces disturbed in the installation and operation of the system and all other incidentals necessary for the proper completion of the work specified and shown on the plans complete and accepted by the engineer .
num maintenance and disposal of hydrodemolition runoff will be paid for at the contract unit price per day as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full compensation for transportation and disposal of the hydrodemolition wastewater all materials labor tools vehicles any necessary permits and approvals required to complete the disposal and all other incidentals necessary for the proper completion of the work specified and shown on the plans complete and accepted by the engineer .
num part num aggregate and gravel base and subbase courses section num aggregate and gravel base courses num description .
this work consists of providing one or more courses of graded aggregate or gravel borrow and fillers if required on prepared subgrade surfaces in reasonable close conformity with the dimensions and details indicated on the plans all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
the following materials shall conform to the applicable requirements of the indicated subsections of section m materials a. gravel borrow subsection m.num table i column i. b .
crushed stone or gravel subsection m.num table i column ii .
c. fillers subsection m.num fine aggregate .
num construction methods .
num placing .
if the required compacted depth of the base course exceeds num inches the base shall be constructed in two or more layers of approximate equal thickness .
the maximum compacted thickness of any one layer shall not exceed num inches .
the maximum size of stone in the gravel borrow or aggregate placed shall not exceed numths of the depth of the layer after compaction .
this restriction determines the maximum size of stone in the gravel borrow specification of subsection m.num gradation of aggregate .
num shaping and compaction .
compaction of each layer shall continue until a density of not less than num percent of the maximum density determined in accordance with aashto tnum has been achieved .
the surface of each layer shall be maintained during the compaction operations in such a manner that a reasonable uniformity is produced .
the compacted surface shall have a tolerance of ½inch plusorminus to the grades shown on the plans or as directed .
however no plus or minus deviation may continue for more than num feet in any direction .
num method of measurement .
aggregate base course andor gravel borrow base course will be measured by the number of cubic yards or the number of tons as the case may be actually in place in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of aggregate base course andor gravel borrow base course will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices per ton or cubic yard as the case may be as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated shall constitute num full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num gravel borrow subbase courses num description .
this work consists of providing one or more courses of gravel borrow on prepared subgrade surfaces in reasonably close conformity with the dimensions and details indicated on the plans all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
gravel borrow shall meet the requirements of subsection m.num gradation of aggregates table i column i .
num construction methods .
num placing .
placing subbase materials shall conform to the requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
num shaping and compaction .
shaping and compaction of subbase materials shall conform to the requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
num method of measurement .
gravel borrow subbase course will be measured by the number of cubic yards actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of gravel borrow subbase course will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals including trimming and fine grading required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num special graded aggregate for shaping and trimming driveways or shoulders num description .
this work consists of providing special graded aggregate as surface courses for driveways or shoulders to be placed in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades and typical cross sections indicated on the plans all in accordance with these specifications .
num num materials .
special graded aggregate shall be a composite mix of crusher run coarse aggregate and fine aggregate free from clay loam soft or elongated rock fragments organic soil or vegetative matter .
coarse aggregate plus no .
num shall consist of clean hard durable particles of crushed rock fragments or crushed gravel .
crushed gravel shall consist of num percent by weight particles with at least one fractured face .
coarse aggregates shall have a percentage of wear by the los angeles abrasion test aashto tnum of not more than num percent and a sodium sulfate soundness aashtnum tnum of not more than num percent .
fine aggregate shall consist of particles produced during the crushing of coarse aggregate at the approved source and shall be free of organic deleterious matter .
the composite coarse and fine aggregate mix shall conform to the following gradation requirements square mesh percentage by weight passing sieve size indicated square mesh sieve num½ num num num num ½ num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num coarse and fine aggregates to be used as special graded aggregate for driveway or shoulder surfaces shall be selected to provide a stable compactable functional and presentable surface which shall be similar in color and texture as approved by the engineer to match existing surfaces .
num construction methods .
num placing .
when used as a crushed aggregate surface course to provide a transition between existing gravelaggregate surfaces and new asphalt special graded aggregate shall be placed in layers such that the maximum compacted thickness of any one layer shall not exceed num inches .
num shaping and compaction .
special graded aggregate shall be shaped and compacted in accordance with the requirement of subsection num shaping and compaction of these specifications .
num method of measurement .
special graded aggregate will be measured by the number of cubic yards or the number of tons as the case may be actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of special graded aggregate will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton or per cubic yard as the case may be as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated shall constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including trimming and fine grading and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num select leveling and filler aggregate num description .
this work consists of providing select leveling and filler aggregate to adjust subbase or subgrade surfaces to close conformance with the lines grades and typical cross sections indicated on the plans all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
select leveling and filler aggregate shall be a composite of crushed or uncrushed coarse aggregate and natural or crushed fine aggregate all provided from approved sources .
the composite aggregate shall be free of compressible or organic soils soft or elongated rock fragments or gravel and vegetative matter .
coarse aggregate plus no .
num may consist of crushed rock fragments crushed or uncrushed gravel or a blend of crushed and uncrushed rock and gravel .
each coarse aggregate component source material shall have been shown individually to have a percentage of wear by los angeles abrasion test aashto tnum of not more than num percent and a sodium sulfate soundness aashto tnum of not more than num percent .
fine aggregate may consist of natural sand or particles produced by crushing rock or gravel and shall be free of organic soils or other deleterious matter .
the composite coarse and fine aggregate mix shall conform to the following gradation requirements square mesh percentage by weight passing sieve size indicated sieve size num½ num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num construction methods .
num surface preparation .
the existing subbase or subgrade surface shall be scarified to a depth of num inches prior to placement of the select aggregate as a filler for local depressions or washouts or as a leveling course .
num num placement .
select leveling and filler aggregate shall be placed in layers such that the maximum compacted thickness of any one layer shall not exceed num inches .
num method of measurement .
select leveling and filler aggregate will be measured by the number of cubic yards actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of select leveling and filler aggregate will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard as listed in the proposal .
the price so stated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including trimming and fine grading and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num part num bituminous pavements section num dense graded bituminous concrete pavements num description .
these specifications are applicable to all types of bituminous pavements irrespective of gradation of aggregate kind and amount of bituminous material or pavement use .
this work consists of constructing base binder or surface courses of bituminous concrete pavement on prepared foundations in reasonably close conformity with the dimensions and details indicated on the plans all in accordance with these specifications .
num specific pavements and mixes .
the specific pavements and mixes are designated by the column headings of the table that constitutes subsection m.num of these specifications .
they are a .
base course b. binder course c. bridge binder d. surface course class inum e. surface course class inum or sidewalks .
num materials .
num aggregates .
aggregates shall meet the applicable requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num filler .
filler shall meet the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num hydrated lime .
hydrated lime shall meet the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num bituminous materials .
the grade of bituminous material shall be as specified in subsection m.num of these specifications .
performance graded pg num shall be used in all nonrecycled paving mixtures including friction courses unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
asphalt cement will be conditionally accepted at the point of distribution and at the point of use on the basis of a certificate of analysis .
samples will be taken at the plant and tested by the engineer to determine specification conformance .
num composition of mixtures .
the bituminous concrete shall be composed of a mixture of aggregate filler if required and bituminous material .
the aggregate shall be sized graded and combined in such proportions that the resulting mixture meets the grading requirements of the job mix formula .
num the contractor annually shall submit for the engineers approval a job mix formula including aggregate sources and mixing temperature for each mixture to be supplied by each plant .
the job mix formula with the allowable tolerances shall be within the master ranges specified in subsection m.num for the particular type of bituminous concrete .
the job mix formula for each mixture shall be in effect until the engineer is notified in writing of any modifica tions and approves the new mix .
the job mix formula for each mixture shall establish a single percentage of aggregate passing each required sieve size and a single temperature at which the mixture is to be delivered at the point of discharge .
a .
determination of optimum asphalt cement content for asphaltic concrete mixtures .
the contractor shall be responsible for the complete laboratory design of all asphalt concrete mixtures .
the aggregate and the job mix formulas used in all design procedures shall be those approved for the mixture .
b .
mix design procedures .
the procedures of the asphalt institute publication mix design methods for asphalt concrete and other hotmix types msnum marshall method of mix design latest edition shall be followed in the preparation and testing of the specimens and determination of the optimum asphalt content with the following exceptions num .
equivalent aashto test methods shall be substituted for all astm test methods referenced in msnum .
num .
the mixing temperature and number of blows applied to each side of each specimen shall be as specified in the table of subsection m.num bituminous concrete pavements of these specifications .
num .
for the voids analysis the theoretical maximum specific gravity shall be determined at each asphalt content .
samples of the minimum size specified in aashto tnum shall be submitted at each asphalt content .
num .
the data shall include a plot of voids filled with asphalt vs. asphalt content .
num .
all mix designs submitted shall include an ignition furnace calibration factor .
num .
at the optimum asphalt content the properties of the mix shall satisfy all specified requirements including those specified in the table of subsection m.num bituminous concrete pavements of these specifications .
all design data and calculations shall be signed by a registered professional engineer and must be submitted to the materials section no later than two weeks before production of that mixture is scheduled to begin .
no mixture may be produced for state projects until the mix design is approved by the engineer .
c. job mix tolerances .
after the job mix formula and optimum asphalt content are established all bituminous mixtures produced shall conform to the following range of tolerances and the master ranges specified in table m.num passing no .
num and larger sieves plus or minus num percent passing no .
num to no .
num sieves plus or minus num percent num passing no .
num sieve plus or minus num percent asphalt content plus or minus num percent temperature of mixture plus or minus numof should a change in sources of materials be made a new mix design shall be established before the new material is used .
when unsatisfactory results or other conditions make it necessary the contractor shall establish a new mix design and submit it to the engineer for approval .
the aggregate will be accepted on the basis of its source and quality in stockpile at the plant site .
the plant mixed material will be accepted after blending and mixing at the plant .
final acceptance will be based on satisfactory quality of material after placement providing that it meets all contract requirements .
num quality control .
a .
process control .
the contractor shall exercise process control over all production operations .
this will entail the constant monitoring of equipment materials and production activity to insure that bituminous mixtures meet all applicable requirements and are produced within the allowable tolerances .
the contractor shall be responsible for conducting any tests and making any analysis necessary to make certain that all mixtures are produced within the limits of the specifications .
the contractor has the option of using the acceptance test results as part of its process control .
b .
acceptance testing .
acceptance testing will be conducted in the plant field laboratory by the engineer .
the results of an acceptance test are satisfactory only when all specification requirements are met .
neither the asphalt content nor the percent passing any sieve may vary from the mix design by more than the specified job mix tolerance .
the engineer will notify the contractor of any unsatisfactory acceptance test result .
another acceptance test will be performed as soon as it is possible to sample mix produced after the contractor has been given sufficient time to take corrective action .
in no case will this be longer than the maximum prescribed acceptance testing interval .
the contractor shall cease production and delivery of any class of mix for the following reasons num .
the asphalt content or the percent passing any individual sieve varies from the mix design by more than twice the specified job mix tolerance in any single acceptance test .
num .
either the asphalt content or the aggregate gradation exceeds the job mix tolerance on both of two consecutive acceptance tests on the same class of mix .
num .
the results of three acceptance tests within a numhour period on the same class of mix are unsatisfactory for any reason or combination of reasons .
num num .
production of that class of mix will be allowed to resume on that day or on any succeeding day only after completion of a successful trial batch and it has been demonstrated to the satisfaction of the engineer that material can be produced consistently and within specification .
failure to meet requirements will be cause for rejection by the engineer of the non conforming material produced .
c. independent assurance testing .
this testing shall be performed by the department in accordance with the rhode island department of transportation publication for the project entitled schedule for sampling testing and certification of materials .
num construction methods .
num bituminous mixing plant .
mixing plants shall be of sufficient capacity and coordinated to adequately handle the proposed production of bituminous materials .
the storage yard shall be maintained neat and orderly and the separate stockpiles shall be readily accessible for sampling .
plants producing bituminous concrete for state of rhode island paving projects including new construction resurfacing and maintenance shall conform to the following requirements a .
requirements for all plants .
num .
equipment for preparation of bituminous material .
tanks provided for the storage of bituminous material shall be equipped to heat and hold the material at the required tempera tures .
the heating shall be accomplished by steam coils electricity or other approved means such that no flame shall be in contact with the tank .
the circulating system for the bituminous material shall be designed to assure proper and continuous circulation during the operating period .
provision shall be made for measuring storage tanks .
an adequate sampling valve shall be provided to insure the safe and proper sampling of the liquid asphalt .
num .
cold feed bins .
the plant shall include no fewer than three num storage bins of sufficient capacity to supply the mixer when it is operating at full capacity .
bins shall be arranged to assure separate and adequate storage of appropriate fractions of the mineral aggregates .
they shall also be so constructed that samples can be readily obtained .
separate dry storage shall be provided for filler or hydrated lime when used and the plant shall be equipped to feed such material into the mixer .
num .
cold aggregate feeder .
the plant shall be provided with accurate mechanical means for uniformly feeding the aggregate into the drier so that uniform production and temperature will be obtained .
num .
drier .
the plant shall include a drier or driers which continuously agitate the aggregate during the heating and drying process .
num .
bituminous control unit .
satisfactory means either by weighing or metering shall be provided to obtain the proper amount of bituminous material in the mix within the tolerance num specified .
means shall be provided for checking the quantity or rate of flow of bituminous material into the mixer .
num .
thermometric equipment .
an armored thermometer of adequate range in temperature reading shall be fixed in the bituminous feed line at a suitable location near the charging valve at the mixer unit .
the plant shall also be equipped with either an approved dialscale mercuryactuated thermometer an electric pyrometer or other approved thermometric instrument so placed at the discharge chute of the drier as to register automatically the temperature of the exiting material .
the engineer may require replacement of any malfunctioning or inconsistent thermometer by an approved temperature sensing and recording apparatus for better regulation of the temperature of the material .
num .
dust collector .
the plant shall be equipped with a dust collector constructed to waste or return uniformly all or any part of the material collected as directed .
num .
truck scales .
when required the bituminous mixture shall be weighed on approved scales furnished by the contractor or on public scales at the contractors expense .
such scales shall be tested at least every num days or whenever the engineer deems necessary to assure their accuracy .
num .
scales .
scales shall be so located as to be easily readable from the operators normal work station otherwise a remote readout shall be supplied .
all plant scales including truck scales shall be certified at the expense of the contractor by a competent and experienced scales technician as follows a annually prior to use in state work .
b at intervals of not more than num calendar days .
c at any time ordered by the engineer .
num .
safety requirements .
adequate and safe stairways to sampling points shall be provided .
guarded ladders to other plant units shall be placed at all points where accessibility to plant operations is required .
accessibility to the top of truck bodies shall be provided by a platform or other suitable device placed in an acceptable location near the testing laboratory to enable the engineer to obtain samples and mixture temperature data .
all gears pulleys chains sprockets and other dangerous moving parts shall be thoroughly guarded and protected .
a clear and unobstructed passage shall be maintained at all times in and around the truck loading area .
this area shall be kept free from drippings .
num .
hot bituminous mixture holding bin .
hot bituminous mixtures may be stored in holding bins especially designed for that purpose .
each holding bin must meet the requirements of aashto mnum unless otherwise permitted by the engineer and will be inspected by the department to determine acceptance at specific holding times .
num acceptance shall be based upon the ability of the holding bin to hold and discharge mixtures within the quality criteria specified by the mix design and these specifications .
b .
requirements for batching plants .
num .
automatic proportioning .
the plant shall be equipped with automatic proportioning devices .
such devices shall include equipment for accurately proportioning the various components of the mixture by weight in the proper sequence .
bitumen and aggregates shall be proportioned by weight .
additives if required may be proportioned by volume or weight .
the plant shall be equipped to automatically control the sequence and timing of mixing operations .
there shall be auxiliary interlock cutoff circuits to interrupt and stop the automatic cycling of the batching operations at any time an error in weighing occurs when an aggregate bin becomes empty or when there is a malfunction of any portion of the control system .
num .
recording equipment .
the plant shall be equipped with a digital recorder which will automatically print the following data on delivery tickets a batch weights of each size aggregate .
weights printed may be individual or cumulative .
b total weight of aggregates in batch .
the weight printed for the last aggregate batched shall be the total weight of aggregates in the batch when cumulative weights are used .
c weight of bitumen in batch .
d weight of total batch .
e total weight of batches in truck .
f total weight of bitumen in all batches in truck .
g date mixed .
h the time each batch or load began or the time each was completed .
when silos are utilized the requirements for delivery tickets shall conform to para .
c requirements for drum dryer mixing plants of this subsection .
in addition automated batch plant printout tickets generated in accordance with para .
b of this subsection shall be given to the plant inspector and maintained on file .
there shall be sufficient copies of delivery tickets to provide a copy for the plant inspector and a copy for the resident engineer for permanent project record .
the following information shall also be included on delivery slips i name of customer .
j name of project and contract number .
k name of trucker and truck number .
num l mixture .
m additives .
num .
equipment failure .
if at any time the automatic proportioning or recording devices become inoperable the plant may be allowed to batch and mix bituminous materials for a period of not more than num hours from the time of the breakdown if approved by the engineer .
written permission of the engineer will be required for periods of operation without automatic proportioning facilities longer than num hours .
num .
screens .
plant screens capable of screening all aggregates to the specified sizes and proportions and having normal capacities in excess of the full capacity of the mixer shall be provided .
num .
hot aggregate bins .
hot bin storage of sufficient capacity to insure uniform and continuous operation shall be provided .
the bins shall be arranged to insure separate and adequate storage of appropriate fractions of the aggregate .
each bin shall be provided with overflow pipes of such size and at such locations as to prevent backing up of material into other compartments or bins .
each bin shall be provided with its individual outlet gate constructed so that when closed there shall be no leakage .
the gates shall cut off quickly and completely .
bins shall be equipped with adequate telltale devices to indicate the position of the aggregates in the bins at the lower quarter points .
adequate and convenient facilities shall be provided for obtaining aggregate samples from each hot bin .
num .
aggregate scales .
scales for any weigh box or hopper shall be of the springless dial type having a full complement of index pointers and shall be of a standard make and design .
they shall be accurate to num percent have minimum graduations not greater than num percent and shall be readable and sensitive to num percent or less .
the preceding percentages are based on total batch weight .
num .
batching controls .
batching controls shall be electrically interlocked with the scales to prevent cycling or recycling of batching until scales tare zero .
the batching controls shall meet the following tolerances with respect to the various components weighed in each batch combined aggregate components num percent of total batch weight asphalt num percent of total batch weight the total weight of the batch shall not vary more than plus or minus num percent from the theoretical design weight .
num .
time locking device .
the mixer shall have an accurate time locking device to control the operation of a complete mixing cycle by locking the weigh box gate after charging the mixer until the closing of the mixer discharge gate at the completion of the cycle .
it shall lock the bituminous material feed throughout the dry mixing period and shall lock the mixer discharge gate throughout the dry and wet mixing periods .
the dry mixing period is defined as the interval of num time between the opening of the weigh box gate and the commencement of application of the bituminous material .
the wet mixing period is the interval of time between the commencement of application of the bituminous material and the opening of the mixer discharge gate .
the control of the timing shall be flexible and capable of being set at intervals of not more than five seconds throughout the cycles up to three minutes .
changes in mixing time shall be made only when ordered by the engineer .
num .
weigh box or hopper .
the equipment shall include a means for accurately weighing each size of aggregate in a weigh box or hopper suspended on scales and of ample size to hold a full batch without hand raking or running over .
the gate shall close tightly so that no material is allowed to leak into the mixer while a batch is being weighed .
num .
bituminous control .
the equipment used to measure the bituminous material shall be accurate to plus or minus num percent .
the bituminous material bucket shall be a nontilting type with a loose sheet metal cover .
the length of the discharge opening trough bucket or spray bar shall be not less than threefourths the length of the mixer and it shall discharge directly into the mixer .
the bituminous material bucket its discharge valve or valves and spray bar shall be adequately heated .
steam jackets if used shall be efficiently drained and all connections shall be so constructed that they will not interfere with the efficient operation of the bituminous scales .
the capacity of the bituminous material bucket shall be at least num percent in excess of the weight of bituminous material required in any batch .
the plant shall have an adequately heated quickacting nondrip charging valve located directly over the bituminous material bucket .
the indicator dial shall have a capacity of at least num percent in excess of the quantity of bituminous material used in a batch .
the controls shall be constructed so that they may be locked at any dial setting and will automatically reset to that reading after the addition of bituminous material to each batch .
the dial shall be in full view of the mixer operator .
the flow of bituminous material shall be automatically controlled so that it will begin when the dry mixing period is over .
all of the bituminous material required for one batch shall be discharged in not more than num seconds after the flow has started .
the size and spacing of the spray bar openings trough or asphalt bucket shall provide a uniform application of bituminous material the full length of the mixer .
the section of the bituminous line between the charging valve and the spray bar shall be provided with a valve and outlet for checking the meter when a metering device is substituted for a bituminous material bucket .
num .
mixer .
the batch mixer shall be capable of producing a uniform mixture within the job mix tolerances .
if not enclosed the mixer box shall be equipped with a dust hood to prevent loss of dust .
the clearance of blades from all fixed and moving parts shall not exceed one inch unless the maximum diameter of the aggregate in the mix exceeds num¼inches in which case the clearance shall not exceed num½inches .
num .
access to the mixer platform shall be by adequate and safe stairways .
a hoist or pulley system shall be provided to raise scale calibration equipment sampling equipment and other similar equipment from the ground to the mixer platform and return .
there shall be adequate and unobstructed space on the mixer platform .
num c. requirements for drum dryer mixing plants .
num .
proportioning .
aggregates and asphalt shall be proportioned by dry weight of the aggregate .
additives if required may be proportioned by volume or weight .
the cold aggregate feeder shall be synchronized with the asphalt delivery system .
satisfactory means shall be provided to assure positive interlocking control between each cold bin the cold aggregate feeder and the asphalt delivery system .
this interlocking control shall be such that production is interrupted if one or more cold bins becomes empty or the flow of either aggregate or asphalt is obstructed .
num .
recording equipment .
the plant shall be equipped with a digital recording device approved by the engineer by which the proportion of aggregate supplied by each cold bin the flow rates by weight of dry aggregate and of asphalt and the cumulative weights of dry aggregate and of asphalt incorporated in the mix are automatically printed .
these printed records showing the date and time of printing shall be provided to the engineer at the start and at the end of each production period and at any other times or intervals of time as requested .
the plant shall also have a computerized scale system consisting of a weight batcher andor a truck scale .
delivery tickets shall be printed on an automatic digital recorder which will print the following information on delivery tickets a date loaded .
b net weight of mixture in truck .
when a truck scale is used the net weight of the mixture shall be automatically calculated by weighing the truck both empty and full .
c time of each load .
there shall be sufficient copies of delivery tickets to provide a copy for the plant inspector and a copy for the resident engineer for permanent project record .
the following information shall also be included on delivery slips a name of customer .
b name of project and contract number .
c truck identification .
d type of mixture .
e additives .
num .
equipment failure .
if at any time the automatic recording device or the computerized scale system become inoperable the plant may be allowed to produce bituminous materials for a period of not more than num hours from the time of the breakdown if approved by the engineer .
approval will not be granted unless a satisfactory arrangement is made by the contractor to weigh the mix .
written permission of the engineer will be required for periods of operation longer than num hours during which any required automatic system is not functioning properly .
num num .
aggregate storage .
sufficient storage space shall be provided for each stockpile of various sized aggregates which shall be kept separated until they have been introduced into the cold bins that feed the drier .
a minimum of four cold feed bins shall be required .
num .
cold feed system .
the plant shall have a device at each cold bin to feed the aggregate accurately and uniformly .
no gravity type feeders will be permitted .
each adjustment opening shall be provided with indicators graduated to allow proportioning .
each cold bin gate shall be interlocked in such a manner that production is interrupted if one or more cold bins becomes empty or the flow is obstructed .
a mineral filler bin when required shall be added to the standard plant cold feed bins and shall feed the mineral filler at adjustable rates accurately and uniformly .
the feeder shall be inter locked so that production is interrupted if the bin becomes empty or the flow is obstructed .
the weighing equipment for all aggregates including mineral filler shall consist of a contin uous weighing device either as it is proportioned by the individual feeders or after all materials have been deposited on a common belt .
belt scales shall meet the requirements of n.b.s .
handbook num and shall be installed according to the scale manufacturers recommendations .
the plant shall have an adjustable feed rate control for each aggregate cold bin feeder and mineral filler feeder .
the plant shall proportion the total aggregate quantity to the drum mixer with such accuracy and uniformity that the variation of material per interval of time shall not exceed an amount equal to num percent of the total weight of bituminous mixture per interval of time .
an automatic aggregate sampling device shall be provided which will divert a representa tive combined aggregate sample including mineral filler into a hopper or container for the purpose of gradation testing .
the container shall cut the full width and depth of the aggregate flow .
the sampling point shall be after the aggregate is proportioned and prior to its mixing with bitumen .
num .
bituminous control unit .
the asphalt shall be proportioned by a meter accurate to num percent .
a flow switch designed to interrupt production if the asphalt flow is discontinued shall be installed in the delivery line between the meter and the mixer .
the asphalt delivery system shall be coupled with the aggregate delivery system to automatically maintain the required proportions as the aggregate flow varies .
the delivery tolerance for asphalt shall be num percent of the total mixture weight .
num .
plant calibration .
the cold feed and asphalt delivery systems shall be calibrated to insure that the plant is operating within the allowable tolerances .
a procedure acceptable to the engineer and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations shall be followed .
these calibrations shall be performed prior to the start of each paving season and at any other time as directed by the engineer .
num .
mixer unit .
the plant shall include a continuous mixer unit having an automatic burner control and capable of producing a uniform mixture within the job mix tolerances .
the mixture shall be discharged into a hot bituminous mixture holding bin meeting the requirements of para .
a.num of this subsection .
num the moisture content of the mixture upon discharge from the mixer shall not exceed num percent by weight .
num hauling equipment .
trucks or other equipment used for hauling bituminous mixtures shall have tight clean smooth metal beds which have been thinly coated with an approved release agent .
no diesel fuel or other material is to be applied to any portion of the vehicle that comes into contact with the bituminous material .
any hauling equipment not complying with these specifications shall be immediately rejected along with its load of bituminous material .
each truck shall have a cover of canvas or other suitable material of such size as to protect the mixture from the weather .
truck beds shall be securely covered and if necessary insulated to assure delivery of the mixture at the specified temperature .
num pavers .
unless otherwise shown on the plans mixtures shall be spread by means of a mechanical selfpowered paver capable of spreading the mixture true to line grade and crown set by the engineer .
bituminous pavers shall be selfcontained powerpropelled units provided with activated vibratory screed and solid vibratory screed extenders and capable of spreading and finishing courses of bituminous plant mixed material in lane widths applicable to the specified typical section and thickness shown on the plans .
pavers used for shoulders and similar construction shall be capable of spreading and finishing courses of bituminous concrete material in the widths depths and cross slopes indicated on the plans .
when laying mixtures the paver shall be capable of being operated at forward speeds consistent with satisfactory laying of the mixture .
the paver shall be equipped with a receiving hopper having sufficient capacity for a uniform spreading operation .
the hopper shall be equipped with a distribution system to place the mixture uniformly in front of the screed .
a. screeding .
the screed and screed extenders shall vibrate while placing the mixture and shall effectively produce a finished surface of the required evenness and texture without tearing shoving or gouging the mixture .
the screed and screed extenders shall be heated if necessary to maintain the bituminous mixture at the required placement temperature .
the paver shall be equipped with automatic screed controls with sensors for either or both sides of the paver capable of sensing grade from an outside reference line sensing the trans verse slope of the screed and providing the automatic signals which operate the screed to maintain the desired grade and transverse slope .
the sensor shall be capable of operating from a skitype device of not less than num feet in length .
the sensor shall also have the capability of operating from a reference line unless the skitype device can ride on an adjacent newly placed lift of bituminous concrete .
a reference line shall also be used for the first course placed over in place recycled material .
reference lines for the control of horizontal alignment shall be provided by the contractor subject to the approval of the engineer .
when a reference line is used for automatic grade control the contractor shall furnish and install all pins brackets tensioning devices wire and accessories necessary for satisfactory operation of the automatic control equipment using a taut stringline set to grade for reference .
num the transverse slope controller shall be capable of maintaining the screed at the desired slope within plus or minus num percent .
the paver shall be equipped with automatic feeder controls properly adjusted to maintain a uniform depth of materials ahead of the screed .
b. manual operation .
manual operation will be permitted in the construction of irregularly shaped and minor areas on plant mixed seal courses or where otherwise directed .
whenever a breakdown or malfunction of the automatic controls occurs the equipment may be operated manually or by other methods for the remainder of the normal working day on which the breakdown or malfunction occurred provided this method of operation will produce results otherwise meeting project requirements .
num rollers .
static or vibratory steel wheel rollers or pneumatic tire rollers shall be employed .
they shall be in good condition capable of reversing without backlash and shall be operated at speeds slow enough to avoid displacement of the bituminous mixture .
however in no case shall such rollers be operated at speeds in excess of five miles per hour .
vibratory rollers shall have separate controls for energy and propulsion and shall be acceptable for bituminous mixture compaction .
one roller used for compaction shall be equipped with an infrared thermometer with remote sensor that will continuously indicate the temperature of the pavement and be visible to the operator during the rolling process .
num conditioning of existing surfaces .
surfaces of curbs gutters vertical faces of existing pavements and all structures to be in contact with the bituminous mixture shall be given a thin even coating of bituminous material .
care shall be taken to avoid the splattering of surfaces which will not be in contact with the bituminous mixture .
when a tack coat is required the type and grade of bituminous material and the application methods shall conform to the applicable provisions of both section m.num materials and section num asphalt emulsion tack coat of these specifications .
after a tack coat is applied no bituminous mix shall be placed on it until the emulsion has broken .
the tack coat shall be applied only as far in advance of the placing of mix as is necessary to obtain the proper condition of tackiness .
num preparation of bituminous material .
the bituminous material shall be heated to the specified temperature in a manner that will avoid local overheating and provide a continuous supply of the bituminous material to the mixer at a uniform temperature at all times .
num preparation of aggregates .
the aggregates for the mixture shall be dried and heated to the required temperature .
flames used for drying and heating shall be properly adjusted to avoid damage to the aggregate and to avoid soot on the aggregate .
in batch type plants immediately after heating and drying the aggregates shall be screened into two or more fractions as necessary and conveyed into separate compartments ready for batching and mixing with bituminous material .
num mixing .
the dried aggregates shall be combined in the mixer in the amount of each fraction of aggregates required to meet the job mix formula .
the bituminous material shall be num measured or gauged and introduced into the mixer in the amount specified by the job mix formula .
in batch type plants the aggregates shall be mixed dry for a period of five num seconds the asphalt cement shall then be added and mixing continued for a minimum total time of forty five num seconds or as directed or established by the engineer .
the temperature of the mixture shall be that established and approved by the job mix formula .
the measurement of the mixing temperature shall be made as soon as possible after completion of the mixing cycle .
num spreading and finishing .
the mixture shall be laid upon an approved cleaned surface spread and struck off to the grade and elevation established .
bituminous pavers shall be used to distribute the mixture either over the entire width or over such partial width as may be practicable .
the practices and guidelines for placing hot mix asphalt as outlined in asphalt institute publication msnum construction of hot mix asphalt pavements shall be adhered to unless otherwise permitted by the engineer .
the maximum compacted lift thickness shall be num inches for surface courses and num inches for any other courses .
excessive and unnecessary walking on the uncompacted bituminous mat shall not be allowed .
before beginning a new lane the screed shall be heated to the proper operating temperature and any clumps of cold material in the paver hopper shall be removed .
no trucks or other equipment shall be allowed on freshly placed bituminous pavement unless specifically permitted by the engineer .
on areas where irregularities or unavoidable obstacles make the use of mechanical spreading and finishing equipment impracticable the mixture shall be placed as close to its final position as possible .
it shall then be spread raked and luted by hand tools in a manner which will minimize segregation and result in the required compacted thickness .
unless otherwise directed by the engineer any layer of bituminous pavement i.e .
surface binder or base course called for on side streets or driveways must be placed to a distance of at least three feet beyond the gutter line at the same time that layer is being placed on the adjacent project roadway .
the practice of placing pavement on side streets after the main roadway has been paved results in cold joints at the gutter line and therefore such practice is not acceptable .
a. bituminous overlay bridge binder .
when a bridge binder course is being placed on a surface which is covered with a waterproofing membrane the following precautions should be observed num .
no traffic other than paving equipment should be allowed on the membrane .
num num .
the paver must be moved carefully on and off the membrane .
initial proper adjustment of the paver to the correct depth is very important to prevent tearing the membrane .
the contractor shall be responsible for making any repairs to the membrane or to the asphalt concrete overlay necessary to correct damage caused by the paving operation all at its expense .
num .
any and all tears of the membrane by the paver or trucks should be repaired immediately .
vehicle tires shall be clean of any rocks or materials that would puncture the membrane .
num .
the paving trucks are not to be pushed with the paver .
num .
truck drivers shall not make quick stops and starts nor turn the wheels while parked nor cross the deck at an angle .
num compaction .
immediately after the bituminous mixture has been spread struck off and surface irregularities adjusted it shall be thoroughly and uniformly compacted by rolling .
the surface shall be rolled when the mixture is in the proper condition and when rolling does not cause undue displacement cracking and shoving .
two rollers shall be required for all paving operations that exceed a daily total of num tons except in the case of driveway sidewalk and bridge deck paving operations .
the number weight and type of rollers shall be sufficient to compact the mixture to the required density before it reaches the minimum compaction temperature .
vibratory rollers used for compaction shall be operated in the vibratory mode .
all rollers used for compaction shall have a manufacturers rating of ten tons or greater .
the use of equipment which results in excessive crushing of the aggregate will not be permitted .
the sequence of rolling operations and the selection of roller types shall be such as to obtain the required density .
unless otherwise specified the minimum acceptable density shall be num percent of the corresponding daily plant marshall density aashto tnum .
density measurements shall be made with a nuclear density gauge .
in the event of a dispute as to the credibility of the results the density shall be determined from cores taken from the pavement .
the rolling of a bridge binder course shall begin when the temperature of the mat is not more than numof .
the ideal temperature for initial compaction of all other types of hot mix is numof .
final compaction shall be completed before the temperature of the mat drops below numof .
the typical time that shall elapse between spreading and completion of the rolling process shall not normally exceed fifteen minutes .
this time limit may be modified by the engineer depending on temperature conditions but under no circumstances will rolling be allowed when the temperature of the material is less than numof .
the speed of a static weight steel wheel roller pneumatic tire roller or vibratory roller shall not exceed five miles per hour .
num rollers shall not be temporarily parked on hot mix .
when reversing direction the action should be smooth not abrupt .
the drive wheel should approach the new mix not the tiller wheel .
when a vibratory roller is used for finish rolling it shall be used in the static mode .
finish rolling shall continue until all roller marks are eliminated .
unless otherwise directed rolling shall start longitudinally at the sides and gradually progress toward the center of the pavement except on superelevated curves where the rolling shall begin on the low side and progress to the high side overlapping on successive trips by at least onehalf the width of tandem rollers and uniformly lapping each preceding track .
the motion of the rollers shall be slow enough at all times to avoid displacement of the hot mixture and any displacement resulting from reversing the direction of the rollers or from any other cause shall be satisfactorily corrected .
the wheels of steelwheel rollers shall be kept moist and clean to prevent adhesion of the fresh material but an excess of water will not be permitted .
if satisfactory density can not be obtained in any lift and if the engineer determines it to be structurally inadequate andor incapable of maintaining material integrity the contractor shall be required to remove and replace any such area at its own expense .
any mixture that becomes loose and broken mixed with dirt or is in any way defective shall be removed and replaced with fresh hot mixture which shall then be compacted to conform with the surrounding area .
any area showing an excess or deficiency of bituminous material shall be removed and replaced .
num joints .
placing of the bituminous paving shall be as continuous as possible .
rollers shall not pass over the unprotected end of a freshly laid mixture unless authorized by the engineer .
longitudinal and transverse joints shall be made in a careful manner .
well bonded and sealed joints are required .
both longitudinal and transverse joints in successive courses shall be staggered so as not to be one above the other .
longitudinal joints shall be staggered a minimum of num inches and shall be arranged so that the longitudinal joint in the top course being constructed shall be at the location of the line dividing the traffic lanes .
joints between old and new pavements or between successive days work shall be carefully made in such a manner as to insure a thorough and continuous bond between the old and new surfaces .
the edge of the old pavement or previously placed new pavement shall be cut back a sufficient distance to expose a fresh full thickness vertical face .
to obtain a well bonded joint this face shall be brushpainted or pressure sprayed with a bituminous tack coat after which the hot bituminous mixture shall be placed in contact with it .
any bituminous material that falls on the cold side of the mat during paving operations shall be raked onto the hot joint .
care shall be taken to insure that the material pushed onto the hot side of the joint remains in the joint area and is not broadcast over the pavement .
the edge of a newly placed pavement that has not been opened to traffic need not be cut back but will require tack coat .
immediately after compaction the surface tolerance adjacent to each transverse cold joint shall be tested by placing an approved numfoot straightedge perpendicular to the cold joint such that the midpoint of the straightedge rests on the cold joint .
the variation of the surface from the num testing edge of the straightedge at any point between contacts with the surface shall not exceed numinch .
num pavement samples .
when specified the contractor shall cut samples from the compacted pavement for testing by the engineer .
samples of the mixture shall be taken for the full depth of the course at the locations directed by the engineer .
where samples have been taken new material shall be placed and compacted to conform with the surrounding area .
num surface tolerances .
the surface will be tested by the engineer at selected locations using an approved numfoot straightedge furnished by the contractor .
the variation of the surface from the testing edge of the straightedge between any two contacts with the surface shall at no point exceed numinch .
all humps or depressions exceeding the specified tolerance shall be corrected by removing defective work and replacing it with new material as directed .
num thickness requirements .
the thickness of a pavement shall be that as shown on the plans and shall not vary from the specified thickness by more than that specified in subsection num below except as otherwise provided for in resurfacing existing pavements .
num weather limitations .
bituminous concrete shall not be placed on any wet surface or when weather conditions otherwise prevent the proper handling or finishing of the bituminous mixtures .
a .
restrictions .
bituminous concrete paving may not be placed under any of the following conditions num .
when the underlying layer contains frozen moisture .
num .
when the temperature of the underlying layer in the shade and away from any source of heat is below numof .
num .
when the temperature of the underlying layer in the shade and away from any source of heat is below numof and the thickness of the lift to be placed is num½ inches or less .
b. compaction .
rollers shall follow pavers as close as possible to provide the specified compaction .
should additional rollers be required they will be provided in a timely manner .
specification density shall be achieved before the mix temperature drops below numof .
num cold weather paving .
if the existing pavement is removed before the winter shutdown the contractor shall not close the project for the season until a new bituminous binder course has been placed and striped with temporary pavement markings .
num dropoffs .
a. longitudinal dropoffs .
a longitudinal dropoff occurs along the outside edges of pavement and is the difference in elevation between the top of recently placed bituminous pavement and the top of existing ground or pavement .
num num .
for posted speeds of num mph or less .
dropoffs greater than num inches but less than num inches shall be tapered to a maximum numtonum slope to existing ground or pavement .
drop offs num inches or greater shall be tapered to a maximum numtonum horizontal to vertical slope to existing ground or pavement .
num .
for posted speeds greater than num mph .
longitudinal dropoffs will not be permitted within num feet of a travel lane .
the first num feet adjacent to a travel lane must be at grade with the travel lane .
however should either the sequence of operation required by the contract or the contractors approved sequence of operation result in overnight dropoffs greater than num inches occurring between num and num feet from the edge of a travel lane then such dropoffs shall be tapered to a numtonum horizontal to vertical slope to existing ground or pavement .
all tapers shall be constructed with hot mix asphalt conforming to the requirements of this section num of these specifications .
longitudinal dropoffs within the roadway cross section will not be allowed except as otherwise detailed on the plans or as described in a special provision .
longitudinal dropoffs will not be paid for separately but will be included in the contract unit price for bituminous pavements as listed in the proposal .
b. transverse dropoffs .
transverse dropoffs occur as follows pavement removal .
a transverse dropoff occurs when pavement removal operations cease at the end of a working day .
the dropoff is the difference in elevation between the bottom of the excavated pavement and the top of the existing pavement .
pavement overlay .
a transverse dropoff occurs when pavement overlay operations cease at the end of a working day .
the dropoff is the difference in elevation between the top of the overlay pavement and the top of the existing pavement .
in each case at the end of a working day either the pavement removal operations or the pavement overlay operation must be left in a squaredoff condition or approximately perpendicular to the direction of traffic .
if traffic is allowed across either of these dropoffs during the period prior to the resumption of pavement removal or pavement overlay operations tapers must be provided as follows num .
for posted speeds of num mph or less .
transverse dropoffs in place at the end of a working day shall be graded at a slope of num feet horizontal to num inch vertical .
num .
for posted speeds greater than num mph .
transverse dropoffs in place at the end of a working day shall be graded at a slope of num feet horizontal to num inch vertical .
all slopes shall be constructed with hot mix asphalt conforming to the requirements of section num of these specifications .
the contractor shall place one wnum num x num bump sign at each dropoff for each direction of traffic .
num prior to the resumption of pavement overlay operations the transition slope shall be removed as follows the pavement overlay shall be saw cut back approximately num inches to expose a fresh full thickness vertical face .
this face shall be brushpainted or pressure sprayed with bituminous tack coat after which the bituminous paving may resume .
transverse dropoffs will not be paid for separately but will be included in the contract unit prices for bituminous pavements as listed in the proposal .
num method of measurement .
num measurement of bituminous concrete pavement .
bituminous concrete pavements will be measured by the number of tons actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
as an alternative batch weights may be used for measurement so long as the automatic proportioning and recording equipment provisions of subsection num bituminous mixing plants are satisfied .
in such case the cumulative weight of all the batches will be used for payment .
a .
determination of thickness .
the thickness of each course as well as of the total asphalt concrete pavement shall be that indicated on the plans or as ordered by the engineer .
prior to the determination of thickness the roadway shall exhibit acceptable workmanship and all defects shall have been corrected .
the thickness of the total asphalt concrete pavement will be determined by cutting or coring holes to full depth .
at least two cores will be taken from each lane mile except that there will be a minimum of ten cores per project all at the discretion of the engineer .
cores will be measured in accordance with astm dnum standard test method for thickness or height of compacted bituminous paving mixture specimens .
the depth measurement will be considered as applying for the full width of the lane .
measurements will be made at random locations determined by the engineer and all information relative thereto will be recorded in the project records .
for the determination of thickness a shoulder width of six feet or greater will be considered to be a separate lane of the roadway .
a shoulder width of less than six feet will be considered part of the adjacent lane .
the contractor shall fill any holes cut or cored in the pavement by the department with a compacted dense bituminous hot mix material which is acceptable to the engineer .
if required by the engineer the contractor shall maintain and control traffic while the pavement samples are being taken and while the holes are being filled and compacted .
payment will be made for the applicable traffic control items .
b .
adjustment of tonnage quantity .
the following definitions shall apply num .
bituminous base course .
base course shall be as indicated on the plans .
num .
surface course .
the surface course shall consist of bituminous concrete constructed on a prepared base in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines grades thickness and typical cross sections shown on the plans .
for these measurements the binder course shall be considered part of the surface course .
the pavement thickness will be considered acceptable if both of the following requirements are met num a the total asphalt concrete tonnage delivered and placed does not exceed the tonnage calculated from the approved area measured from the final surface course width by the project length and the pavement thickness specified in the contract documents by more than num percent .
and b when specification conformity analysis federal highway administration technical advisory tnum dated june num num is applied to the entire roadway or sections thereof as determined by the engineer at least num percent of the total asphalt concrete pavement will have a thickness that meets the minimum pavement thickness .
the minimum pavement thickness is that contained in the contract documents minus ½inch e.g .
a total pavement thickness of num inches will have a minimum pavement thickness requirement of num inches .
if the first requirement is not met no payment will be made for all tonnage exceeding num percent unless unusual field conditions are present and documented e.g .
pavement rutting .
if the second requirement indicates that the pavement thickness is deficient the contractor with permission of the engineer shall place a correction course not less than one inch in depth after compaction provided an acceptable grade and cross section can be achieved .
where an acceptable grade and cross section can not be achieved through the above means the contractor shall reconstruct by cutting back and into the pavement a sufficient distance to permit the placement of an acceptable depth and place new material to achieve the proper depth cross section and profile .
these areas where a corrective course is placed or reconstruction of the pavement is performed will be measured again as though originally constructed no compensa tion will be made to the contractor for the material removed or removal of materials and disposal thereof or for restoration of affected supporting base or adjacent construction or for traffic control adjusting all utility appurtenances in the roadway or for correcting pavement striping .
compensa tion will be made for the additional pavement class inum correction course accepted in place .
determination of the quantity to be used for adjusted payment or exclusion for payment will be based on tons per square yard per inch thickness as determined by marshall core aashto tnum densities using the accepted job mix formula .
sweeping and cleaning as included in the items covered by this section refers to the normal removal of dust debris etc .
only .
any sweeping and cleaning necessary due to construction being held over for the winter season in accordance with the approved construction schedule will be paid for separately .
work described in subsection num conditioning of existing surface will be paid for at the contract unit prices for the material used .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of the various types of bituminous pavements i.e .
base courses binder courses and surface courses will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per ton as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num section num friction courses num description .
this work consists of placing a friction course on prepared sound dense surfaces of bituminous concrete at the locations and to the thickness indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num specific pavements .
the specific pavements and mixes are designated by the column headings of the table that constitutes subsection m.num of these specifications .
they are a .
dense friction course b. ramp friction course num materials .
num composition .
the friction course shall consist of aggregate mixed with asphaltic cement in a bituminous hot mix plant .
num mixture .
a .
approval .
each year dense friction course is to be produced at the hot mix plant either a new mix design shall be submitted or at the discretion of the engineer the current mix design shall be verified .
b .
mix design .
the contractor shall submit a mix design for the specific pavements .
the design with the allowable tolerances shall be within the master range indicated for gradation percent asphalt marshall stability percent voids and flow all as set forth in the table that constitutes subsection m.num of these specifications for each particular friction course .
num .
mix tolerances passing numand larger sieves num percent passing no .
num to no .
num sieves num percent passing no .
num sieve num percent asphalt content num percent to num percent the mix design shall be submitted at least six weeks prior to production .
c. verification of mix design .
sufficient amounts of aggregate and asphalt cement with additives shall be submitted to the engineer at least one month prior to production for the purposes of mix design verification .
num the materials used in the mix design will be those approved for the plant at which the friction course is to be produced .
d. plant trial batches .
plant trial batches will be required at the design asphalt content .
num aggregate .
aggregate must be sound durable and of high quality which includes being resistant to polishing degradation and stripping or loss of strength when incorporated in the mix and exposed to water .
the aggregate must be from an approved source meeting the criteria stated herein a. coarse aggregate shall be either crushed ledge stone crushed granite or crushed gravel but no combination blend or mixture of these will be permitted .
it shall have at least num percent by weight crushed particles with one or more fractured faces and num percent by weight crushed particles having at least two fractured faces .
coarse aggregate shall also have a loss on abrasion of no more than num percent as tested in accordance with aashto tnum .
num .
crushed gravel is defined as the product of crushing material that is retained on the ¾inch sieve .
num .
the retained coating of coarse aggregate shall be at least num percent when tested in accordance with aashto tnum .
b .
fine aggregate shall be crushed stone screenings natural sand or a blend thereof .
no more than num percent of the fine aggregate may be natural sand .
c. aggregate stockpiles from approved sources shall be available at the plant site no later than two days prior to production for verification testing by the engineer .
num asphalt cement .
the asphalt cement shall be pg num .
it shall contain an approved silicone additive in quantities of num ounce per num gallons of asphalt cement .
to provide adequate stripping resistance the asphalt cement shall be blended with an approved antistripping compound num percent active .
the dosage level shall be as recommended by the manufacturer .
the antistripping compound shall be heat stable and capable of remaining in storage indefinitely .
num construction methods .
num general requirements .
the mixing placing and finishing of bituminous friction course shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num of these specifications together with the following exceptions and additional conditions a .
both the mixing temperature and the temperature of the friction courses at the time of placement shall be within the range of numof to numof .
b .
the plant shall operate solely for the production of this mixture and exclusively for the state of rhode island .
the unloading of silos must commence within one hour from the time loading begins and silos must be completely emptied within one hour from the time they are filled .
the use of silos for storage will not be permitted .
num c. the mixture shall be compacted to the required density with adequately ballasted static steel wheel rollers .
adequately ballasted vibratory rollers may be allowed provided they are used in the static mode .
d. the mixture shall be placed as soon as possible after completion of mixing at the plant .
it shall be placed within num minutes from the time it is loaded in the truck subject to the specified placement temperature range .
num production and placement .
when placed on a newly reconstructed surface the thickness shall be as shown on the plans with a tolerance of ¼ inch .
when used to overlay an existing roadway the thickness shall be minimum of num inch and a maximum of num¾ inches to accommodate for rut depths of up to ¾ inch on the existing pavement .
the surface on which the friction course is to be placed shall be treated with a tack coat .
tack coat must be applied uniformly over the surface of the underlying pavement .
it may be diluted up to num percent with water during the manufacturing process .
the surface shall be broom cleaned before the application of tack coat .
the application rate shall be num .num gallons per square yard .
spreading of the mixture shall be performed carefully and the operation shall be as continuous as possible .
particular attention shall be given to the joints and any irregularities shall be removed before compacting .
after placement the mixture shall be thoroughly and uniformly compacted with power rollers as directed by the engineer .
sufficient rollers shall be furnished to handle the output of the plant .
rolling shall continue until all roller marks are eliminated the surface is of uniform texture and true to grade and cross section .
when friction course is placed compaction with a static steel wheel roller shall be accomplished immediately after lay down when the temperature of the layer is numof numof .
overrolling or rolling when the material is too cool should be avoided so as not to crush the aggregate .
inplace density shall be a minimum of num percent of marshall density as determined at the plant .
density shall be attained before the temperature of the surface falls below numof .
excess concentrations of asphalt can be easily detected during paving operations .
all fat areas shall be removed immediately .
the wasted quantity as determined by the engineer shall be subtracted from the quantity shipped that day .
num weather limitations .
friction course shall not be placed on a wet or damp surface or when the temperature of the surface course in the shade is less than numof measured prior to placement .
it shall only be placed when the air temperature in the shade is at least numof and rising .
num time limitation .
friction course shall only be placed between the period of june numst to august numst .
num num method of measurement .
num dense friction course .
dense friction course will be measured by the number of tons actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num ramp friction course .
ramp friction course will be measured by the number of tons actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num ten percent limitation .
pavement thickness will be considered acceptable when placed within the tolerances specified .
the total tonnage delivered and placed shall not exceed the tonnage calculated from the approved areas measured from the final surface course width by the project length and the pavement thickness in the contract by more than num percent .
a thicker pavement may be acceptable however no payment shall be made for any quantity of asphalt concrete delivered which exceeds num percent of the final measured length times measured width times specified thickness times unit weight .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of dense friction course and ramp friction course will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per ton as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num asphalt emulsion tack coat num description .
this work consists of furnishing delivering and placing a liquid asphalt tack coat on bituminous concrete or portland cement concrete prior to the placement of a bituminous concrete overlay all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
the asphalt emulsion shall be ssnum ssnumh cssnum or cssnumh .
num construction methods .
num equipment .
application of the asphalt emulsion tack coat shall be by means of a pressure distributor capable of producing a uniform continuous fine spray through multiple nozzles resulting in a uniform continuous coat of asphalt emulsion over the section to be treated .
any puddles of tack coat must be squeegeed or broomed out .
num application of bituminous material .
a .
application rates .
the asphalt emulsion shall be applied at the following rates over the entire area to be overlayed num num .
old pavement .
the application rate shall be num gallons per square yard plusor minus num gallons per square yard .
num .
new pavement .
a thirty days old or has been opened to traffic the application rate shall be num gallons per square yard plusorminus num gallons per square yard .
b less than thirty days old and has not yet been opened to traffic tack coat is not required .
b. nozzle settings .
tack coat shall be applied using the proper nozzle settings and the double coverage or triple coverage techniques as outlined in chapter num of asphalt institute publication msnum construction of hot mix asphalt pavements .
c. additional requirements .
special care shall be taken at gore areas to insure that asphalt emulsion is not sprayed or tracked onto precast reflectorized gore markers .
this shall be accomplished by placing a covering over the gore markers anchored in place prevent any displacement .
num method of measurement .
asphalt emulsion tack coat will be measured by the number of square yards actually spread in the designated areas and at the specified rate all in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of asphalt emulsion tack coat will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num prime coat num description .
this work consists of treating an existing gravel surface with bituminous material and blotter material if required in preparation for receiving a subsequent bituminous course at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num bituminous materials .
bituminous material used as prime coat may be any of those enumerated in subsection m.num of these specifications .
they are a. asphalt cement subsection m.num b .
medium cure cutback asphalt subsection m.num num c. rapid curing cutback asphalt subsection m.num d. emulsified asphalt subsection m.num the grade may be changed as required by the engineer during construction at no change in unit price .
num blotter material .
blotter material shall meet the requirements of subsection m.num fine aggregate of these specifications .
the material may be accepted in stockpile at the source .
num construction methods .
num equipment .
the equipment to be used shall include a power broom approved broom dragging equipment rollers a selfpropelled mechanical spreader for spreading coarse aggregate a mechanical revolving cylindertype aggregate spreader or mechanical rollertype hopper spreader for spreading fine aggregate that can be so adjusted as to spread accurately the required amount of material per square yard a bituminous distributor so designed equipped maintained and operated that bituminous material at even heat may be applied uniformly on variable widths of surface up to num feet at readily determined and controlled rates from num to num gallons per square yard with uniform pressure .
distributor equipment shall include a tachometer pressure gauges sampling valve accurate volume measuring devices or a calibrated tank and a thermometer for measuring temperature of tank contents .
distributors shall be equipped with a power unit for the pump and full circulation spray bars adjustable vertically and laterally and equipment for heating bituminous material .
other types of aggregate spreaders may be used provided they accomplish results equal to those obtained by the types described herein and are approved .
rollers shall be selfpropelled steel wheel vibratory or pneumatic type .
the number and weight of rollers shall be sufficient to compact the mixture to form a firm even and unyielding surface .
num preparation of surface .
the surface to be primed shall be shaped to the required grade and section shall be free from all ruts corrugations segregated material or other irregularities and shall be uniformly compacted .
delays in priming will necessitate reprocessing or reshaping to provide a smooth compacted surface .
num application of bituminous material .
bituminous material shall be applied to the width of the section to be primed by means of a pressure distributor in a uniform continuous spread .
when traffic is maintained not more than onehalf of the width of the section shall be treated in one application .
care shall be taken that the application of bituminous material at the junctions of spreads is not in excess of the specified amount .
excess bituminous material shall be squeegeed from the surface .
skipped areas or deficiencies shall be corrected .
building paper shall be placed over the end of the previous applications and the joining application shall start on the building paper .
building paper used shall be removed and satisfactorily disposed of .
num when traffic is maintained oneway traffic shall be permitted on the untreated portion of the roadbed .
as soon as the bituminous material has been absorbed by the surface and blotter material if required will not pick up traffic shall be transferred to the treated portion and the remaining width of the section shall be primed .
the quantities rate of application temperatures and areas to be treated shall be approved before application of the prime coat .
num application of blotter material .
if after the application of the prime coat the bituminous material fails to penetrate within the time specified and the roadway must be used by traffic blotter material shall be spread in the amounts required to absorb any excess bituminous material .
num weather limitations .
bituminous material shall not be applied on a wet surface or when weather conditions would prevent its proper construction .
prime coat will not be applied when the air temperature is below numof unless otherwise permitted by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
num bituminous material .
prime coat will be measured by the number of square yards actually applied in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num blotter material .
blotter material will be measured by either the number of tons or the number of cubic yards as the case may be actually applied in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
num prime coat .
the accepted quantities of prime coat will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
num blotter material .
the accepted quantity of blotter material will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton or per cubic yard as the case may be as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num seal coat num description .
this work consists of providing a surface treatment consisting of an application of bituminous material on a prepared gravel foundation to be followed by an application of cover coat material at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num num materials .
num bituminous material .
bituminous material used as a seal coat may be any of those enumerated in subsection m.num of these specifications .
the specific material to be used will be specified in the contract .
the grade may be changed by the engineer during construction at no change in the unit price .
num cover coat material .
cover coat material shall meet the requirements of subsection m.num fine aggregate for the size specified .
the material may be accepted in stockpile at the source .
num construction methods .
num equipment .
the equipment to be employed shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
the aggregate spreader shall be equipped with a means of applying the cover coat material to the surface with positive controls so that the required amount of material will be deposited uniformly over the full width of the bituminous material .
other types of aggregate spreaders may be used provided they accomplish equivalent results and are approved .
num preparation of surface .
seal coating operations shall not be started until the surface is thoroughly compacted by rolling and traffic .
bituminous material shall not be applied until the surface has been cleaned as required and the section to be sealed has been approved .
num applying bituminous material .
bituminous material shall be applied by means of a pressure distributor in a uniform continuous spread over the section to be treated .
bituminous material shall be heated to a temperature in accordance with the manufacturers recommenda tions .
the quantity of bituminous material to be used per square yard shall be as directed .
a strip of building paper at least num feet in width and with a length equal to that of the spray bar of the distributor plus one foot shall be used at the beginning of each spread .
if the cutoff is not positive the use of paper may be required at the end of each spread .
the paper shall be removed and disposed of in a satisfactory manner .
the distributor shall be moving forward at proper application speed at the time the spray bar is opened .
any skipped areas or deficiencies shall be corrected .
junctions of spreads shall be carefully made to assure a smooth riding surface .
the length of spread of bituminous material shall not be in excess of that which trucks loaded with cover coat material can immediately cover .
the spread of bituminous material shall not be more than num inches wider than the width covered by the cover coat material from the spreading device .
under no circumstances shall operations proceed in such manner that bituminous material will be allowed to chill set up dry or otherwise impair retention of the cover coat .
the distributor when not spreading shall be parked so that the spray bar or mechanism will not drip bituminous materials on the surface of the traveled way .
num num application of cover coat material .
immediately following the application of the bituminous material cover coat material shall be spread in quantities as designated .
spreading shall be accomplished in such a manner that the tires of the trucks or aggregate spreader at no time contact the uncovered and newly applied bituminous material .
if directed the cover coat material shall be moistened with water to eliminate or reduce the dust coating of the aggregate .
moistening shall be done the day before the use of the aggregate .
immediately after the cover coat material is spread any deficient areas shall be covered by additional material .
initial rolling shall begin immediately behind the spreader and shall consist of one complete coverage with a power roller .
pneumatic tire rolling shall begin immediately after completion of the initial rolling and shall be continued until num complete coverages are obtained .
pneumatic tire rolling shall be completed the same day the bituminous material and cover coat materials are applied .
after the application of the cover coat material the surface where specified shall be lightly broomed or otherwise maintained as directed .
maintenance of the surface shall include the distribution of cover coat material over the surface to absorb any free bituminous material and cover any area deficient in cover coat material .
the maintenance shall be conducted so that imbedded material is not displaced .
excess material shall be swept from the entire surface by means of rotary brooms .
the surface shall be swept at the time determined by the engineer .
num weather limitations .
bituminous material shall not be applied on a wet surface or when weather conditions would prevent its proper construction .
seal coat will not be applied when the air temperature is below numof unless otherwise permitted by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
num bituminous material .
seal coat will be measured by the number of square yards actually applied in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num cover coat material .
cover coat material will be measured by either the number of tons or the number of cubic yards as the case may be actually applied in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
num seal coat .
the accepted quantity of seal coat will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
num cover coat material .
the accepted quantity of cover coat material will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton or per cubic yard as the case may be as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num section num cold recycled base course pavement rehabilitationrecycling num description .
this work consists of the rehabilitation of an existing pavement structure into a processed asphalt stabilized base recycled course .
the existing pavement is to be mixed with a specified depth of the existing gravel base .
this mixture of pavement and gravel is to be processed reshaped rolled compacted and fine graded to the cross sections andor grades indicated on the plans all in accordance with these specifications .
num remaining gravel base .
the remaining gravel base andor subgrade may be modified to properly accommodate the processed asphalt stabilized base course .
any modifications of this nature if required such as but not limited to the excavation and replacement of unsuitable materials and trimming and fine grading will be accomplished under separate bid items .
any movement of the existing recyclable materials to allow for these modifications is included in this bid item .
num materials .
the processed asphalt stabilized base material shall conform to the gradation requirements of either gradation a or gradation b whichever is specified in the contract .
gradation a gradation b sieve designation passing by weight passing by weight num num num num½ num num num½ num num num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num if additional aggregate is needed the contractor may be directed to add material from an outside source .
however scarified pavement and gravel fines must be mixed together and thoroughly worked andor reworked as described herein .
additional gravel shall conform to the requirements for gravel borrow as set forth in subsection m.num table i column i of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num equipment .
the contractor has the option to utilize whatever equipment can effectively pulverize crush mix andor blend the recyclable materials to specification .
furthermore the contractor can either choose to process inplace or load and haul the recyclable materials to an offsite location process them into the proper recycled material and return it to the job site .
num num procedure .
prior to the start of pavement rehabilitationrecycling all water and gas gates are to be lowered to a minimum depth of one foot from proposed finish grade .
all manholes and catch basin frames grates and covers are to be removed .
the structures are to be covered with a temporary cover which shall overhang the pavement opening by a minimum of one foot on all sides of adequate strength to accommodate truck and construction equipment loadings .
the voids remaining after utility gates or drainage structures are lowered are to be filled with gravel borrow material conforming to the requirements of table i column i of subsection m.num of these specifications .
the existing pavement is to be scarified and mixed with gravel from the roadway structure .
the minimum depth of existing gravel to be incorporated in the rehabilitation process will be shown on the plans .
this quantity will be taken from the uppermost portion of the base layer unless otherwise specified .
water and calcium shall be added to insure optimum moisture content at the time of compaction .
they shall be applied at the rate of num pounds of calcium chloride per gallon of water per square yard of recycled pavement area .
the mixing formula may be modified by the engineer to compensate for temperature humidity weather andor density determinations .
any required modifications to the remaining gravel base andor subgrade such as but not limited to cuts fills grade realignment and the removal of unsuitable materials will be made before spreading the asphalt stabilized base material .
existing utility gates manholes and catch basins are to be adjusted to finish grade .
the thickness of the processed asphalt stabilized recycled base course will be shown on the plans graded to the specified cross section plan grades or as directed by the engineer and compacted to a uniform density of not less than num percent of maximum density as determined by aashto tnum method d. the restored cross section shall be thoroughly compacted to a dense consolidated mass by rolling with an approved roller capable of producing the specified density .
the required density will be measured by a nuclear density gauge .
the processed asphalt stabilized base shall be tested for smoothness and accuracy of grade and if any portions are found to lack required smoothness or accuracy such portions shall be rescarified reshaped recompacted and otherwise manipulated as the engineer may direct until the required smoothness and accuracy are obtained .
the finished surface shall have a tolerance of ½ inch plus or minus to the grades shown on the plans or as directed .
it is the responsibility of the contractor to insure that the equipmentconstruction methods he intends to use are capable of complying with project specifications .
num method of measurement .
cold recycled base course will be measured by the number of square yards of material actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of cold recycled base course will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor equipment and materials including num scarifying mixing pulverizing spreading reshaping regrading rolling compacting fine grading any loading hauling or other handling of recyclable materials all costs incurred resulting from the contractors choice to process materials offsite costs resulting from moving processed materials to allow for modifications to the remaining gravel base andor subgrade the removal and disposal of unsuitable materials the movement of surplus asphalt stabilized base material from one location to another within the project limits all material placement and subsequent removal of temporary covers and structures and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num other operations and materials .
the following work operations and materials may be necessary to properly complete the work as specified above .
when required they will be measured and compensated for under appropriate bid items as follows a .
cut and match asphalt pavement .
b. excavation to modify the gravel base andor subgrade or remove unsuitable materials .
c. reconstruct catch basin d to catch basin f. d. adjust water gates .
e. adjust gas gates .
f. gravel borrow subbase to adjust the gravel base andor subgrade or to replace unsuitable materials .
g. coarse or fine aggregate from outside sources .
h. water for compaction control .
i. calcium chloride for pavement rehabilitation .
j .
adjust catch basins or manholes to grade .
k. trimming and fine grading to adjust the gravel base or subgrade .
section num hot recycle option for bituminous pavements num description .
this specification provides the contractor with the option of recycling reclaimed asphalt pavement rap into the composition of the following mixes or applications .
a. bituminous concrete base course b. bituminous concrete binder course if the contractor chooses this recycling option the following modifications to section num bituminous concrete pavements shall apply .
num num materials .
reclaimed asphalt pavement rap shall consist of asphalt pavement recovered by cold milling or other removal techniques approved by the engineer .
new aggregate and asphalt cement shall be added to meet the required composition .
num composition of mixtures .
no more than num percent rap will be allowed in the bituminous mixture .
the recycled mixture of rap new aggregate and added asphalt cement shall meet the requirements specified in subsection m.num bituminous concrete pavements for aggregate gradation and asphalt cement content .
aashto tpnum shall be used for extracting and recovering the binder from the rap .
the added asphalt cement grade shall be selected so that the requirements for pg num specified in subsection m.num performance graded asphalt cement shall be met .
a .
job mix formula .
for any bituminous mixture containing rap the contractor shall formulate and submit to the engineer a job mix formula jmf which shall include num .
gradation and asphalt content of the rap .
num .
gradation of recycled mixture .
num .
percentage of rap added .
num .
new aggregate sources .
num .
total asphalt cement content based on total mixture weight .
num .
added asphalt cement content based on total mixture weight .
num .
grade of added asphalt cement .
num .
recycling agent additive type and amount optional if needed num bituminous material .
the added asphalt cement may be pg num pg num pg num pg num or other asphalt cement grades approved by the engineer .
num reclaimed asphalt pavement rap .
the aggregate component of the rap shall meet the requirement of subsection m.num of these specifications .
the bitumen component of the rap shall be asphalt cement and shall be free of significant contents of solvents tars or other contaminating substances that will make the rap unacceptable for recycling as determined by the engineer .
the rap shall be separated according to specific pavement sources by the contractor unless otherwise permitted by the engineer .
a .
approval of rap quality .
the engineer will use one of the following criteria to approve the rap quality num .
rap obtained from a pavement which was constructed with asphalt cement and aggregates that meet the current requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num num .
if the source of the rap or its quality is not known the contractor shall submit to the department at least num calendar days prior to the start of paving the following a designated use of the rap and approximate proportions .
b a five pound minimum sample representing the rap to be incorporated into the recycled mixture .
c the absolute viscosity numof of the bituminous material recovered from the rap .
the engineer will determine the acceptability of the rap for the designated use .
details for sampling and testing the rap are available from the engineer .
b .
acceptance requirements .
the rap will be accepted on the basis of the following num .
certification from the contractor stating the source of the rap if known .
num .
analysis of rap and its components conducted by the contractor and approved by the engineer .
this will be submitted as required to insure the consistency of the rap .
c. stockpile requirements .
rap from similar pavement types and sources shall be stockpiled on a free draining base separated from other aggregates and rap sources and shall be free of foreign materials .
the stockpile must contain at a minimum the amount projected to be used in five days or necessary to complete the project .
prior to entry into the mixer the rap shall have a consistent gradation from coarse to fine with num percent passing the maximum size sieve allowed by the job mix formula .
num recycling agent additives .
the recycling agent additive shall be approved by the engineer and shall be chemically and physically compatible with asphalt cement .
recycling agent additive material shall be composed of selected maltene and asphaltene fractions derived from petroleum crude .
the additive when mixed with aged asphalt shall restore the properties of the aged asphalt to a level that is reasonably consistent with the requirements of current specifications for the new asphalt .
num construction methods .
num batch plant .
the plant shall meet all the applicable requirements of subsection num bituminous mixing plant with exceptions and additions as noted below .
it shall be modified as required to permit recycling in conformance with all local state and federal air pollution standards .
the recycling modification shall be such that it provides a separate independent controlled cold feed system to introduce the salvaged bituminous pavement material into the weigh box for automatic proportioning with new virgin aggregates liquid asphalt and additives as required .
this cold feed system shall also be equipped with a scalping screen to insure that all bituminous pavement material being recycled will be num percent passing the maximum size sieve allowed by the job mix formula .
the recording equipment shall be capable of automatically recording the batch weight of the salvaged bituminous pavement material along with other batch components on the required delivery tickets .
num the new virgin aggregates shall be dried and heated to a sufficiently high temperature to produce a recycled mixture with a discharge temperature of at least numof or as approved by the engineer .
the salvaged bituminous pavement material to be recycled shall be added to the heated aggregates in the weigh box at a rate that will minimize heat loss and provide for efficient plant operations .
the salvaged bituminous pavement material to be recycled shall not be preheated prior to being added to the weigh bin .
the combined aggregate and pavement material shall be mixed in the pugmill for approximately num seconds after which the mixture shall be sprayed with the asphalt cement and additives as required and mixed for approximately num seconds more .
the mixing time may be increased if in the opinion of the engineer the aggregate is not sufficiently coated with asphalt .
these components shall be proportioned and mixed so as to fall within the limits of the approved job mix formula .
num drum dryer mixing plant .
the plant shall meet all the applicable requirements of subsection num bituminous mixing plant with exceptions and additions noted below .
the plant shall consist of a dryer with a dual entry system capable of drying heating and mixing new aggregate and salvaged bituminous pavement material to the temperature and gradation requirements established in the job mix formula .
at no time shall the rap material be in contact with the flame of the burner .
it shall be capable of recycling in conformance with all local state and federal air pollution standards .
this type plant shall also conform to the following specifications a .
cold feed system .
the plant shall have an adjustable feed rate control for the salvaged bituminous pavement feeder as well as for the cold aggregate feeder and the mineral filler feeder .
b. mixer unit .
num .
the drum mix plant shall utilize a center entry system for recycling purposes .
num .
the moisture content of the mixture upon discharge from the mixer shall not exceed num percent by weight and the mixture shall have a minimum temperature of numof .
c. automated blending system .
num .
the plant shall have an automated blending system for proportioning virgin aggregate liquid bitumen additives as needed and recycled material .
num .
the blending system shall include a hardcopy strip printer capable of totaling and printing at intervals quantities of virgin aggregate liquid bitumen additives as needed and recycled material .
num method of measurement .
base course and binder course which have been produced utilizing the hot recycle option will be measured according to subsection num of these specifications .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of base course and binder course which have been produced utilizing the hot recycle option will be paid for according to subsection num of these specifications .
num section num cleaning routing and sealing cracks in bituminous concrete pavement num description .
this work consists of performing all operations in connection with the reshaping cleaning and filling of construction and random cracks in bituminous concrete pavements at the locations indicated in the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num .
cracks less than one inch in width .
poured joint seal material shall be an asphalt rubber compound hot poured type conforming to the requirements of aashto mnum and approved by the engineer .
num cracks one inch and over in width .
bituminous concrete class inum .
num construction methods .
num equipment .
equipment shall be subject to the approval of the engineer and maintained in a satisfactory working condition at all times .
a .
the router for reshaping cracks shall be vertical spindle or rotary type cutter .
b .
air compressor .
air compressors shall be portable and capable of furnishing not less than num cubic feet of air per minute at not less than num pounds per square inch pressure at the nozzle .
the compressor shall be equipped with traps that will maintain the compressed air free of oil and water .
c. selfpropelled vacuum sweeper .
small selfpropelled vacuum sweeper designed especially for use in cleaning highway and airfield pavements shall be used to remove debris dirt and dust from routed cracks .
d. hand tools shall consist of brooms shovels metal bars with chisel shaped ends and any other tools which may be satisfactorily used to accomplished this work .
e. melting kettle .
the unit used to melt the joint sealing compound shall be a double boiler indirect fired type with a heating capacity of numof .
the space between the inner and outer shells shall be filled with suitable heat transfer oil or substitute having a flash point of not less than numof .
the kettle shall be equipped with a satisfactory means of agitating the joint sealer at all times .
this may be accomplished by continuous stirring with mechanically operated paddles andor by a continuous circulating gear pump attached to the heating unit .
the kettle must be equipped with thermostatic control calibrated between numof and numof .
f. hand pouring pots must be equipped with mobile carriage and rubber shoe and have a flow control valve which allows all cracks to be filled to refusal so as to eliminate all voids or entrapped air and not leave unnecessary surplus crack sealer on pavement surfaces .
num g. equipment for blowing clean drying and rejuvenating sidewalls of cracks and joints shall be a unit which operates at num feet per second velocity .
num preparation of cracks .
a .
general .
no crack sealing material shall be applied in wet cracks or where frost snow or ice is present nor when the ambient temperature is below numof .
b. reshaping .
all cracks numinch and wider shall be routed to a minimum width of ½ inch and minimum depth of ½inch and thoroughly cleaned by compressed air to remove all dirt foreign material and loose edges from same .
c. cracks over ½inch in width do not require reshaping but must be thoroughly cleaned by compressed air as above .
d. debris removal .
all old material and other debris removed from the cracks shall be removed from pavement surface immediately by means of vacuum sweepers or hand brooms .
num cracks less than one inch in width .
a .
preparation of sealer .
joint sealing material shall be heated and applied at temperature specified by the manufacturer and approved by the engineer .
b .
installation of sealer .
all cracks shall be sealed as specified herein and the sealer shall be well bonded to the pavement .
unless otherwise directed the cracks shall be completely filled flush with the pavement and not less than numinch below surface without formation of voids or entrapped air .
more than one application of crack sealer may be necessary to fill cracks to required level .
num cracks one inch and over in width .
all cracks of sufficient depth and one inch or over in width shall first be brush coated with bituminous material on all contact surfaces filled with class inum bituminous mixture and compacted all in accordance with the applicable provisions of subsection num compaction of these specifications .
num method of measurement .
num cracks less than one inch in width .
cleaning routing and sealing cracks in bituminous pavement cracks less than one inch in width will be measured by the number of linear feet of sealed joints actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num cracks one inch and over in width .
cleaning routing and sealing cracks in bituminous pavement cracks one inch and over in width will be measured by the number of linear feet of sealed joints actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num num basis of payment .
num cracks less than one inch in width .
the accepted quantity of cleaning routing and sealing cracks in bituminous pavement cracks less than one inch in width will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num cracks one inch and over in width .
the accepted quantity of cleaning routing and sealing cracks in bituminous pavement cracks one inch and over in width will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num sawing and sealing transverse joints in bituminous concrete pavements over rigid base num description .
this work consists of making a saw cut transversely across the finished bituminous surface pavement and filling it with a hot poured asphalt rubber compound at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
poured joint seal material shall be an asphalt rubber compound of the hot poured type conforming to aashto mnum and approved by the engineer .
num construction methods .
num equipment .
the equipment to be used shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num with the following exceptions a. router .
a router will not be required .
b .
power saw and blades .
saw and blades of such size and configuration that saw cuts can be made with one pass and shall not cause damage or ravelling to the adjacent pavement sidewalls .
num operation .
a .
general .
the cut shall be made directly over the existing underpavements transverse joints .
the existing joints shall be located and marked so as to insure that the saw cuts are made directly over them .
b. sawing joints .
the joints shall be constructed no sooner than num days after the surface course has been applied .
num the saw cutting of the joints shall be made with an approved power driven saw .
the cuts shall be numinch wide by numinch deep .
the saw cuts shall be made with an abrasive blade and sawn dry .
the completed cuts shall extend in a straight line transversely across the pavement to the extent of the existing underpavements transverse joints .
each joint to be sawed will be refer enced by the contractor .
it shall be the responsibility of the contractor to insure that the saw cuts are constructed directly over the existing underpavements transverse joints .
c. cleaning and sealing joints .
a sawed joint shall be air cleaned and sealed immediately after the saw cut has been made .
traffic shall not be allowed to knead together or damage the sawed joint .
each joint shall be thoroughly cleaned and dried prior to placement of the sealing compound .
any cleaning required shall be performed by blowing out all dirt dust or deleterious matter that may have accumulated in the newly sawed joint .
sufficient air pressure shall be provided to insure thorough cleaning .
the melter shall be either oil or gasfired and shall be of the double walled oil bath type with a power driven mechanical agitator and circulation pump .
the melter shall be equipped with a thermostat to maintain the sealing compound within the range of temperatures specified by the manufacturer and with a suitably mounted thermometer to indicate the temperature of the sealing compound in the melter .
the melting temperature of the sealer will be furnished by the manufacturer and shall not be exceeded by more than numof .
the joint seal shall be applied with a pressurized mobile carriage and rubber shoe and the system shall have a flow control valve which allows all cracks to be filled to refusal so as to eliminate all voids or entrapped air and so as to not leave unnecessary surplus crack sealer on the pavement surface .
the hot seal shall completely fill the joint such that after cooling the level of the sealer will be flush with the pavement surface .
any depression in the seal shall be brought up to the specified limit by the further addition of hot seal .
care shall be taken in the sealing of the joints such that the final appearance will present a neat fine line .
overfilling of the joints will not be allowed and spillage of the sealer should be avoided .
all workmanship shall be of the highest quality and all excess or spilled sealer must be removed from the pavement by approved methods and discarded .
num method of measurement .
sawing and sealing transverse joints in bituminous concrete pavement will be measured by the number of linear feet of sealed joint actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of sawing and sealing transverse joints in bituminous concrete pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num section num temporary patching material potholes and trenches num description .
this work consists of repairing roadway potholes and patching utility and drainage trenches during the construction of the roadway at locations indicated on the plans andor as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
the temporary patching material shall conform to the requirements for class inum surface course as set forth in subsection m.num or to high performance cold patching material as set forth in subsection m.num of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num potholes .
the contractor shall repair all potholes within the project limits regardless of the cause for the pothole commencing ten calendar days following the official notice to proceed .
potholes shall be repaired within num hours of notification by the engineer .
repair shall consist of placing asphalt patching material by hand in up to two numinch lifts leaving the repair flush with the existing roadway pavement when complete .
the pothole shall be free of loose asphalt debris and excess moisture .
the compaction shall be done using a vibratory plate compactor or other appropriate equipment .
num trenches .
the contractor shall repair all trenches within the project limits .
repair shall consist of placing asphalt patching material in a workmanlike manner .
the existing pavement shall be neatly cut on both sides .
the gravel backfill shall be compacted to the required density and the subgrade left free of loose asphalt debris and excess moisture .
the bituminous patch material shall be placed in a properly compacted numinch lift unless otherwise detailed on the plans .
when completed the patch shall be left flush with the existing roadway pavement .
num damage claims .
failure to maintain the roadway as required by this section will result in the contractor being held liable for any and all damage claims in accordance with subsection num responsibility for damage claims .
num method of measurement .
temporary patching for pothole repairs as specified in this section will not be measured by a single unit of measurement usually associated with a specific proposal item .
rather this work will be documented and paid for on a force account basis as set forth below in subsection num .
num trenches .
temporary patching materialtrenches will be measured by the number of tons of such material actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num num basis of payment .
num potholes .
temporary patching for potholes will be paid for on a force account basis as set forth in para .
a.num of subsection num differing site conditions changes extra work and force account work of these specifications .
num trenches .
the accepted quantity of temporary patching materialtrenches will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num part num concrete pavements section num portland cement concrete pavement and base num description .
this work consists of constructing portland cement concrete base or pavement with or without reinforcement on a prepared subgrade or subbase in reasonably close conformity with the dimensions and details indicated on the plans all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
materials shall meet the requirements of section m.num portland cement concrete and section m.num metals of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num construction requirements .
the classifications proportioning testing batching mixing handling placing finishing and curing of portland cement concrete pavement or base shall conform to the applicable requirements of section num portland cement con crete of these specifications .
num equipment .
a. finishing machines .
equipment for finishing concrete pavement shall be mechanical selfpropelled spreading and finishing machines capable of consolidating the concrete and producing a finished surface as specified herein .
finishing machines shall be equipped with at least two oscillating type transverse screeds which shall be adjustable to produce a crowned or flat surface as required .
b. vibrators .
vibrators for full width vibration of concrete paving may be either the surface pan type or the internal types with either immersed tube or multiple spuds .
they may be attached to the spreader or the finishing machine or may be mounted on a separate carriage to accommodate either slip form or side form paving methods .
they shall not come in contact with the joint load transfer devices subgrade reinforcing or side forms .
the frequency of the surface vibrators shall not be less than num impulses per minute and the frequency of the internal type shall not be less than num impulses per minute for tube vibrators and not less than num impulses per minute for spud vibrators .
vibrators shall be rubber tipped to prevent damage to epoxycoated reinforcing steel .
c. concrete saw .
when sawing joints is elected or specified the contractor shall provide sawing equipment adequate in number of units and power to complete the sawing with a watercooled diamond edge saw blade or an abrasive wheel to the required dimensions and at the required rate .
the contractor shall provide at least one standby saw in good working order .
num an ample supply of saw blades shall be maintained at the site of the work at all times during sawing operations .
the contractor shall provide adequate artificial lighting facilities for night sawing .
d. forms .
straight side forms shall be made of a metal having a thickness of not less than numinch and shall be furnished in sections not less than num feet in length .
forms shall have a depth equal to or greater than the prescribed edge thickness of the concrete without horizontal joint and a base width equal to or greater than the depth of the forms .
flexible or curved forms of proper radius shall be used for curves of numfoot radius or less .
flexible or curved forms shall be of a design acceptable to the engineer .
forms shall be provided with adequate devices for secure setting so that when in place they will withstand without visible spring or settlement the impact and vibration of the consolidating and finishing equipment .
flange braces shall extend outward on the base not less than twothirds the height of the form .
forms with battered top surfaces and bent twisted or broken forms shall be removed from the work .
repaired forms shall not be used until inspected and approved by the engineer .
builtup forms shall not be used except where the total area of pavement of any specified thickness on the project is less than num square yards .
the top face of the form shall not vary from a true plane more than numinch in num feet and the upstanding leg shall not vary more than numinch .
the forms shall contain provisions for locking the ends of abutting form sections together tightly and for secure setting .
num preparation of grade .
after the roadbed has been graded and compacted to meet the density requirements of subsection num of these specifications the grade shall be trimmed approximately to correct elevation extending the work at least num feet beyond each edge of the proposed concrete pavement or base .
num setting support .
a .
base support .
the foundation under the forms shall be hard and true to grade so that the form when set will be firmly in contact for its whole length and at the specified grade .
b .
form setting .
forms shall be set sufficiently in advance of the point where concrete is being placed .
forms shall be staked into place with not less than num pins for each numfoot section .
a pin shall be placed at each side of every joint .
form sections shall be tightly interlocked free from play or movement in any direction .
the forms shall not deviate from true line by more than numinch at any point .
no excessive settlement or springing of forms under the finishing machine will be tolerated .
forms shall be cleaned and oiled prior to the placing of concrete .
c. grade and alignment .
the alignment and grade elevations of the forms shall be checked and corrections made by the contractor before placing the concrete .
when any form has been disturbed or any grade has become unstable the form shall be reset and rechecked .
num conditioning of subgrade or base course .
when side forms have been securely set to grade the subgrade or base course shall be brought to proper cross section .
high areas shall be trimmed to proper elevation .
low areas may be filled and compacted to a condition similar to that of surrounding grade or filled with concrete integral with the pavement .
the finished grade shall be maintained in a smooth and compacted condition until the pavement is placed .
num unless waterproof subgrade or base course cover material is specified the subgrade or base course shall be uniformly moist when the concrete is placed .
if it subsequently becomes too dry the subgrade or base course shall be sprinkled but the method of sprinkling shall not be such as to form mud or pools of water .
num placing concrete .
concrete shall not be placed on soft muddy or frozen subgrade or subbase .
also concrete shall not be placed when subgrade is frozen under adjacent pavement which is to remain in place .
the concrete shall be deposited on the grade in such manner as to require as little rehandling as possible .
unless truck mixers truck agitators or nonagitating hauling equipment are equipped with means for discharge of concrete without segregation of the materials the concrete shall be unloaded into an approved spreading device and mechanically spread on the grade in such manner to prevent segregation of the materials .
placing shall be continuous between transverse joints without the use of intermediate bulkheads .
necessary hand spreading shall be done with shovels not rakes .
workmen shall not be allowed to walk in the freshly mixed concrete with boots or shoes coated with earth or foreign substances .
where concrete is to be placed adjoining a previously constructed lane of pavement and mechanical equipment will be operated upon the existing lane of pavement that pavement shall meet the minimum flexural strength of num pounds per square inch when tested by the thirdpoint method in accordance with aashto tnum .
if only finishing equipment is carried on the existing lane paving in adjoining lanes may be permitted after three days .
concrete shall be thoroughly consolidated against and along the faces of all forms and along the full length and on both sides of all joint assemblies by means of internal vibrators inserted in the concrete .
vibrators shall not be permitted to come in contact with a joint assembly the grade reinforcement or a side form .
in no case shall the vibrator be operated longer than num seconds in any one location .
the vibration shall be of sufficient duration to thoroughly consolidate the concrete but not so long as to produce segregation .
concrete shall be deposited as near to expansion and contraction joints as possible without disturbing them but shall not be dumped from the discharge bucket or hopper onto a joint assembly unless the hopper is well centered on the joint assembly .
should any concrete materials fall on or be worked into the surface of a completed slab they shall be removed immediately by approved methods .
num test specimens .
the contractor shall furnish the concrete necessary for casting test beams and cylinders .
the beams shall be cured by a designated method as specified for the pavement according to aashto tnum .
num strikeoff of concrete and placement of reinforcement .
following the placing of the concrete it shall be struck off to conform to the cross section shown on the plans and to an elevation such that when the concrete is properly consolidated and finished the surface of the pavement will be at the elevation shown on the plans .
when reinforced concrete pavement is placed in two layers the entire width of the bottom layer shall be struck off to such length and depth that the sheet of fabric or bar mat may be laid full length on the concrete in its final position without further manipulation .
the reinforcement shall then be placed directly upon the concrete after which the top layer of the concrete shall be placed struck off and screeded .
any portion of the bottom layer of concrete which has been placed more than num minutes without being covered num with the top layer shall be removed and replaced with freshly mixed concrete at the contractors expense .
when reinforced concrete is placed in one layer the reinforcement may be positioned in advance of concrete placement or it may be placed in plastic concrete after spreading by mechanical or vibratory means .
the surface of reinforcing steel shall be free from any material which could impair bond of the steel with the concrete all in accordance with the applicable requirements of section num castinplace structure concrete masonry of these specifications .
num joints .
joints shall be constructed of the type and dimensions and at the locations required by the plans or special provisions .
a. longitudinal joint .
longitudinal sawed joints shall be cut by means of approved concrete saws to the depth width and line shown on the plans .
suitable guide lines or devices shall be used to assure cutting the longitudinal joint on the true line as shown on the plans .
the longitudinal joint shall be sawed before the end of the curing period and before any equipment or vehicles are allowed on the pavement .
the sawed area shall be thoroughly cleaned and if required the joint shall immediately be filled with sealer .
b. transverse expansion joints .
the expansion joint filler shall be continuous from form to form shaped to the subgrade and to the keyway along the form .
preformed joint filler shall be furnished in lengths equal to the pavement width or equal to the width of one lane .
damaged or repaired joint filler shall not be used unless approved by the engineer .
the expansion joint filler shall be held in a vertical position .
an approved installing bar or other device shall be used if required to secure preformed expansion joint filler at the proper grade and alignment during placing and finishing of the concrete .
finished joints shall not deviate more than numinch in the horizontal alignment from a straight line .
if joint fillers are assembled in sections there shall be no offsets between adjacent units .
no plugs of concrete shall be permitted anywhere within the expansion space .
c. transverse contraction joints .
transverse contraction joints shall consist of planes of weakness created by cutting grooves in the surface of the pavement and when shown on the plans shall include load transfer assemblies .
num .
sawed contraction joints shall be created by sawing grooves in the surfaces of the pavement or base to the dimensions and at the spacing and lines shown on the plans with an approved concrete saw .
after each joint is sawed the saw cut and adjacent concrete surface shall be thoroughly cleaned .
if curing blankets are used they shall be removed from the pavement only at the locations where a joint is to be sawed and only a sufficient width to allow the cut to be made .
as soon as the cut has been made curing material shall be replaced .
in no case shall either the top or edges of concrete be left unprotected for more than onehalf hour .
sawing of the joints shall commence as soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently to permit sawing without excessive raveling usually num to num hours .
all joints shall be sawed before uncontrolled shrinkage cracking takes place .
if necessary the sawing operations shall be carried on during the day and night regardless of weather conditions .
the sawing of any joint shall be omitted if a crack occurs at or near the joint location prior to the time of sawing .
sawing shall be discontinued when a crack develops ahead of the saw .
the pavement within the lane where cracks occur shall be removed to the full width of the lane and replaced .
the minimum num lane length of pavement replacement shall be num feet .
if cracking occurs on both sides of the same joint the dowel assembly and a minimum of num feet on each side of the joint shall be removed and replaced all at the contractors expense .
in general all joints should be sawed in sequence .
all contraction joints in lanes adjacent to previously constructed lanes shall be sawed before uncontrolled cracking occurs .
if extreme conditions exist which make it impractical to prevent erratic cracking by early sawing the contraction joint groove shall be formed prior to initial set of concrete .
num .
transverse construction joints shall be constructed when there is an interruption of more than num minutes in the concreting operations .
no transverse joint shall be constructed within num feet of an expansion joint contraction joint or plane of weakness .
if sufficient concrete has not been mixed at the time of interruption to form a slab at least num feet long the excess concrete back to the last preceding joint shall be removed and disposed of .
num .
load transfer devices .
dowels when used shall be held in position parallel to the surface and centerline of the slab by a metal device that is left in the pavement .
the dowels shall be thoroughly coated with an approved lubricant to prevent the concrete from binding to that portion of the dowel .
an approved metal dowel cap or sleeve shall be furnished for each dowel bar used with the expansion joints .
the caps or sleeves shall fit the dowel bar tightly and the closed end shall be watertight .
in lieu of using dowel assemblies at contraction joints dowel bars may be placed in the full thickness of pavement by a mechanical device approved by the engineer .
num final strikeoff consolidation and finishing of concrete pavement .
a. sequence .
the sequence of operations shall be the strikeoff and consolidation machine finishing floating straightedging and texturing .
following the placement of concrete it shall be struck off to conform to the cross section indicated on the plans and to an elevation such that once the concrete is properly consolidated and finished the surface of the pavement will be at the elevation indicated on the plans .
in general the addition of surficial water to the surface of the concrete to assist in finishing operations will not be permitted .
if the application of water to the surface is permitted it shall be applied as a fog spray by means of approved spray equipment .
b. finishing at joints .
the concrete adjacent to joints shall be compacted or firmly placed without voids or segregation against the joint material also under and around all load transfer devices joint assembly units and other features designed to extend into the pavement .
concrete adjacent to joints shall be mechanically vibrated as required in subsection num .
after the concrete has been placed and vibrated adjacent to the joints as required in subsection num the finishing machine shall be brought forward operating in a manner to avoid damage or misalignment of joints .
if uninterrupted operation of the finishing machine to over and beyond the joints causes segregation of concrete damage to or misalignment of the joints the finishing machine shall be stopped when the front screed is approximately num inches from the joint .
segregated concrete shall be removed from in front of and off the joint the front num screed shall be lifted and set directly on top of the joint and the forward motion of the finishing machine resumed .
when the second screed is close enough to permit the excess mortar in front of it to flow over the joint it shall be lifted and carried over the joint .
thereafter the finishing machine may be run over the joint without lifting the screeds provided there is no segregated concrete immediately between the joint and the screed or on top of the joint .
c. machine finishing .
num .
nonvibratory method .
the concrete shall be distributed or spread as soon as placed .
as soon as the concrete has been placed it shall be struck off and screeded by an approved finishing machine .
the machine shall go over each area of pavement as many times and at such intervals as necessary to give the proper compaction and to leave a surface of uniform texture .
excessive operation over a given area shall be avoided .
the tops of the forms shall be kept clean by an effective device attached to the machine and the travel of the machine on the forms shall be maintained true without lift wobbling or other variation tending to affect the precision finish .
during the first pass of the finishing machine a uniform ridge of concrete shall be maintained ahead of the front screed for its entire length .
num .
vibratory method .
when vibration is specified vibrators for full width vibration of concrete paving slabs shall meet the requirements in subsection num para .
b .
if uniform and satisfactory density of the concrete is not obtained by the vibratory method at joints along forms at structures and throughout the pavement the contractor will be required to furnish equipment and methods which will produce pavement conforming to the specifications .
all the provisions in para .
c.num above not in conflict with the provisions for the vibratory method shall govern .
d. hand finishing .
unless otherwise specified hand finishing methods will not be permitted except under the following conditions in the event of breakdown of the mechanical equipment hand methods may be used to finish the concrete already deposited on the grade when the breakdown occurs .
narrow widths or areas of irregular dimensions where operations of the mechanical equipment is impractical may be finished by hand methods .
concrete as soon as placed shall be struck off and screeded .
an approved portable screed shall be used .
a second screed shall be provided for striking off the bottom layer of concrete if reinforcement is used .
the screed for the surface shall be at least num feet longer than the maximum width of the slab to be struck off .
it shall be of approved design sufficiently rigid to retain its shape and be constructed either of metal or of other suitable material shod with metal .
consolidation shall be attained by the use of a suitable vibrator or other approved equipment .
if necessary this shall be repeated until the surface is of uniform texture true to grade and cross section and free from porous areas .
num e. floating .
after the concrete has been struck off and consolidated it shall be further smoothed trued and consolidated by means of a longitudinal float using one of the following methods as specified or permitted num .
hand method .
the handoperated longitudinal float shall be not less than num feet in length and num inches in width properly stiffened to prevent flexibility and warping .
the longitudinal float operated from foot bridges resting on the side forms and spanning but not touching the concrete shall be worked with a sawing motion while held in a floating position parallel to the road centerline and passing gradually from one side of the pavement to the other .
movement ahead along the centerline of the pavement shall be in successive advances of not more than onehalf the length of the float .
any excess water or soupy material shall be wasted over the side forms on each pass .
num .
mechanical method .
the mechanical longitudinal float shall be of a design approved by the engineer and shall be in good working condition .
the tracks from which the float operates shall be accurately adjusted to the required crown .
the float shall be accurately adjusted and coordinated with the adjustments of the transverse finishing machine so that a small amount of mortar is carried ahead of the float at all times .
the forward speed shall be adjusted so that the float will lap the distance specified by the engineer on each transverse trip .
the float shall pass over each area of pavement at least two times but excessive operation over a given area will not be permitted .
any excess water or soupy material shall be wasted over the side forms on each pass .
num .
alternative mechanical method .
as an alternative to the mechanical method described above the contractor may use a machine composed of a cutting and smoothing float or floats suspended from and guided by a rigid frame .
the frame shall be carried by four or more visible wheels riding on and constantly in contact with the side forms .
if necessary following one of the preceding methods of floating longhandled floats having blades not less than num feet in length and num inches in width may be used to smooth and fill in open textured areas in the pavement .
longhandled floats shall not be used to float the entire surface of the pavement in lieu of or supplementing one of the preceding methods of floating .
when strikeoff and consolidation are done by the hand methods and the crown of the pavement will not permit the use of the longitudinal float the surface shall be floated transversely by means of the longhandled float .
care shall be taken not to work the crown out of the pavement during the operation .
after floating any excess water and laitance shall be removed from the surface of the pavement by a straightedge num feet or more in length .
successive drags shall be lapped onehalf the length of the blade .
f. straightedge testing and surface correction .
after the floating has been completed and the excess water removed but while the concrete is still plastic the surface of the concrete shall be tested for trueness with a numfoot straightedge .
for this purpose the contractor shall furnish and use an accurate numfoot straightedge swung from handles num feet longer than onehalf the width of the slab .
the straightedge shall be held in contact with the surface in successive positions parallel and perpendicular to the road centerline and the whole area gone over from one side of the slab to the other as necessary .
advance along the road shall be in successive stages of not more than onehalf the length of the straightedge .
any depressions found shall be immediately filled with freshly mixed concrete struck off consolidated and refinished .
high areas shall be cut down and refinished .
special attention shall be given to assure that the surface across joints meets the requirements for smoothness .
straightedge testing and surface num corrections shall continue until the entire surface is found to be free from observable departures from the straightedge and the slab conforms to the required grade and cross section .
g. final finish .
the final finish shall be specified or shown on the plans and shall consist of one of the three finishes described as follows num .
broom finish .
if the surface texture is to be a broom finish it shall be applied when the water sheen has practically disappeared .
the broom shall be drawn from the center to the edge of the pavement with adjacent strokes slightly overlapping .
the brooming operation shall be so executed that the corrugations produced in the surface shall be uniform in appearance and not more that numinch in depth .
brooming shall be completed before the concrete is in such condition that the surface will be torn or unduly roughened by the operation .
the surface thus finished shall be free from rough and porous areas irregularities and depressions resulting from improper handling of the broom .
brooms shall be of the quality size and construction and be so operated as to produce a surface finish meeting the approval of the engineer .
subject to satisfactory results being obtained and approval of the engineer the contractor will be permitted to substitute mechanical brooming in lieu of the manual brooming as herein described .
num .
belt finish .
if the surface texture is to be a belt finish when straightedging is complete and water sheen has practically disappeared and just before the concrete becomes nonplastic the surface shall be belted with a numply canvas belt not less than numinches wide and at least num feet longer than the pavement width .
hand belts shall have suitable handles to permit controlled uniform manipulation .
the belt shall be operated with short strokes transverse to the road centerline and with a rapid advance parallel to the centerline .
num .
drag finish .
if the surface texture is to be a drag finish a drag shall be used which shall consist of a seamless strip of damp burlap or cotton fabric which shall produce a uniform surface of gritty texture after dragging it longitudinally along the full width of pavement .
for pavement num feet or more in width the drag shall be mounted on a bridge which travels on the forms .
the dimensions of the drag shall be such that a strip of burlap or fabric at least num feet wide is in contact with the full width of pavement surface while the drag is used .
the drag shall consist of not less than num layers of burlap with the bottom layer approximately num inches wider than the upper layer .
the drag shall be maintained in such condition that the resultant surface is of uniform appearance and reasonably free from grooves over numinch in depth .
drags shall be maintained clean and free from encrusted mortar .
drags that can not be cleaned shall be discarded and new drags substituted .
h. edging at forms and joints .
after the final finish but before the concrete has taken its initial set the edges of the pavement along each side of each slab and on each side of transverse expansion joints formed joints transverse construction joints and emergency construction joints shall be worked with an approved tool and rounded to the radius required by the plans .
a welldefined and continuous radius shall be produced and a smooth dense mortar finish obtained .
the surface of the slab shall not be unduly disturbed by tilting of the tool during use .
at all joints any tool marks appearing on the slab adjacent to the joints shall be eliminated by brooming the surface .
in doing this the rounding of the corner of the slab shall not be disturbed .
all concrete on top of the joint filler shall be completely removed .
num all joints shall be tested with a straightedge before the concrete has set and corrections made if one side of the joint is higher than the other or if they are higher or lower than the adjacent slabs .
i .
concrete base .
in the case of concrete base the above requirements for finishing andor longitudinal floating are waived .
num surface test .
a .
concrete pavement .
as soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently the pavement surface shall be tested with an approved numfoot straightedge furnished by the contractor .
areas showing high spots of more than numinch but not exceeding numinch in ten feet shall be marked and immediately ground down with an approved grinding tool to an elevation where the area or spot will not show surface deviations in excess of numinch when tested with a numfoot straightedge .
where the departure from correct cross section exceeds ½inch the pavement shall be removed and replaced by and at the expense of the contractor .
any area or section so removed shall be not less than num feet in length nor less than the full width of the lane involved .
when it is necessary to remove and replace a section of pavement any remaining portion of the slab adjacent to the joints that is less than num feet in length shall also be removed and replaced .
b .
concrete base .
the surface of the concrete base shall be roughened by any means acceptable to the engineer such as brooming tinning or burlap drag .
the surface shall be finished so that there will be no deviation of more than numinch between any two contact points when tested with a numfoot straightedge .
num curing .
immediately after the finishing operations have been completed and as soon as marring of the concrete will not occur the entire surface of the newly placed concrete shall be cured in accordance with the applicable provisions of subsection num of these specifica tions .
num removing forms .
unless otherwise provided forms shall not be removed from freshly placed concrete until it has set for at least num hours except auxiliary forms used temporarily in widened areas .
forms shall be removed carefully so as to avoid damage to the pavement .
after the forms have been removed the sides of the slab shall be cured as outlined in one of the methods indicated above .
major honeycombed areas will be considered as defective work and shall be removed and replaced .
any area or section so removed shall not be less than num feet in length nor less than full width of the lane involved .
when it is necessary to remove and replace a section of pavement any remaining portion of the slab adjacent to the joints that is less than num feet in length shall also be removed and replaced .
num sealing joints .
if the joints are to be sealed they shall be filled with joint sealing material before the pavement is opened to traffic and as soon after completion of the curing period as is feasible .
just prior to sealing each joint shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign material including membrane curing compound and the joint faces shall be cleaned and surface dry when the seal is applied .
material for seal applied hot shall be stirred during heating so that localized overheating does not occur .
the sealing material shall be applied to each joint opening to conform to the details shown num on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the pouring shall be done in such a manner that the material will not be spilled on the exposed surfaces of the concrete .
any excess material on the surface of the concrete pavement shall be removed immediately and the pavement surface cleaned .
the use of sand or similar material as a cover for the seal will not be permitted .
poured jointsealing material shall not be placed when the air temperature in the shade is less than numof unless approved by the engineer .
when specified preformed compression seals and lubricant adhesive shall conform to subsection m.num of these specifications .
num protection of pavement .
the contractor shall protect the pavement and its appurtenances against both public traffic and traffic caused by his own employees and agents .
any damage to the pavement occurring prior to final acceptance shall be repaired or the pavement replaced .
num opening to traffic .
the engineer will decide when the pavement or base shall be opened to traffic .
pavement or base will not be opened to traffic until specimen beams have attained a flexural strength of num pounds per square inch when tested by the thirdpoint method in accordance with aashto tnum .
num concrete pavementslip form method .
if the contractor elects to use the slipform method the following provisions shall apply a. grade .
after the grade or base has been placed and compacted to the required density the areas which will support the paving machine shall be cut to the proper elevation by means of a properly designed machine .
the grade on which the pavement is to be constructed shall then be brought to the proper profile by means of a properly designed machine .
if the density of the base is disturbed by the grading operations it shall be corrected by additional compaction before concrete is placed .
the grade should be constructed sufficiently in advance of the placing of the concrete .
if any traffic is allowed to use the prepared grade the grade shall be checked and corrected immediately ahead of the placing of the concrete .
b .
placing concrete .
the concrete shall be placed with an approved slipform paver designed to spread consolidate screed and floatfinish the freshly placed concrete in such manner that a minimum of hand finish will be necessary to provide a dense and homogenous pavement in conformance with the plans and specifications .
the machine shall vibrate the concrete for the full width and depth of the strip of pavement being placed .
such vibration shall be accomplished with vibrating tubes or arms working in the concrete .
the sliding forms shall be rigidly held together laterally to prevent spreading of the forms .
the forms shall trail behind the paver for such a distance that no appreciable slumping of the concrete will occur and that necessary final finishing can be accomplished while the concrete is still within the forms .
the concrete shall be held at a uniform consistency having a slump of not more than num inches .
the slipform paver shall be operated with as nearly a continuous forward movement as possible and all operations of mixing delivering and spreading concrete shall be so coordinated as to provide uniform progress with stopping and starting of the paver held to a minimum .
if for any reason it is necessary to stop the forward movement of the paver the vibratory and tamping elements shall also be stopped immediately .
no tractive force shall be applied to the machine except that which is controlled from the machine .
num c. finishing .
the surface smoothness and texture shall meet the requirements of subsection num and subsection num. d. curing .
unless otherwise specified curing shall be done in accordance with one of the methods included in subsection num .
the curing media shall be applied at the appropriate time and shall be applied uniformly and completely to all surfaces and edges of the pavement .
e. joints .
all joints shall be constructed in accordance with subsection num and sealed in accordance with subsection num. f. protection against rain .
in order that the concrete may be properly protected against the effects of rain before the concrete is sufficiently hardened the contractor will be required to have available at all times materials for the protection of the edges and surface of the unhardened concrete .
such protective materials shall consist of standard metal forms or wood plank having a nominal thickness of not less than num inches and a nominal width of not less than the thickness of the pavement at its edge for the protection of the pavement edges and covering material such as burlap or cotton mats curing paper or plastic sheeting material for the protection of the surface of the pavement .
when rain appears imminent all paving operations shall stop and all available personnel shall begin placing forms against the sides of the pavement and covering the surface of the unhardened concrete with the protective covering .
num tolerance in pavement or base thickness .
the thickness of the pavement or base will be determined by the average caliper measurement of cores tested in accordance with aashto tnum .
for the purpose of establishing an adjusted unit price for the pavement or base units to be considered separately are defined as num linear feet of pavement in each traffic lane starting at the end of the pavement bearing the smaller station number .
the last unit in each lane shall be num feet plus the fractional part of num feet remaining .
one core will be taken at random by the department in each unit .
when the measurement of the core from a unit is not deficient more than numinch from the plan thickness full payment will be made .
when such measurement is deficient more than numinch and not more than num inch from the plan thickness two additional cores at intervals of not less than num feet will be taken and used in the average thickness for that unit .
an adjusted unit price as provided in subsection num will be paid for the unit represented .
other areas such as intersections entrances crossovers ramps etc .
will be considered as one unit and the thickness of each unit will be determined separately .
small irregular unit areas may be included as part of another unit .
at such points as the engineer may select in each unit one core will be taken for each num square yards of base or pavement or fraction thereof in the unit .
if the core so taken is not deficient more than numinch from the plan thickness full payment will be made .
if the core is deficient in thickness by more than numinch but not more than num inch from the plan thickness two additional cores will be taken from the area represented and the average of the three cores determined .
if the average measurement of these three cores is not deficient more than numinch from the plan thickness full payment will be made .
if the average thickness of the three cores is deficient more than numinch but not more than num inch from the plan thickness an adjusted unit price as provided in subsection num will be paid for the area represented by these cores .
num in calculating the average thickness of the base measurements which are in excess of the specified thickness by more than numinch will be considered as the specified thickness plus numinch and measurements which are less than the specified thickness by more than num inch will not be included in the average .
when the measurement of any core is less than the plan thickness by more than num inch the actual thickness of the base in this area will be determined by taking additional cores at num foot intervals parallel to the centerline in each direction from the affected location until in each direction a core is found which is not deficient by more than num inch .
areas found deficient in thickness by more than num inch shall be evaluated by the engineer .
if the engineer decides that the deficient areas should be removed they shall be removed and replaced with concrete of the thickness shown on the plans .
exploratory cores for deficient thickness will not be used in averages for adjusted unit price .
the method of establishing the adjusted unit price for pavement based on the measurement of cores is specified below in subsection num .
num method of measurement .
portland cement concrete pavement and portland cement concrete base will be measured by the number of square yards of each actually provided in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
the width for measurement will be the width of the pavement shown on the typical cross section of the plans additional widening where called for or as otherwise directed in writing by the engineer .
the length will be measured horizontally along the centerline of each roadway or ramp .
num basis of payment .
num general .
the accepted quantities of portland cement concrete pavement and portland cement concrete base will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including reinforcing steel dowels joint material and other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num price adjustments .
where the average thickness of pavement is deficient in thickness by more than numinch but not more than num inch payment will be made at an adjusted price as specified in the following table num concrete pavement deficiency deficiency in thickness proportioned part determined by cores of contract unit inches price allowed __________________________ _____________________ num to num num percent num to num num percent num to num num percent num to num num percent num to num num percent num to num num percent when the thickness of pavement or base is deficient by more than one inch and the judgment of the engineer is that the area of such deficient pavement or base should not be removed and replaced there will be no payment for the area soretained .
no additional payment over the contract unit price will be made for any pavement or base which has an average thickness in excess of that shown on the plans .
section num full depth cleaning and sealing of joints and cracks two and one half num½ inches nominal width or less in portland cement concrete pavement num description .
this work consists of performing all operations required for cleaning and sealing cracks and joints in existing portland cement concrete pavement of num½inch nominal width or less at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num .
materials .
a .
joint seal .
poured joint seal material shall be hot poured asphalt rubber compound conforming to the requirements of aashto mnum and approved by the engineer .
num construction methods .
num equipment .
equipment shall be subject to the approval of the engineer and maintained in satisfactory working condition at all times .
a. cutter .
equipment for reshaping cracks shall be a vertical spindle type cutter .
b .
air compressor .
air compressors shall be portable and capable of furnishing not less than num cubic feet of air per minute at not less than num pounds per square inch pressure at the nozzle .
the compressor shall be equipped with traps that will maintain the compressed air free of oil and water .
num c. selfpropelled sweeper .
a small selfpropelled sweeper designed especially for use in cleaning highway and airfield pavements shall be used to remove debris dirt and dust from joints or cracks in concrete pavement .
d. hand tools shall consist of brooms wire brushes shovels metal bars with chisel shaped ends and any other tools which may be used to accomplish this work .
e. melting kettle .
the unit used to melt the joint sealing compound shall be a double boiler indirect fired type .
the space between the inner and outer shells shall be filled with a suitable heat transfer oil or substitute having a flash point of not less than numof .
the kettle shall be equipped with a satisfactory means of agitating the joint sealer at all times .
this may be accomplished by continuous stirring with mechanically operated paddles or by a continuous circulating gear pump attached to the heating unit .
the kettle must be equipped with thermostatic control calibrated between numof and numof .
f. application system .
the joint seal shall be placed by hot extrusion with a wand type instrument .
the system shall include a flow control valve which allows all cracks to be filled to refusal .
num preparation of cracks and joints .
all transverse and longitudinal joints and any cracks shall be sealed .
just prior to sealing each joint or crack shall be thoroughly cleaned to the full depth of the concrete pavement of all foreign material by compressed air .
if accessible the sides of the joints shall be wirebrushed and cleaned of all debris .
the sides of the joints shall be surface dry .
poured joint sealing material shall not be placed unless approved by the engineer .
all material and debris removed from the joint or crack shall be immediately removed from the pavement surface by means of sweepers or hand brooms before sealing .
no joint sealing shall be allowed until the joints are thoroughly dried or where either frost snow or ice is present .
num application .
the joint seal shall be applied by hot extrusion .
all joints or cracks are to be filled to refusal so as to eliminate all voids or entrapped air .
the hot seal shall completely fill the joint or crack such that after cooling the level of the sealer will be flush with the pavement surface .
any depression in the seal shall be brought up to the specified limit by the further addition of hot seal .
care shall be taken in the sealing of the joints or cracks such that the final appearance will present a neat fine line .
overfilling of the joints will not be allowed and spillage of the sealer should be avoided .
all workmanship shall be of the highest quality and all excess or spilled sealer must be removed from the pavement by approved methods and discarded .
num method of measurement .
full depth cleaning and sealing of joints and cracks two and onehalf inches nominal width or less in portland cement concrete pavement will be measured by the number of linear feet of sealed joints or cracks actually repaired in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of full depth cleaning and sealing of joints and cracks two and onehalf inches nominal width or less in portland cement concrete pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num repairing deteriorateddamaged joints greater than two and onehalf num½ inches and less than or equal to eight num inches nominal width in finished portland cement concrete pavement num description .
this work consists of performing all operations required for cleaning saw cutting concrete removal rebuilding and sealing joints in existing portland cement concrete pavement that are greater than num½inches and less than or equal to num inches nominal width at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num .
materials .
a .
joint seal .
poured joint seal material shall be a hot poured asphalt rubber compound conforming to the requirements of aashto mnum and approved by the engineer .
b. epoxy resin bonding agent .
this material shall be an allpurpose twopart epoxy resin system conforming to aashto mnum type v and be included on the departments approved materials list .
c. fast set repair mortar .
fast set repair mortar shall conform to the requirements of astm cnum and shall be included on the departments approved materials list .
the material shall be used in strict accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the department reserves the right to discontinue the use of any product it deems is not performing to the standards advertised by its manufacturer .
should the contractor choose an approved repair material not previously used by the department the contractor shall arrange with the materials manufacturer or distributor for the services of a competent field representative at the work site prior to any mixing of components .
the field representative shall instruct the work crews in the proper mixing and application procedures .
the field representative shall remain at the job site after work commences and continue to instruct until heshe and the engineer are satisfied that the crew has mastered the technique of installing the system successfully .
the cost of any expense incurred for these services shall be borne by the contractor .
d. preformed bituminous joint filler .
preformed bituminous joint filler shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum .
num num construction methods .
num equipment .
equipment shall be subject to the approval of the engineer and maintained in satisfactory working condition at all times .
a .
air compressor .
air compressors shall be portable and capable of furnishing not less than num cubic feet of air per minute at not less than num pounds per square inch pressure at the nozzle .
the compressor shall be equipped with traps that will maintain the compressed air free of oil and water .
b .
hand tools shall consist of brooms shovels metal bars with chisel shaped ends and any other tools which may be used to accomplish this work .
c. melting kettle .
the unit shall be either oil or gasfired and shall be of the double walled oil bath type with a power driven mechanical agitator and circulation pump .
the kettle shall be equipped with a thermostat to maintain the sealing compound within the range of temperatures specified by the manufacturer and with a suitable mounted thermometer to indicate the temperature of the sealing compound in the kettle .
the melting temperature of the sealer will be furnished by the manufacturer and shall not be exceeded by more than numof .
d. application system .
the joint seal shall be placed by hot extrusion with a wand type instrument .
the system shall include a flow control valve which allows all cracks to be filed to refusal .
num removal of existing concrete .
a .
saw cutting .
a numinch deep saw cut parallel to the joint shall be made on both sides of the joint a distance of num inches back from the edge of the deteriorated concrete .
care shall be taken to prevent damage to the freshly saw cut edge and the slab reinforcing during the concrete removal operations .
b .
removal .
the concrete shall be removed to the full depth of the existing pavement and to a minimum width of num inches by a method approved by the engineer .
jack hammers heavier than the nominal numpound class shall not be used .
chipping hammers heavier than the nominal numpound class shall not be used to remove concrete from beneath any reinforcing bar .
hand tools such as hammers and chisels shall be provided for removal of final particles of unsound concrete or to achieve the required depth .
in no case shall pneumatic tools be placed in direct contact with reinforcing steel .
any load transfer device encountered shall be retained cleaned and left in place if it is still a competent part of the concrete slab .
if the load transfer device has failed as determined by the engineer it will be removed and disposed .
num preparatory work .
the exposed concrete and reinforcing steel surface shall be free of rust oil solvent grease dirt dust bitumen loose particles and other foreign matter just prior to the application of the epoxy bonding agent .
care shall be taken not to disturb the gravel subbase or undermine the existing concrete slabs .
any disturbance of the gravel subbase or undermining of the existing concrete slab shall be corrected by the contractor at his expense to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num joint filler placement .
prior to placement of the fast set repair mortar one numinch or two numinch thick lengths of a preformed bituminous joint filler shall be installed in a straight num line perpendicular to the reinforcing steel for the full width of the existing concrete slabs .
the preformed bituminous joint filler shall extend in a plumb vertical direction from the gravel subbase to the surface of the existing concrete slab .
num application of the epoxy bonding agent .
an epoxy bonding agent shall be applied to the prepared concrete surface to be repaired with a stiffbristle broom to a thickness of approximately num mils or in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
reinforcing steel shall not be coated with epoxy .
the contractor shall follow the manufacturers recommendations for curing the epoxy bonding agent prior to placing the concrete repair material .
the repair material should not be placed if the bonding agent has passed the manufacturers recommended contact time .
if the bonding agent has exceeded its contact time the contractor shall follow the manufacturers recommendations for reapplication .
an epoxy bonding agent with an extended contact time should be used if required by the timing of concrete placement andor weather conditions .
num application of fast setting mortar .
a .
application mixing and batching .
application priming curing cleanup and protection of freshly patched areas shall be performed in accordance with applicable manufac turers recommendations .
mix no more material than can be placed within the specified working time recommended by the manufacturer .
more than one mixing container or device may be utilized provided that enough patching area is prepared ahead and the work crews can place the materials efficiently without wasting the products .
unless otherwise recommended by the manufacturer coarse aggregate to be added to the system to produce concrete mix shall be clean well graded and surfacedry .
it shall conform to aashto mnum size num .
use of crushed limestone will not be permitted .
b .
weather limitations for application of the epoxy bonding agent and fast setting mortar .
concrete repair mortar shall not be applied when the ambient temperature is below numof andor in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
num sealing joints .
upon placement and proper curing of the fast set concrete repair mortar the top num inch of preformed bituminous joint filler shall be removed and replaced with a joint sealer .
each joint shall be thoroughly cleaned and dried prior to placement of the sealing compound .
any cleaning required shall be performed by blowing out all dirt dust or deleterious matter .
the hot extruded joint sealing material shall not be placed unless approved by the engineer .
all material and debris removed from the joint shall be immediately removed from the pavement surface by means of vacuum sweepers or hand brooms before sealing .
the joint seal shall be applied by hot extrusion .
all cracks are to be filled to refusal so as to eliminate all voids or entrapped air .
the hot seal shall completely fill the joint such that after cooling the level of the sealer will be flush with the pavement surface .
any depression in the seal shall be brought up to the specified limit by the further addition of hot seal .
num care shall be taken in the sealing of the joints such that the final appearance will present a neat fine line .
overfilling of the joints will not be allowed and spillage of the sealer should be avoided .
all workmanship shall be of the highest quality and all excess or spilled sealer must be removed from the pavement by approved methods and discarded .
no joint sealing shall be allowed until the joints are thoroughly dried or where either frost snow or ice is present .
storage of materials shall be in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
num method of measurement .
repairing deteriorateddamaged joints greater than two and onehalf inches and less than or equal to eight inches nominal width in finished portland cement concrete pavement will be measured by the number of cubic feet of fast set concrete repair mortar actually placed in the respective repaired joints in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of repairing deteriorateddamaged joints greater than two and onehalf inches and less than or equal to eight inches nominal width in finished portland cement concrete pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num pavement grooving num description .
this work consists of installing grooves in existing concrete pavement at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction methods .
a. sealing joints .
prior to grooving all joints in the concrete pavement are to be cleaned and sealed .
sealing of joints shall conform to the applicable requirements of either section num or section num of these specifications .
b. grooving .
the contractor shall determine the equipment to be used and the methods to be employed to install grooves in the existing pavement .
whatever method is used the final product must conform to the requirements of the typical groove detail shown in the plans within the following tolerances .
num num .
groove width num num num .
groove depth num num num .
groove spacing num num the entire width of concrete pavement is to be grooved within the limits shown on the plans .
pavement grooving is to be accomplished while traffic flow is being maintained .
after grooving the entire pavement including the grooves is to be thoroughly cleaned of any remaining fine material .
num method of measurement .
pavement grooving will be measured by the number of square yards of pavement actually grooved in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of pavement grooving will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
a. sealing joints .
cleaning and sealing joints will be paid for in accordance with the applicable requirements of either subsection num or subsection num of these specifications .
section num portland cement concrete base course wcrack control numinch extra strength num description .
this work consists of constructing a class xae portland cement concrete base course num inches thick for the purpose of providing high early strength in the pavement .
num materials .
materials shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num of these specifications with the following additional provisions a .
reinforcing .
num x num welded wire fabric reinforcing shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
b. dowels .
dowels shall be num epoxy coated bars num inches long .
num construction methods .
methods of construction shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num of these specifications with the following additional provisions num a .
crack control .
control of cracks shall consist of the following num .
a longitudinal construction joint along the roadway centerlines using a full depth num gauge metal plate .
num .
sawed transverse contraction joints num¾inches deep and numinch wide spaced num feet on center max .
and filled with liquid asphalt .
num .
preformed joint filler numinch by num inches along all curbing and existing roadway base match points .
num .
sawing of joints shall commence as soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently to permit sawing without excessive raveling usually between num to num hours .
all joints shall be sawed before uncontrolled shrinkage cracking takes place .
b .
connection to existing base course .
the new concrete base course shall be connected into existing abutting concrete base course with num epoxy coated dowels spaced num inches on center .
the dowels shall be drilled and grouted into the existing base course as indicated on the plans .
c. opening to traffic .
the pavement will not be opened to traffic until it conforms to the requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
num method of measurement .
portland cement concrete base course wcrack control numinch extra strength will be measured by the number of square yards of pavement actually provided in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of portland cement concrete base course wcrack control numinch extra strength will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials equipment reinforcement joints dowels drilling and grouting of dowels saw cutting liquid asphalt and other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num part num concrete section num portland cement concrete num description .
this work consists of furnishing placing curing and finishing portland cement concrete for bridges pavements structures and incidental construction in accordance with these specifications the special provisions and contract documents .
any modifications of these general requirements will be given in the specific requirement for each item unless otherwise indicated in the contract documents .
concrete shall consist of a homogeneous mixture of portland cement coarse aggregate fine aggregate air entrainment water admixtures and pozzolan when used mixed in proportions herein specified .
num classification .
portland cement concrete shall be proportioned with the required cement content for each class and shall be thoroughly mixed to the consistency herein after specified .
each class of concrete shall be used in that part of the work in which it is called for on the plans proposals special provisions or where otherwise directed .
the classes of concrete required for the particular work unless otherwise indicated or superseded by special provisions are shown in table num .
all concrete mixes are subject to the approval of the engineer .
the minimum compressive strength of each class of concrete shall be as listed in table num or as specified on the plans .
various sizes of approved coarse aggregate for the classes of concrete may be combined during the batching operation in the amount of each fraction of aggregate size required to obtain the specified gradation .
when testing aggregates to determine compliance with a specified gradation fractions will be tested separately and combined mathematically or combined mechanically in predetermined proportions and tested .
num table num class of concrete general classification of work x precast elements highway bounds modular wall units flared ends hp structural ibeams cellular slabs box beams prestressedprecast castinplace bridge structures elements box culverts retaining walls backwalls beam seats pier caps pier columns diaphragms abutment stems pier stems wall stems bridge decks railings parapets end posts bridge sidewalks castinplace piles reinforced overhead sign foundations miscellaneous prestressedprecast elements .
xx precast elements collars catch basins manholes drop inlets sumps electrical handholes median barriers copings pipe .
structural elements reinforced footings approach slabs .
miscellaneous road pavements commercial driveways headwalls endwalls high capacity inlets road base sidewalks residential driveways .
a general use tremie seals fence post footings guardrail anchorage mast arm foundations unreinforced footings paved waterways nonspecified use .
z precast elements curbing pipe .
b general use void filler thrust blocks class a bedding .
note all concrete shall be air entrained .
num materials .
num portland cement .
portland cement shall conform to the requirements of section m.num portland cement concrete and be listed on the departments approved materials list .
for bridge projects one brand of portland cement shall be furnished and used for all visible portions of a structure but is not required for interior deck slabs beams or corresponding elements that are semiexposed .
num the contractor shall provide suitable means for storing and protecting the cement against dampness .
cement that becomes partially set or contains lumps of caked cement will be rejected .
all portland cement used shall be supplied from mill silos that have cement which has been tested .
a copy of a certified mill test report shall be furnished to the engineer for the cement being used .
deliveries may be directed to the site or through a regional distribution base .
no cement may be used for the project without a certificate of compliance issued by the manufacturer .
in addition the following will be required a .
the manufacturers certificate of compliance as referenced above and signed by the company representative having legal binding authority shall accompany each shipment of cement .
the certificate of compliance shall conform to the departments requirements .
copies of a standard form are available from the department upon request .
b .
each shipment or truckload thus received will be sampled and tested by the engineer .
if rejected the degree to which a structure has been affected by the use of this nonconforming product will be assessed and either the removal of the structure or an adjustment in price will be warranted .
c. under all steps and conditions delivery shall be made in weatherproofed and sealed transporting equipment .
all cement shall be well protected from moisture and contaminants .
any cement which fails to meet any of the requirements mentioned above shall be rejected and removed from the work .
any hydraulic cement stored by the contractor for a period longer than num days shall be retested in accordance with aashto mnum by an independent laboratory at the contractors expense and approved by the engineer before being used on the work .
num chemical admixtures .
previously approved admixtures shall be used when specified or ordered by the engineer or may be used at the contractors option if approved by the engineer as described herein .
admixtures used in portland cement concrete shall conform to the requirements of section m.num .
no admixture shall be used in the work unless it is approved by the engineer .
physical and chemical properties of admixtures shall be uniform throughout their use in the work .
should it be found that an admixture as furnished is not uniform in properties its use shall be discontinued .
if more than one admixture type or brand is used said admixtures shall be compatible with each other so that the desirable effects of all admixtures used will be realized .
when the contractor proposes to use an admixture of a brand and type on the departments approved materials list he shall furnish a certificate of compliance from the manufacturer certifying that the admixture furnished conforms to the chemical and physical requirements as specified by the department .
the engineer may take samples for testing at any time .
num the cost of the admixtures when approved for use shall be distributed over the appropriate pay items at no extra compensation .
the quantity of admixture used shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommended minimum and maximum dosage range .
airentraining admixture shall be used in amounts to produce a concrete having the specified aircontent .
chemical admixtures including airentraining admixtures shall be dispensed in liquid form .
if more than one chemical admixture is used in the concrete mix a separate dispensing measuring unit shall be provided for each admixture .
dispensing shall be accomplished in accordance with manufacturers approved recommendations .
dispensers for chemical admixtures shall have sufficient capacity to measure at one time the prescribed quantity required for each batch of concrete .
each dispenser shall include a graduated measuring unit into which liquid admixtures are measured to within plus or minus num percent of the prescribed quantity volume or weight as applicable for each batch of concrete .
dispensers shall be located and maintained so that the graduations can be accurately read from the point at which proportioning operations are controlled to permit a visual check of batching accuracy prior to discharge .
each dispensing unit shall be clearly marked for the type and quantity of admixture .
each liquid admixture dispensing system shall be equipped with a sampling device consisting of a valve located in a safe and readily accessible position such that a sample of the admixture may be withdrawn by the engineer .
for all types of admixtures the water content as determined by manufacturers recommendations andor departmental testing must be taken into account when calculating the total unit free water of the concrete mix .
num pozzolans .
mineral admixtures such as fly ash blast furnace slag and silica fume may be permitted as a partial replacement of portland cement in any concrete as approved by the engineer .
mineral admixtures shall conform to the requirements of both subsection m.num and section num of these specifications and furthermore shall be listed on the departments approved materials list .
the engineer will evaluate requests of alternate cementpozzolans combinations in the concrete mix design .
the engineers evaluation may include laboratory testing field trial runs and other related work required to determine equivalency with specified materials mix designs and performance .
the contractor shall provide suitable means for storing and protecting the pozzolans against moisture .
pozzolans that become partially hydrated or contain lumps will be rejected .
handling and storage of all pozzolans shall conform to the requirements listed under subsection num portland cement .
the manufacturers certificate of compliance signed by a company representative having legal binding authority shall accompany each shipment of pozzolans .
any pozzolan stored by the contractor for a period longer than num days shall be retested for compliance with the required specifications by an independent laboratory at the contractors expense and approved by the engineer before being used on the work .
num num aggregates .
coarse and fine aggregates shall conform to the requirements of subsections m.num and m.num respectively of these specifications .
a .
sources of aggregates .
aggregates shall be obtained from sources which have been previously tested and approved by the state .
results and information of such tests may be obtained from the engineer upon request .
if the contractor proposes to obtain aggregates from sources that have not been tested and approved the contractor shall num .
notify the state three months in advance of use together with relevant test results in accordance with sections m.num and m.num .
these tests shall be performed by an aashto or ccrl accredited laboratory and signed by a rhode island registered professional engineer .
num .
submit report of test results astm cnum petrographic examination of aggregates for concrete for the proposed aggregates .
this test shall be performed by an independent laboratory and signed by a rhode island registered professional engineer .
num .
provide a sufficient quantity of aggregate samples to the engineer for verification testing three months in advance of use .
num .
assume all costs for sampling and testing except for the cost of verification testing which shall be borne by the state .
the contractors attention is directed to the fact that the above requirements may have a direct impact on project schedules .
all proposed aggregates from sources not previously approved will be tested by the state and must produce concrete which has freezethaw durability of num percent as determined by the relative dynamic modulus astm cnum transverse method at num cycles as tested in accordance with astm cnum procedure a as modified by the department .
copies of modification may be obtained from the engineer upon request .
aggregates shall be handled or conveyed from stockpiles or other sources to the batching plant in such manner as to secure a uniform grading of the material .
the batch plant site layout equipment and provisions for transporting material shall be such as to assure a continuous supply of material to the work .
stockpiles shall be built up in layers of not more than num feet in thickness .
each layer shall be completely in place before beginning the next which shall not be allowed to cone down over the next lower layer .
the contractor at his expense shall provide safe and suitable facilities for obtaining and storing samples of aggregates .
aggregates from different sources and of different gradings shall not be stockpiled together .
aggregates that have become segregated mixed with foreign materials or contaminated by aggregates of different gradings shall not be used .
all aggregates produced or handled by hydraulic methods shall be stockpiled or binned for draining at least num hours before being batched .
rail shipments requiring more than num hours will be accepted as adequate binning only if the car bodies permit free drainage .
in case the aggregates contain high or nonuniform moisture content storage or stockpile periods in excess of num hours may be required num by the engineer .
in no event shall the moisture content of the fine aggregate at the time of batching exceed num percent of its dry weight .
num water .
water used in mixing and curing of concrete shall be subject to approval and shall conform to subsection m.num of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num proportioning .
a .
general .
the proportioning of ingredients for each batch shall be that approved by the engineer as herein specified .
all concrete used on state of rhode island projects will be air entrained and have the following air contents coarse aggregate percent by volume air content designated size mix design basis range num num num num ½ num num num num num num num num num num num num½ num num num the following classes and proportions of materials per cubic yard of concrete shall govern unless otherwise specified or approved table num class x hp xx a z b minimum cement factor lbscy num num num num num num maximum cement factor lbscy total cementitious num num num num num num maximum water cementitious ratio num num num num num num consistency range in slump inches num num num num num num minimum compressive strength num days psi num num num num num num num days psi num num num num num num minimum flexural strength modulus of rupture num days psi as per contract requirements .
num the slump range for tremie seals shall be approximately num inches .
the required slump range shall be approved by the engineer on a job specific basis .
total cementitious material .
the slump range for hp shall be obtained by the addition of astm cnum type f or g high range water reducing admixture .
note num i in general with the exception of the class z mix if additional workability is desired the engineer may allow a slump increase of up to num inch if an astm cnum type a water reducing admixture is used or an increase of up to num inches if an astm cnum type f or g high range water reducing admixture is used .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to assure that the required slump is maintained at all times .
ii astm cnum type f or g high range water reducing admixture is required when concrete is to be placed by pumping equipment .
admixtures must be used in accordance with manufactur ers recommended dosages .
slump shall be determined in accordance with aashto tnum and air content in accordance with aashto tnum .
compressive strength test specimens shall be made and cured in accordance with aashto tnum and tested in accordance with aashto tnum .
b .
design and approval of concrete mixtures .
the contractor shall design the concrete mixtures for each class of concrete specified .
the concrete mix components shall be proportioned using the absolute volumes method in accordance with the requirements for each class as specified herein and methods outlined in the american concrete institutes manual of concrete practice num edition standard num recommended practice for selecting proportions for normal heavyweight and mass concrete and standard num specifications for structural concrete in buildings section num .
step num .
laboratory testing .
at least num days prior to production the contractor shall submit in writing its concrete mix design on department forms and trial batch reports supported by laboratory test data to the engineer for review .
the trial batch test reports shall include the following information a contractortesting laboratory name .
b the coarse and fine aggregate gradations and sources .
c the fine aggregate finess modulus fm .
d any other pertinent information i.e .
aggregate specific gravities unit weights absorptions or any other material properties .
e date of mixing .
f mixing equipment and procedures used .
g the size of batch in cubic yards .
h weightvolume type sourcemanufacturer of all ingredients used in the mix .
i slump .
num j the air content of the mix .
k concrete temperature .
l unit weight of fresh concrete .
m curing method age at time of testing and compressive strength of concrete .
note all testing shall conform to the applicable aashto andor astm requirements listed in these specifications .
all concrete mix designs with trial batch test reports shall be signed by a rhode island registered professional engineer .
step num .
trial runs .
once the concrete mix design provided by the contractor has been reviewed and no exception taken by the engineer the contractor will conduct trial runs prior to production using the submitted mix designs component materials and proportions including the amount of admixtures which will be necessary to meet the specifications and produce concrete of the required plasticity workability air content compressive strength flexural strength or any other specified concrete property .
the contractor shall conduct the trial runs by employing the concrete batch plant mixer and handling equipment which the contractor proposes to use in production .
all equipment employed in the batching mixing transporting and testing shall be properly calibrated and meet the requirements listed herein prior to commencement of the trial runs .
the contractor shall attempt to produce concrete using the maximum amount of water and air content specified in the submitted mix design during the trial runs .
the engineer shall be notified by the contractor at least num hours in advance of performing the trial runs so that he can witness the test procedures .
the contractors attention is directed to the time required to test trial runs .
the contractor shall be responsible for production of trial runs at a sufficiently early date so that the commence ment of the work is not delayed .
once the concrete temperature slump and air content are tested and found to be in compliance with the specifications listed herein the engineer shall fabricate compressive strength specimens to be tested at num days or earlier as determined by the engineer .
when all specified concrete parameters have been met the engineer shall approve the proposed mix design for production .
the approved mix design proportions will govern during the progress of the work .
no changes in the sources or character of the materials shall be made without approval of the engineer .
new materials shall not be used until a revised mix design and new proportions based on laboratory tests and trial mixes are approved by the engineer .
num batching plants and equipment .
a .
general .
equipment and tools necessary for handling materials and performing all parts of the work must meet with the approval of the engineer as to design capacity and num mechanical condition and the equipment must be available sufficiently ahead of the start of construction operations to be examined thoroughly for approval .
the batching plant shall include bins weighing hoppers and scales for the fine aggregate and for each size of coarse aggregate .
cement shall be weighed independently on a separate scale .
the weighing hopper shall be properly sealed and vented .
b. bins and hoppers .
bins and hoppers with adequate separate compartments for fine aggregate and for each size of coarse aggregate shall be provided in the batching plant .
c. cement silos .
separate silos or holding bins shall be provided for each cement type and pozzolan .
the bins shall protect the cement and pozzolan from rain and moisture .
a log must be maintained showing deliveries which will include the brand supply location type quantity and date .
this log shall be maintained by the contractor on a weekly basis to fully document the cement on hand .
all received cement must conform to the specified quality requirements .
this log will also contain data showing the quantitative distribution of all cement used on both private and state projects .
copies of the log will be submitted to the engineer upon request and attested to by the contractor or his representative .
d. discharge chutes .
all discharge chutes shall be arranged so that materials will not lodge or be lost on discharge .
e. scales .
the scales for weighing aggregates and cement shall be either the beamtype or the springlessdial type of standard make and design .
they shall be accurate within num percent throughout the range of use and have minimum graduations not greater than num percent and shall be readable and sensitive to num percent or less .
the preceding percentages are based on total batch weight .
when beamtype scales are used provision such as a telltale dial shall be made for indicating to the operator that the required load in the weighing is being approached .
a device on weighing beams shall indicate critical position clearly .
poises shall be designed to be locked in any position and to prevent unauthorized change .
the scale weigh beam and telltale device shall be in full view of the operator while charging the hopper and he shall have convenient access to all controls .
scales shall be sealed as often as the engineer may deem necessary to assure their continued accuracy .
the contractor shall have on hand not less than ten numpound weights for frequent testing of all scales .
for each scale a cradle or platform approved by the engineer shall be provided for applying the test weights .
all plant scales and water meters including truck scales involved in the plant operation shall be tested at the expense of the contractor by a commercial scale company as follows num .
annually prior to use in state work .
num .
at intervals of not more than num calendar days .
num .
at any time ordered by the engineer .
num note every num days the plant owner must submit to the engineer a certificate from the commercial scale company making the checks attesting to the accuracy of all plant scales .
the certificate must be signed by the technician or a responsible representative of the scale company making the check .
f. automation and recordation .
plants producing portland cement concrete for the state of rhode island shall conform to the following plant equipment requirements num .
automatic proportioning .
portland cement concrete shall be produced in batch type mixing plants equipped with approved automatic proportioning devices .
such devices shall include equipment for accurately proportioning batches of the various components of the mixture by weight or volume in the proper sequence .
cement and aggregates shall be proportioned by weight .
water and admixtures shall be proportioned by weight or volume .
the batch weights will have to be adjusted periodically to take into account the actual moisture content of the aggregates at time of use .
plants shall be automatically equipped to control the batching sequence and timing of operations .
there shall be auxiliary interlock cutoff circuits to interrupt and stop the automatic cycling of the batching operations at any time an error in weighing occurs when an aggregate bin becomes empty or when there is a malfunction of any portion of the control system .
num .
recording equipment .
the plant shall be equipped with a digital recorder which will automatically print the following data on delivery tickets and it shall reproduce the reading of the scale being recorded within num percent of scale capacity .
a approved mix design .
b batch weights and storage bins for each size aggregate .
c total weight of aggregates in batch .
the weight printed for the last aggregate batched shall be the total weight of aggregate in the batch when cumulative weights are used .
d weight of cement andor pozzolans and storage silo designation .
e weight or volume of water .
f weight or volume of admixtures .
g date batched .
h time of each batch or load .
i tare zero balance to within num percent of scale capacity .
j total size of batch k name of customer .
l name of project and ri project contract number .
m name of trucker and truck number .
num the following information shall be included on the delivery ticket .
a signature of inspector plant .
b amount of water andor admixtures added at the point of delivery .
c signature of inspector site .
signatures do not indicate acceptance of the material but only signify that the required inspectionwitnessing has been accomplished .
there shall be sufficient copies of delivery tickets to provide a copy for the plant inspector and a copy for the resident engineer for permanent project record .
num .
equipment failure .
if at any time the recording devices become inoperative the plant may be allowed to batch materials for a period of not more than num work day from the time of breakdown if approved by the engineer .
written permission of the engineer will be required for periods of operations without automatic proportioning facilities longer than num work day .
as a condition for continued use with inoperative recording devices the contractor will be required to manually record all required information on all delivery tickets .
num .
batching controls .
batching controls shall be electrically interlocked with the scales to prevent cycling or recycling of batching until scales tare zero .
the batching controls shall meet the following tolerances with respect to the various components weighed in each batch coarse aggregate .num percent of required weight of the total coarse aggregate being weighed .
fine aggregate num percent of required weight of the total fine aggregate being weighed .
portland cement num percent of required weight of cement being weighed .
pozzolans num percent of required weight of pozzolans being weighed .
water .num percent of required weight or volume of water being weighed .
admixtures num percent of required weight or volume of each admixture being used .
the total weight of the batch shall not vary more than num percent from the theoretical design weight .
num concrete mixing delivery and discharge .
concrete may be mixed at the site of construction at a central point or in transit mixers all in accordance with these specifications .
num a .
equipment mixers and agitators .
mixers may be stationary mixers or truck mixers .
agitators may be truck mixers or truck agitators .
stationary mixers shall be equipped with a metal plate or plates on which are plainly marked the mixing speed of the drum or paddles and the maximum capacity in terms of the volume of mixed concrete .
when used for the complete mixing of concrete stationary mixers shall be equipped with an acceptable timing device that will not permit the batch to be discharged until the specified mixing time has elapsed .
each truck mixer or agitator shall have attached thereto in a prominent place a metal plate or plates on which are plainly marked the gross volume of the drum the capacity of the drum or container in terms of the volume of the mixed concrete and the minimum and maximum mixing speeds of rotation of the drum blades or paddles .
when the concrete is truckmixed the volume of concrete mixed per batch shall not exceed the mixers nominal capacity as shown on the manufacturers standard rating plate on the mixer except that an overload up to num percent above the mixers nominal capacity may be permitted provided concrete test data for strength segregation and uniform consistency are satisfactory and provided no spillage of concrete takes place .
truck mixers and agitators shall be equipped with means by which the number of revolutions of the drum blades or paddles may be readily verified .
truck mixers must also have a means of measuring the amount of water added during retempering such as a water meter or other method approved by the engineer .
all stationary and truck mixers shall be capable of combining the ingredients of the concrete within the specified time or number of revolutions specified herein into a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass and of discharging the concrete so that no less than num of the num requirements shown in aashto mnum table anum shall have been met .
the agitator shall be capable of maintaining the mixed concrete in a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass and of discharging the concrete with a satisfactory degree of uniformity as defined by aashto mnum annex anum .
slump tests of individual samples taken after discharge of approximately num percent and num percent of the load may be made for a quick check of the probable degree of uniformity .
these two samples shall be obtained within an elapsed time of not more than num minutes .
if these slumps differ more than that specified in aashto mnum annex anum the mixer or agitator shall not be used unless the condition is corrected .
mixers and agitators shall be examined or weighted routinely as frequently as necessary to detect changes in condition due to accumulations of hardened concrete or mortar and examined to detect wear of blades .
when such changes are extensive enough to affect the mixer performance the prooftests described in aashto mnum annex anum shall be performed to show whether the correction of deficiencies is required .
b. mixing and delivery .
readymixed concrete shall be mixed and delivered to the point designated by the engineer by means of one of the following combinations of operations central mixed and truckmixed concrete .
num agitators and nonagitating equipment shall only be used for delivering premixed concrete .
mixers and agitators shall be operated within the limits of capacity and speed of rotation designated by the manufacturer of the equipment .
num .
central mixed concrete .
concrete that is mixed completely in a stationary mixer and transported to the point of delivery either in a truck agitator or a truck mixer operating at agitating speed or in nonagitating equipment approved by the engineer and meeting the requirements specified herein shall conform to the following the mixing time shall be counted from the time all the solid materials are in the drum .
the batch shall be so charged into the mixer that some water will enter in advance of the cement and aggregate and all water shall be in the drum by the end of the first onefourth of the specified mixing time .
where no mixer performance tests are made the acceptable mixing time for mixers having capacities of num cubic yard or less shall not be less than num minute .
for mixers of greater capacity this minimum shall be increased num seconds for each cubic yard or fraction thereof of additional capacity .
for mixer performance refer to aashto mnum annex anum .
num .
truck mixed concrete is that which is completely mixed in a truck mixer num to num revolutions at the mixing speed designated by the manufacturer to produce the uniformity of concrete indicated in aashto mnum annex anum .
concrete uniformity tests shall be made in accordance with aashto mnum and if requirements for uniformity of concrete indicated in aashto mnum annex anum are not met with num revolutions of mixing after all ingredients including water are in the drum that mixer shall not be used until the condition is corrected .
when satisfactory performance is found in one truck mixer the performance of mixers of substantially the same design and condition of blades may be regarded as satisfactory .
additional revolutions of the mixer beyond the number found to produce the required uniformity of concrete shall be at a designated agitating speed .
num .
use of nonagitating equipment .
centralmixed concrete may be transported in suitable nonagitating equipment approved by the engineer .
the proportions of the concrete shall be approved by the engineer and the following limitations shall apply bodies of nonagitating equipment shall be smooth watertight metal containers equipped with gates that will permit control of the discharge of the concrete .
covers shall be provided for protection against the weather when required by the engineer .
the concrete shall be delivered to the site of the work in a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass and discharged with a satisfactory degree of uniformity as prescribed in aashto mnum annex anum .
c. discharge .
num .
time and rate .
the time elapsing from the time water is added to the mix until the concrete is in the forms at the site of the work shall not exceed num minutes when hauled in truck mixers or truckagitators or num minutes when concrete is hauled by nonagitating equipment .
concrete not discharged into its final place within num minutes num minutes when using nonagitating num equipment after batching shall be wasted at no additional expense to the state even if a retarder is used .
the rate of discharge of mixed concrete from transit mixers or agitators shall be controlled by the speed of rotation of the drum in the discharge direction with the discharge gate fully open .
these limits shall not be exceeded .
if the discharge of concrete is accomplished by tilting the body the surface of the load shall be restrained by a suitable baffle to prevent segregation .
num .
retempering .
retempering concrete by adding water or by other means will not be permitted until after arrival on the job site and only when delivered in truck mixers .
additional water or admixtures may be added to the batch materials and additional mixing performed to increase the slump or air content to meet the specified requirements if permitted by the engineer and provided that a all these operations are performed within num minutes after the initial mixing operation b the maximum watercement ratio is not exceeded c the admixture dosages do not exceed manufacturers recommendations .
if additional water is to be incorporated into the concrete the drum shall be revolved not less than num revolutions at mixing speed immediately after retempering the concrete and before discharge is commenced .
all admixtures shall be added at the plant .
the engineer may approve chemical admixture superplasticizers air entrainment etc .
adjustments at the job site by means of a metered pressurized wand with the exception of silica fume .
the manufacturers recommended dosage shall not be exceeded .
if additional admixtures are incorporated into the concrete the drum shall be revolved not less than numtonum revolutions at mixing speed immediately after retempering the concrete and before discharge is commenced .
concrete that is not within the specified slump or air content limits at the time of placement shall not be used .
the contractor shall assume the responsibility of any concrete retempering at the site as permitted by the engineer .
retempering with admixtures will be permitted only with the approval of the engineer or when specifically provided for in the contract .
num limitations of mixing .
no concrete shall be mixed placed or finished when the natural light is insufficient unless an adequate artificial lighting system is operational and approved by the engineer .
the contractor at all times during and immediately after placement shall protect the concrete from adverse affects of rain .
num when there is a probability of air temperature below numof the contractor shall submit for approval by the engineer a cold weather concreting and curing plan detailing the methods and equipment which will be used to assure that the concrete temperature does not fall below numof during the first num days after placement and shall be considered the protection period .
concrete mixing operations during cold weather shall conform to subsection num cold weather concrete .
concrete mixing operations during hot weather shall conform to subsection num hot weather concrete .
num cold weather concrete .
when concreting is authorized by the engineer during cold weather the aggregates andor water may be heated by either steam or dry heat prior to being placed in the mixer .
the apparatus used shall heat the mass uniformly and shall be so arranged as to preclude the possible occurrence of overheated areas which might injure the materials .
unless otherwise authorized the temperature of the mixed concrete shall be not less than numof and not more than numof at the time of placing it in the forms .
if the air temperature is numof or less at the time of placing concrete the engineer may require the water and the aggregates to be heated to not less than numof nor more than numof and be verifiable by a temperature measuring device .
no concrete shall be placed on frozen subgrade nor shall frozen aggregates be used in the concrete .
stockpiled aggregates may be heated by the use of dry heat or steam .
aggregates shall not be heated directly by gas or oil flame or on sheet metal over fire .
when aggregates are heated in bins steamcoil or watercoil heating or other methods which will not be detrimental to the aggregates may be used .
the use of live steam on or through binned aggregates will not be permitted without approval by the engineer .
sufficient heating devices of a type approved by the engineer shall be installed under an enclosure or covering capable of maintaining at all times and under all weather conditions during the protection period a uniform concrete temperature of not less than numof .
heating devices shall be arranged to prevent overheating any areas of forms or concrete .
before any concrete is placed the enclosure and heating apparatus shall be as nearly complete as the placing of the concrete will permit .
the minimum temperature shall be continuously maintained around deposited concrete for a period of num days immediately after concrete has been placed and then reduced gradually so the concrete will not be subjected to sudden change in temperature .
when permitted by the engineer the heating period may be reduced when the concrete units involved will not be subjected to any appreciable bending stress from dead or live load until after seasonal conditions have permitted normal curing .
in general a steam heating system may be used to supply heat during the protection period .
auxiliary devices such as stoves covered salamanders with stacks or unit heaters shall be provided for use during the periods required for preheating the forms reinforcing steel and previously placed concrete to numof minimum prior to placing the concrete during placing of concrete during the time required for the removal of forms and during the surface finishing operations .
when approved by the engineer heat for protection may be supplied by any method which will maintain the required temperature of not less than numof .
when methods other than live steam num are used provisions shall be made in the enclosure being heated to maintain a humid condition of sufficient vapor minimum humidity of num percent content to prevent the moisture in the concrete from being evaporated .
the contractor shall provide adequate fire protection when heating is in progress and shall maintain watchmen or other attendants to keep heating units in continuous operation .
the use of open fires will not be permitted .
when approved by the engineer concrete may be protected and cured by the use of insulating materials of sufficient thickness to properly maintain the concrete at the specified minimum temperature .
the insulating materials and methods of application shall meet with the approval of the engineer .
in general the insulating material used on vertical forms shall consist of blankets having a durable liner on the side exposed to the weather .
the liners shall be asphalt bonded to both sides of the insulating mat .
the insulation material shall be applied tightly against the wood form with the nailing flanges extending out from the blanket so they can be stapled or battened to the sides of the horizontal or vertical studs spaced as required .
the top of all piers abutments and like concrete shall be covered with the insulating blanket tightly secured to prevent loss of heat .
areas around protruding reinforcing which can not be protected with the insulation blankets shall be first covered with sufficient straw or hay to prevent loss of heat from the concrete .
in addition to the above tarpaulins shall be used as an overall cover on top of such concrete .
failure to attain satisfactory control and results with insulation materials will be cause for rejection .
the contractor will keep a daily permanent record of the concrete surface temperatures throughout the curing period with the use of a numhour temperature recording device disc or other approved type .
the engineer will retain these records .
during freezing weather all keyways anchor bolt holes or other depressions in exposed horizontal concrete surfaces shall be sealed against the admission of water and any damage to the concrete due to the freezing of water in such depressions shall be repaired if practicable or the concrete shall be replaced by the contractor at his expense and as directed by the engineer .
although permission may be granted to mix and place concrete under the conditions described above the contractor is not relieved of any responsibility for obtaining satisfactory results .
unsatisfactory concrete placed under such conditions shall be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
num hot weather concrete .
for the purpose of these specifications hot weather shall be as defined in the american concrete institute manual of concrete practice num edition .
during concreting operations in hot weather appropriate measures shall be taken to reduce the hazards of increased rate of cement hydration flash set loss of water due to evaporation high concrete ingredient temperatures and the increased difficulty of concrete placing and finishing .
the following requirements shall be met during concrete placement operations in hot weather a .
concrete temperature .
the temperature of the concrete at the point of discharge shall not exceed numof .
num b. cooling materials .
the contractor may reduce the temperature of the concrete by cooling one or more of several ingredients .
the aggregates may be cooled by fogging or other suitable means which will not result in a high variation of moisture content within the stockpile .
chipped or crushed ice may be used in the mix as a portion of the mixing water on a pound for pound basis provided such measure is determined at the time it is placed in the mix .
if used all ice shall be melted before the batch is discharged from the mixing unit .
water may also be cooled by refrigeration or other means which provide a uniform mixing water temperature .
c. concrete placing .
immediately before the concrete is placed the forms and reinforcement steel shall be cooled by spraying with water .
in no case shall there be any standing water in the concrete forms as a result of the spraying procedures .
the contractor shall have sufficient skilled men and adequate equipment to place the concrete without delays which may cause excessive slump loss and evaporation due to overmixing or exposure before it is placed .
d. finishing .
to prevent thermal and shrinkage cracking resulting from moisture loss the contractor may be required to furnish wind screens to use water fogging or other approved means of supplying moisture .
finishing operations shall follow as closely as practicable behind the placing operation so that curing may begin as soon as possible .
num testing of concrete .
a .
process control of concrete .
in the production and placement of all portland cement concrete the contractor shall be responsible for the process control of all materials during the handling blending mixing and placement operations .
the contractor shall have a competent and experienced concrete technician in charge of the mixing operations and overall quality control .
production control procedures shall be such to insure that the concrete produced complies with these specifications .
the contractor shall furnish a minimum of one concrete specimen curing box that meets the requirements of subsection numc of these specifications .
the curing box will be used for the curing of acceptance concrete test specimens and it will be required for all classes of concrete .
b .
acceptance sampling and testing .
the contractor shall afford the engineer all reasonable access without charge for making necessary checks of the production facilities and securing and furnishing the necessary samples to determine if the concrete is being produced in accordance with the specifications .
samples of fresh concrete for testing shall be taken after all concrete retempering is performed .
when sampling from within the forms is impractical samples shall be taken at the nearest accessible point in the conveyance system prior to placement into the forms .
acceptance sampling and testing shall be in accordance with the rhode island department of transportation project schedule for the sampling testing and certification of num materials andor as modified in these specifications .
sampling and testing shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements as follows num .
sampling for temperature air content and slump aashto tnum .
num .
air content aashto tnum .
num .
slump aashto tnum .
num .
num and numday compressive strength aashto tnum and aashto tnum .
num .
unit weight and temperature aashto tnum .
every batch shall be sampled and tested for air content slump and temperature during concrete placement or production numpercent sampling and testing .
random sampling and testing for air content slump and temperature may be substituted for numpercent sampling and testing if test results are shown to be within the specification limitations .
however numpercent sampling and testing will be reinstated if a test result for any random sample is outside the specification limitations for air content slump or concrete temperature .
compressive strength test specimens shall be standard num x num cylinders unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
c. acceptance plan .
the following is the acceptance plan necessary to obtain samples perform tests and provide inspection of the work .
the terms used in this acceptance plan are defined as follows num .
acceptance plan .
the method of taking and making measurements on a sample for the purpose of determining the acceptability of a lot of material or construction .
num .
lot .
an isolated quantity of material from a single source .
a measured amount of construction produced by the same process .
num .
sublot .
equal divisions or portions of a lot .
num .
random sample .
a sample chosen in such a manner that each increment in the lot has an equal probability of being selected .
num .
acceptance .
as defined in table num lot acceptance schedule .
num .
rejection .
when used in this context rejection shall mean remove dispose and replace at the contractors expense or at the discretion of the engineers rejection may imply acceptance at a lower price .
num .
batch .
a quantity of concrete not exceeding num cubic yards produced and delivered .
num d. twenty eight numday concrete compressive strength .
for a given class of concrete the portions of a concrete structure constructed during one continuous concrete placement operation shall be called the lot .
the lot shall be divided into sublots when the total quantity of concrete placed for each continuous concrete operation exceeding num cubic yards as such the sublot shall represent a quantity of num cubic yards or less .
six cylinders shall be cast for each num cubic yards or less of concrete delivered for each class of concrete .
the casting of any set of num cylinders from the same sample of concrete shall not be permitted .
the following procedure shall be used to insure random sampling each quantity of num cubic yards or less shall be divided into thirds and num cylinders shall be cast from each third .
e. evaluation .
acceptance for compressive strength will be evaluated relative to compliance with the minimum numday compressive strength fc shown on the plans for each class of concrete produced in accordance with table num lot acceptance schedule .
three cylinders randomly selected from each set of num cylinders representing num cubic yards or less of concrete placed shall be tested for numday compressive strength .
f. case a lot quantity of num cubic yards or less .
when the lot quantities are num cubic yards or less the average numday compressive strength of num cylinders selected from a set of num cylinders and the range the difference between the largest and the smallest test result will be used to calculate the acceptance of the lot .
the following formula will be used to calculate the lot acceptance test result latr .
formula a __ latr x xnumxnumxnum num range r xlargest xsmallest symbols x individual test value which is the numday compressive strength of each cylinder tested .
x the mean average numday compressive strength of a set of num cylinders .
r range the difference between the largest and smallest numday compressive strength test result .
latr lot acceptance test result .
g. case b lot quantity greater than num cubic yards .
when the lot quantities are greater than num cubic yards num cylinders from each set of num cylinders from each sublot shall be tested for numday compressive strength .
the mean value of the sum of the average compressive num strengths and the mean value of the sum of the ranges will be used to calculate the acceptance of the lot .
the following formula will be used to calculate the lot acceptance test result latr relative to the use of sublots .
formula b __ __ latr x xnum xnum xn n _ r rnum rnum rn n symbols x the mean average numday compressive strength of a set of num cylinders for each sublot .
x the mean average of the sum of the average numday compressive strength test result of each sublot .
r the average of the sum of the ranges r for each sublot .
n number of sets .
concrete will be evaluated for acceptance in accordance with table num lot acceptance schedule on the basis of the calculated lot acceptance test results latr .
table num lot acceptance schedule lot acceptance test result latr pay factor x or x lpf _ not less than f c num r or r num _ not less than f c num r or r num _ not less than f c num r or r num _ for less than f c num r or r num num. f c is the numday compressive strength specified on the plans .
_ num .
range r or r is the difference between the results of the largest and smallest lot or sublot acceptance test results .
acceptance of the lot at the num lot pay factor lpf in lieu of remove dispose and replacement of the lot will be at the request of the contractor and approval by the engineer .
num acceptance at the num or num lot pay factor lpf in lieu of remove dispose and replacement will be as determined by the engineer on the basis of the effect of the defective lot on the structural integrity of the concrete structure .
the contractor may elect to remove and dispose any defective material and replace it with new material to avoid a pay factor of less than num .
any such new material will be sampled tested and evaluated for acceptance in accordance with the applicable requirements of this section num .
the engineer may reject any quantity of material which appears to be defective based on visual inspection or test results .
such rejected material shall not be used in the work and the results of the tests run on the rejected material will not be included in the calculation of the lot acceptance test results .
h. independent assurance testing .
verification testing shall be performed by the state in accordance with the rhode island department of transportation publication for the project schedule for sampling testing and certification of materials .
num curing .
a. curing plan .
the contractor shall submit to the engineer for approval a plan detailing his scheme for achieving the curing of the concrete for the various structural elements as required by these specifications .
this detailed plan shall include but is not limited to the following num .
curing method .
num .
providing for enclosures indicating method of holding down enclosure safely in place .
num .
heat devices types and location around the structure .
num .
method of monitoring the temperature of hardened concrete .
num .
back up systems as required .
the temperature on the surface of the hardened concrete shall not fall below numf at any time during the first num days of curing .
curing operations on all exposed surfaces shall commence immediately after the placing and finishing operations have been completed .
the method of curing selected shall be that allowed under the various concrete items and shall be continued throughout the work unless the engineer determines that the curing plan results in unsatisfactory concrete curing .
any changes in the method of curing must be authorized in writing .
in all cases in which curing requires the use of water the curing shall have prior right to all water supply or suppliers .
failure to provide sufficient cover material of whatever kind the contractor may elect to use or lack of water to adequately take care of both curing and other requirements shall be cause for immediate suspension of concreting operations .
the concrete shall not be left exposed for more than ½ hour between stages of curing and during the curing period .
num all newly placed concrete shall be cured in accordance with the methods set forth in these specifications .
b .
water method .
the concrete shall be kept continuously wet by the application of water for a minimum period of num days after the concrete has been placed .
cotton mats rugs or carpets may be used as a curing medium to retain the moisture during the curing period .
when cotton mats rugs or carpets are to be used to retain the moisture the entire surface of the concrete shall be kept damp by applying water with a nozzle so that the flow is atomized in the form of a mist rather than a spray until the surface of the concrete is covered with the curing medium .
the moisture from the nozzle shall not be applied under pressure directly upon the concrete and shall not be allowed to accumulate on the concrete in a quantity sufficient to cause a flow or wash the surface .
at the expiration of the curing period the concrete surfaces shall be cleared of all curing mediums .
when concrete bridge decks and flat slabs are to be cured without the use of a moisture retaining medium the entire surface shall be kept damp by the application of water with an atomizing nozzle as specified in the preceding paragraph until the concrete has set after which the entire surface of the concrete shall be sprinkled continuously with water for a period of not less than num days .
c. curing compound method .
concrete that is treated with any additional coatings or overlays shall not be cured as provided in this section .
surfaces of the concrete which are exposed to the air shall be sprayed uniformly with a curing compound .
curing compound shall be applied at a rate in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation .
runs sags thin areas skips or holidays in the applied curing compound shall be evidence that the application is not satisfactory .
if a clear color curing compound is used a fugitive dye shall be added to the curing compound to insure complete coverage .
curing compounds shall be applied using power operated atomizing spray equipment .
the power operated spraying equipment shall be equipped with an operational pressure gauge and a means of controlling the pressure .
the curing compound shall be applied to the concrete following the surface finishing operation immediately before the moisture sheen disappears from the surface but before any drying shrinkage or craze cracks begin to appear .
in the event of any drying or cracking of the surface application of water with an atomizing nozzle as specified above for the water method shall be started immediately and shall be continued until application of the compound is started or resumed .
however the compound shall not be applied over any resulting freestanding waters .
should the film of compound be damaged from any cause before the expiration of num days after the concrete is placed in the case of structures and num hours in the case of pavement the damaged portion shall be repaired immediately with additional compound .
num all curing compounds shall remain sprayable at temperatures above numf .
they shall not be diluted or altered in any manner after manufacture .
when the curing compound is shipped in tanks or tank trucks a shipping invoice shall accompany each load .
the invoice shall contain the same information as that required herein for container labels .
curing compounds may be sampled by the engineer at the source of supply or at the job site or at both locations .
the curing compound shall be used within num days of its manufacture .
all tests will be conducted in accordance with the latest test methods of the american society for testing materials .
d. waterproof membrane method .
the exposed finished surfaces of concrete shall be sprayed with water using a nozzle that atomizes the flow so that a mist and not a spray is formed until the concrete has set after which the curing membrane shall be placed .
the curing membrane shall remain in place for a period of not less than num hours .
sheeting material for curing concrete shall conform to the specifications of aashto mnum for white reflective materials .
the sheeting material shall be fabricated into sheets of such width as to provide a complete cover for the entire concrete surface .
all joints in the sheets shall be securely cemented together in such a manner as to provide a waterproof joint .
the joint seams shall have a minimum lap of num inches .
the sheets shall be securely weighted down by means satisfactory to the engineer .
no rocks sand or loose debris shall be used as ballast .
should any portion of the sheets be broken or damaged before the expiration of num hours after being placed the broken or damaged portions shall be immediately repaired with new sheets properly secured into place .
sections of membrane which have lost their waterproof qualities or have been damaged to such an extent as to render them unfit for curing the concrete shall not be used .
e. formsinplace method .
formed surfaces of concrete may be cured by retaining the forms in place .
the forms shall remain in place for a minimum period of num continuous days after the concrete has been placed except that for members over num inches in least dimension the forms shall remain in place for a minimum period of num continuous days .
the forms shall be removed no later than num weeks maximum .
all joints in the forms and the joints between the end of forms and concrete shall be kept moisture tight during the curing period .
cracks in the forms and cracks between the forms and the concrete shall be resealed by methods subject to the approval of the engineer .
f. curing precast concrete members .
precast concrete members shall be cured for not less than num days in conformance with water method steam curing or by radiant heat at the num option of the contractor .
steam curing for precast members shall conform to the following provisions num .
after placement of the concrete members shall be held for a minimum numhour presteaming period .
if the ambient air temperature is below numof steam shall be applied during the presteaming period to hold the air surrounding the member at a temperature between num and numof .
num .
to prevent moisture loss on exposed surfaces during the presteaming period members shall be covered as soon as possible after casting or the exposed surfaces shall be kept wet by fog spray or wet blankets .
num .
enclosures for steam curing shall allow free circulation of steam about the member and shall be constructed to contain the live steam with a minimum moisture loss .
the use of tarpaulins or similar flexible covers will be permitted provided they are kept in good repair and secured in such a manner to prevent the loss of steam and moisture .
num .
steam at the jets shall be low pressure and in a saturated condition .
steam jets shall not impinge directly on the concrete test cylinders or forms .
during application of the steam the temperature rise within the enclosure shall not exceed numof per hour .
the curing temperature throughout the enclosure shall not exceed numof and shall be maintained at a constant level for a sufficient time necessary to develop the required transfer strength .
control cylinders shall be covered to prevent moisture loss and shall be placed in a location where temperature is representative of the average temperature of the enclosure .
num .
calibrated temperature recording devices that will provide an accurate continuous permanent record of the curing temperature shall be provided .
a minimum of one temperature recording device per num feet of continuous bed length will be required for checking temperature .
num .
once minimum transfer compressive strength is achieved members in tension shall be detensioned immediately after the termination of steam curing while the concrete and forms are still warm or the temperature under the enclosure shall be maintained above numof until the stress is transferred to the concrete .
num .
initial curing of precast concrete will be considered complete once specified transfer strength is verified by compressive strength test results .
num .
radiant heat may be applied by means of pipes circulating steam hot oil or hot water or by electric heating elements .
radiant heat curing shall be done under a suitable enclosure to contain the heat and moisture loss and shall be minimized by covering all exposed concrete surfaces with plastic sheeting .
if the contractor proposes to cure by any other special method the method and its details shall be subject to the approval of the engineer .
num method for placement of portland cement concrete by pumping .
placement of concrete by pumping will be permitted as approved by the engineer .
the equipment shall be so arranged that no vibrations result which might damage freshly placed concrete .
where concrete is conveyed and placed by mechanically applied pressure the equipment shall be suitable in kind num and adequate in capacity for the work .
the operation of the pump shall be such that a continuous stream of concrete without air pockets is produced .
to facilitate the continuity of the stream an elbow is required at the end of the discharge trunkline .
when pumping is completed the concrete remaining in the pipeline if it is to be used shall be ejected in such a manner that there will be no contamination of the concrete or separation of the ingredients .
concrete shall be placed so as to avoid segregation of materials and displacement of reinforcement .
prior to the actual placement of concrete the engineer may require the contractor to demonstrate the capability of the equipment to convey the concrete mixture to maintain the specified quality .
no further verification of the equipments capability will be required unless evidence of nonuniform concrete is observed by the engineer during placement .
concrete shall not come in contact with aluminum during conveying and placing operations .
the lines shall have a minimum diameter of num inches .
the specific pumping equipment which the contractor proposes to use shall be subject to the approval of the engineer .
all chutes troughs and pipes shall be kept clean and free from coatings of hardened concrete by thoroughly flushing with water after each run water used for flushing shall be discarded clear of the concrete already in place .
dropping concrete a distance of more than num feet or depositing a large quantity at any point and running or working it along the forms shall not be permitted .
special care shall be taken to fill each part of the form by depositing concrete directly in the form as near to its final position as possible to work the coarser aggregates back from the face of the concrete and to force the concrete under and around the reinforcement .
after the concrete has taken its initial set care shall be exercised to avoid jarring the forms or placing any strain on the ends of projecting reinforcement .
the contractor shall have the option to submit for approval by the engineer a pump mix design formula of the concrete mixture to be used with the specific pumping equipment .
the concrete mixture shall meet the specific requirements of paragraph entitled proportioning for air content cement factor and slump for the various classes of concrete specified .
num method of measurement .
portland cement concrete will be measured as provided for in the specifications andor special provisions for the particular item or items under which it is paid .
num basis of payment .
portland cement concrete complete in place and fully accepted will be paid for as provided in the specifications covering the particular use .
any portland cement concrete not otherwise provided for will be paid for under the item of concrete masonry of the class indicated and required .
these payments shall constitute full compensation for furnishing all labor materials equipment tools and incidentals to produce place and protect the concrete as herein specified in addition to any requirements in the specifications for the particular use except that a reduction in payment will be made for each lot of concrete not fully accepted .
this reduction in payment for each lot will be determined by multiplying the price of the various classes of num concrete per cubic yard by the pay factor determined in subsection num testing of concrete .
section num mineral additives for portland cement concrete num description .
this specification covers the requirements for either partial replacement of portland cement with a mineral additive or as an addition to the minimum specified cement factor .
concrete containing mineral additives shall conform to the applicable requirements of section num portland cement concrete of these specifications together with the additional provisions set forth below .
num materials .
all material components shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num of these specifications and shall also be included on the departments approved materials list .
num mix design and approval process .
the mix design and approval process of the portland cement concrete containing mineral additives shall conform to the provisions of subsection num of these specifications .
some adjustments in yield will have to be made in the mix design to compensate for the different specific gravity of the mineral additive .
the watercement ratio shall be based on a combined weight of portland cement and the weight of the mineral additive .
num construction methods .
construction methods shall conform to subsection num of these specifications except as otherwise provided herein .
the contractor shall furnish a certificate of compliance from the manufacturer certifying that the mineral additive being supplied conforms to the chemical and physical requirements as specified by the department .
no mineral additives shall be added to the concrete at the construction site .
mineral additives replacement quantities or additions other than those herein specified shall not be allowed unless specifically called for on the contract documents or as authorized by the engineer .
separate storage silos will be made available for each mineral additive and they shall be protected from rain and moisture .
unless otherwise noted mineral additives shall be handled in the same manner as portland cement .
all storage silos shall be completely empty and clean before any mineral additive is deposited therein unless the silo contains a mineral additive of the same type .
num combinations of mineral admixtures will not be allowed unless called for in the contract documents or as approved by the engineer .
when allowed combined mineral admixtures shall be compatible and approved by their respective manufacturers .
num fly ash .
fly ash shall be substituted or added to portland cement in the amounts specified in the contract documents .
if no quantity has been sospecified the contractor has the option of substituting fly ash for portland cement up to num percent by weight on a numtonum ratio .
fly ash is not permitted in class xae concrete .
fly ash shall not be substituted for portland cement after october numth and prior to march numth .
the fly ash supplier shall maintain a quality control program open for inspection by the state as deemed by the engineer .
num microsilica .
microsilica shall be substituted or added to portland cement in the amounts specified in the contract documents .
if the use of microsilica is specified by the engineer but no quantity has been listed in the contract documents the microsilica content shall be num percent by weight of portland cement on a numtonum ratio .
any portland cement concrete mix containing microsilica shall not exceed a watercement ratio of num .
only one brand of microsilica shall be supplied for the life of the contract .
if the microsilica is supplied in slurry form it shall be agitated as necessary to prevent separation .
a .
sampling microsilica additive .
a sample of microsilica additive shall be taken by the engineer directly from the storage container at the batch plant .
if the microsilica is supplied in slurry form approximately num gallon shall be allowed to flow out before the actual sample is obtained .
the initial gallon may be placed back into the storage container .
the actual sample shall be placed directly into a clean and dry one quart plastic jar furnished by the state .
a sample of the microsilica admixture shall be obtained for each production day .
the contractor shall provide the engineer with an inventory list from the manufacturer of the microsilica additive for all shipments received .
num ground granulated blast furnace slag .
ground granulated blast furnace slag shall be substituted or added to portland cement in the amounts specified in the contract documents .
the use of ground granulated blast furnace slag shall be in accordance with the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
ground granulated blast furnace slag shall not be substituted for portland cement after october numth and prior to march numth .
ground granulated blast furnace slag is not permitted in class xae concrete .
prequalification of a source may be based upon test results by the departments laboratory or a certified report of test results by a cement concrete reference laboratory ccrl approved num or nationally recognized independent laboratory attesting that the material is in full compliance with these specifications .
num method of measurement .
mineral additives for portland cement concrete will not be measured for payment .
num basis of payment .
no separate payment will be made for mineral additives for portland cement concrete .
portland cement concrete with mineral additives will be paid for under the appropriate item or items as listed in the proposal .
section num controlled low strength material clsm num description .
this work consists of furnishing and placing controlled low strength material clsm as a self consolidating self leveling rigid setting low density material to be substituted for compacted gravel structural fill and any incidental construction directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
any modifications of these general requirements will be provided in the specific requirements for each item unless otherwise indicated in the contract documents .
clsm consists of a homogenous mixture of portland cement fine aggregate water admixtures when used and pozzolanic material when used mixed in proportions to attain the properties herein specified .
the contractor must acquaint himself with the kind and type of clsm required before submitting the mix design .
num classification .
there are two main categories for clsm excavatable and non excavatable .
the consistency of these two main categories can be further subdivided as flowable and very flowable .
each classification required for the particular work unless otherwise indicated or superseded by the contract documents is shown in table num .
table i description flowable very flowable excavatable i ii nonexcavatable iii iv a. definitions .
num .
very flowable .
exhibit characteristics needed for small or confined areas and required to flow over long distances .
num .
flowable .
where the above flowability characteristics are not required .
num num .
class i and ii .
excavatable that may be removed in the future if required may be used but not limited to in types of applications such as backfill void filler fill around manholes and catch basins utility cut backfill .
num .
class iii and iv .
nonexcavatable used in areas not expected to be removed in the future such as but not limited to fill between median barriers under approach slabs mat foundations .
num materials .
materials shall conform to the applicable requirements of section num portland cement concrete of these specifications unless modified as indicated below .
num chemical admixtures .
in addition to the requirements of section num the clsm may contain air entrainment .
the amount and type of air entraining admixture is dependent upon the design of the clsm .
the contractor shall submit the type of air entrainment to be used and specify if an air entrainment admixture is used or if a high range air inducing or foaming type of admixture is used within the mix design .
num coloring agents .
if required by the engineer a coloring pigment shall be thoroughly mixed in the clsm following the utility color code available thorough dig safe .
the coloring pigment shall meet the requirements of astm cnum and be approved by the engineer .
coloring pigments shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num pozzolans .
in addition to the requirements of section num the pozzolan material if used shall consist of but not be limited to fly ash type f meeting the requirements of astm cnum including the supplemental chemical and physical requirements .
the use of high or low carbon content i.e .
loss of ignition fly ash may be allowed if submitted for approval to the engineer on a project specific basis by the contractor .
lime cao content shall be less than num percent by weight for classes i and ii .
num construction methods .
num general .
the clsm shall be produced and delivered by a department approved ready mix concrete supplier familiar with the design production and transport of clsm .
the contractor shall follow the guidelines set forth in aci numrnum report controlled low strength materials clsm except that the engineer will not allow the use of nonstandard materials section num of aci report .
the methods and tolerances shall conform to the applicable requirements of section num of these specifications unless modified herein .
num proportions .
a .
general .
the clsm shall be designed to conform to the following end resultant properties aashto test method referenced if applicable modified slump performed in class i and iii num to num diameter accordance with para .
b below class ii and iv num to num diameter .
air content t num num percent to num percent see below num unit weight t num num pcf from that stated on mix design .
the clsm can contain a specific fly ash amount a high range or foaming type air entraining admixture or other types of pozzolans .
if a high range or foaming type air entrainment admixture is used the air content shall be a minimum of num percent .
the maximum air content could be adjusted if it is demonstrated to the engineer by the contractor that no deleterious effects would be incurred .
the contractor will be held to the air content stated on the mix design within the following tolerance range air content percent tolerance percent num num num num num num num num the clsm shall develop numday compressive strength tnum tnum or tnum as indicated below mix specification range psi maximum psi class i and ii num num num at num days num at num months class iii and iv num num num at num days specific compressive strengths for structural applications will be noted on the contract drawings .
b .
modified slump test .
in lieu of the standard slump test the following test will be performed a numinch num mm inside diameter by numinch num mm long straight tube constructed of a nonporous nonabsorbent material shall be dampened and placed upon a smooth level non porous nonabsorbent surface that is also dampened .
the tube shall be held firmly in place filled with clsm level to the top of the cylinder no rodding is required and struck off until the surface is flush with the top of the cylinder .
carefully clean the bottom perimeter of the cylinder of excess clsm .
the cylinder is then raised in a uniform vertical steady uplift manner without any lateral or torsional motions within num to num seconds .
do not knock material from the sides of the cylinder onto the resultant pancake .
complete an entire test within num½ minutes from sample to measurement .
the diameter of the pancake is measured to the nearest numinch num mm and the average diameter reported measure cohesive material only do not include water caused by segregation .
c. design and approval of clsm mixtures .
the contractor shall design and obtain approval of clsm mixtures in accordance with the applicable requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
num batching plants and equipment shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
num clsm mixing delivery and discharge .
in addition to the requirements of subsection num of these specifications process control testing shall be performed by the contractor and num these results shall be submitted on a certificate of compliance coc that states that all applicable specifications have been met .
testing performed by the engineer will not relieve the contractor of this requirement .
num limitations of mixing .
requirements for limitation of mixing shall conform to subsection num of these specifications .
num cold and hot weather clsm .
requirements for cold and hot weather clsm shall conform to subsections num and num respectively of these specifications .
num curing .
the requirements of subsection num of these specifications will apply if there is a probability of the air temperature falling below numof andor the temperature on the surface of the clsm will fall below numof at any time during the first five days after placement .
the clsm shall be protected from freezing until it is hardened .
the temperature of the clsm shall be a minimum of numof upon placement .
otherwise no curing is required .
num testing of clsm .
in addition to the requirements of subsection num of these specifications for para .
b acceptance sampling and testing cast six num x num cylinders per each days production and type of mix used num x num cylinders also acceptable .
rodding of specimen is not required .
once the specimen is full lightly strike the exterior of the mold num to num times to consolidate the clsm .
specimens shall remain in the molds until time of testing .
extreme care shall be exercised in the handling and transportation of clsm specimens .
age of compressive strengths will be tested at the discretion of the engineer .
paras .
c d e f and g of subsection num do not apply to clsm .
num plant field laboratory .
the requirements for plant field laboratory shall conform to section num of these specifications except for the following which do not apply a. subsection num bituminous concrete mixing plants .
b. subsection num cement concrete mixing plants the following pieces of testing equipment will not be required num .
the num kg digital platform beam scale .
num .
the gravity drying oven .
num .
the gilson tsnum sieve shaker .
num .
the sample splitter num½inch chute width .
c. subsection num computer equipment .
num placing clsm by pumping .
the requirements for pumping clsm shall conform to subsection num of these specifications with the following exception the discharge height may exceed num feet and is limited only if the mixture becomes segregated .
pumping may be suspended if the engineer observes any deleterious materials in the discharge .
the contractor shall demonstrate the ability to pump clsm without appreciable loss or consistency of air content .
num num trafficpaving .
resumption of traffic onto clsm or the asphalt paving over clsm when required by the engineer to expedite the overall operation will require an initial set time and early strength development .
the initial time for the clsm to set will be a maximum of num hours which time will support the weight of the traffic andor paving operation without rutting or damage to the clsm .
the contractor will demonstrate during the mix design approval process that the above condition will be attained .
the engineer may require the area to be completely covered by steel plating in accordance with details on the plans or protected in accordance with the latest edition of the mutcd .
num trench excavation limit .
for utility or drainage cuts within existing pavement the excavation limit will be as shown in the plans and or special provisions .
num method of measurement .
controlled low strength material will be measured by the number of cubic yards actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of controlled low strength material will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment testing and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num class hpae portland cement concrete num description .
class hpae concrete shall be used for castinplace and pre castprestressed concrete bridge structures and shall conform to the applicable requirements of sections num num num and num of these specifications together with the additional provisions set forth below .
num materials .
the concrete mix design for class hpae concrete shall contain the following additional components num liquid admixtures .
a .
corrosion inhibitor .
calcium nitrate based corrosion inhibitor shall conform to the requirements of section num of these specifications .
b .
mineral additives shall conform to the requirements of section num of these specifications .
c. shrinkage reduction .
eclipse as manufactured by w.r. grace or approved equal .
use and dosage rate of admixture will be specified on the plans .
num num synthetic fibers .
fibers shall be specifically designed to mitigate surface cracking and have the ability to be added to the concrete mix during production .
fiber density shall be a minimum of num million individual fibers per pound .
concrete shall be mixed for a minimum of num minutes at the required mixing speed once the fibers are added .
num mix designs .
the proportioning of the concrete mix design shall conform to the following guidelines in order to achieve the specified properties a. castinplace concrete .
total cementitious includes cement mineral admixture silica fume mnum and highly reactive pozzolans mnum num lbscy num lbscy maximum watercementitious ratio num corrosion inhibitor num galscy synthetic fibers num cy mineral additives silica fume content num cy fly ashground granulated blast furnace slag num of total cementitious by weight slump range num num air content num num compressive strength num day min .
num psi as identified in table num note num subsection num of these specifications the required slump range will be accomplished by the addition of a high range water reducing admixture astm cnum type f or g. b. precastprestressed concrete .
the mixdesign requirements for precastprestressed concrete shall conform to the provisions of subsections num and num para .
a except that the percentage of mineral additives shall be num of total cementitious by weight and the synthetic fibers shall not be required unless specified on the plans .
num manual batching .
the manual addition of silica fume and highly reactive pozzolan bags during the batching operation will be allowed on projects totaling num cy or less of class hp concrete or on individual placements of num cy or less of class hp concrete .
the engineer will approve the method and monitor the addition of the bags .
the concrete producer will record the quantity on the automated batch record .
num construction methods .
construction methods shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsections num num num and num of these specifications .
num method of measurement .
the materials required for class hpae portland cement concrete will not be measured for payment .
num num basis of payment .
no separate payment will be made for the materials required for class hpae portland cement concrete .
this item will be paid for under the appropriate item or items as listed in the proposal .
section num concrete with calcium nitrite based corrosion inhibitor num description .
this specification covers the requirements for adding a calcium nitrite based corrosion inhibitor to the concrete mix design .
concrete containing this admixture shall conform to the applicable requirements of parts num and num of these specifications together with the additional provisions set forth below .
num materials .
all concrete material components shall conform to the requirements of section m.num portland cement concrete of these specifications with the following additional provisions for the corrosion inhibitor .
num calcium nitrite based corrosion inhibitor shall conform to the requirements of astm cnum and shall contain num num percent of calcium nitrite by weight .
the manufacturer shall submit five years of continuous accelerated corrosion test data on concrete with watercement ratios equal to or less than num .
num concrete mix design approval process .
proportioning of ingredients and the design and approval of mixtures shall conform to the requirements of paras .
a and b of subsection num of these specifications together with the following additional provisions a .
rate .
calcium nitrite based corrosion inhibitor shall be added at a rate of num gallons per cubic yard with a tolerance of num percent .
b .
ratio .
the maximum water to cementitious by weight ratio shall be num .
num construction methods .
construction methods shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsections num num num and num of these specifications .
num sampling of calcium nitrite based corrosion inhibitor .
a sample of calcium nitrite based corrosion inhibitor shall be taken by a department representative .
the sample shall be taken directly from the storage container at the batch plant .
approximately num gallon shall be allowed to flow out before the actual sample is obtained .
the initial gallon may be placed back into the storage container .
the actual sample shall be placed directly into a clean and dry one quart plastic jar furnished by the department .
one sample of the corrosion inhibitor shall be obtained for each day of production .
the contractor shall supply to the engineer an inventory list from the manufacturer of the corrosion inhibitor for all shipments received .
num num curing concrete .
the curing of concrete with calcium nitrite based corrosion inhibitor shall be in accordance with subsection num of these specifications when used on bridge decks and in accordance with subsection num of these specifications for all other structural items .
num method of measurement .
the corrosion inhibitor admixture required for concrete with calcium nitrite based corrosion inhibitor will not be measured for payment .
num basis of payment .
no separate payment will be made for the addition of the corrosion inhibitor admixture required for concrete with calcium nitrite based corrosion inhibitor .
portland cement concrete with calcium nitratebased corrosion inhibitor will be paid for under the appropriate item or items as listed in the proposal .
num part num drainage and selected utility accessories section num culverts and storm drains num description .
this work consists of the construction or reconstruction of culverts and storm drains in reasonably close conformity with the dimensions and details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num nonmetallic pipe .
concrete clay fiber vitrified clay vitrified clay lined concrete and plastic pipe shall conform to applicable requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
a .
smooth interior corrugated polyethylene pipe .
pipe couplings and fittings shall conform to the applicable requirements of aashto mnum together with the following provisions .
num .
the pipe shall be type s and shall be included in the departments approved materials list .
num .
the basic materials shall be virgin or cleaned reworked polyethylene compounds .
no recycled materials shall be used .
num .
pipe dimensions shall conform to the following requirements nominal inside diameter in .
pipe size in .
min .
max .
num num num num num num num num num num .
all joints shall be watertight in accordance with astm dnum and shall be sealed with elastomeric gaskets that conform to astm fnum .
num .
reinforced concrete pipe shall be used at all locations where the nominal pipe size greater than num inches is specified .
num metal pipe .
ductile iron pipe and corrugated metal pipe of various types and configurations shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num num flared end sections .
concrete flared end sections shall be manufactured according to the details indicated on the plans .
concrete shall be class xae and shall otherwise conform to the applicable requirements of section num portland cement concrete of these specifications .
metal flared end sections shall conform to the requirements of section m.num drainage .
num inspection of pipe materials and manufacturing plants .
pipe and pipe materials shall meet the requirements of section m.num .
manufacturing plants shall be required to submit a quality control plan for review and approval by the engineer .
when the location of a plant permits said plant shall be inspected by the engineer for compliance with the approved quality control plan and these specifications .
when the plant location does not permit inspection by the engineer pipe materials shall be accepted on the basis of notarized certificates of compliance including all the above requirements .
num bedding materials .
a .
class a bedding consists of class bae plain portland cement concrete that conforms to the applicable requirements of section num of these specifications .
b .
class b bedding consists of gravel borrow that conforms to the applicable requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
c. class c bedding consists of crushed stone or crushed or screened gravel that conforms to the applicable requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num portland cement mortar .
mortar shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num layout .
the engineering layout whether furnished by the state or the contractor shall consist of offset staking of the proposed trench every num feet or less from structure to structure .
field conditions may require exceptions as to the distance between stakes .
stakes will be marked with stationing on the pipe line side of the stake parallel to the installation offset distance on the side opposite the pipe line and depth of cut marked on the side facing the open trench .
this information shall be transferred to transverse batter boards every num feet with line and grade clearly marked and target set all as directed by the engineer .
the contractor at his option may perform pipe layout using the laser beam method .
when site conditions preclude the use of traditional survey methods the contractor shall use the laser beam method .
grade for the purpose of this section shall be defined as the designed invert elevation of all pipelines .
num trench excavation .
trenches shall be excavated in accordance with the applicable requirements of section num of these specifications .
num num bedding .
pipe bedding shall conform to one of the classes specified above in subsection num. a .
class a bedding shall consist of a continuous concrete cradle constructed in accordance with the details indicated on the plans .
b .
class b and class c bedding shall be shaped to fit the bell of the pipe to the height specified .
pipe shall be installed in compacted bedding material at least num inches in thickness and preshaped to accommodate the bell of the pipe .
after the pipe has been installed the trench shall be backfilled and compacted with bedding material to a height equal to at least onehalf the diameter of the pipe or as otherwise directed by the engineer .
num laying pipe .
the pipe laying shall begin at the downstream end of the pipe line .
bell or groove ends of rigid pipe and outside circumferential laps of flexible pipe shall be placed facing upstream .
flexible pipe shall be placed with longitudinal laps or seams at the sides .
paved or partially lined pipe shall be laid so that the longitudinal centerline of the paved segment coincides with the flow line .
when elliptical pipe with circular reinforcement or circular pipe with elliptical reinforcement is used the pipe shall be installed in a position such that the manufacturers marks designating top and bottom of the pipe shall be not more than num degrees from the vertical plane through the longitudinal axis of the pipe .
num joining pipe .
rigid pipe may be of bell and spigot or tongue and groove design unless one type is specified .
the method of joining pipe sections shall be such that the ends are fully entered and the inner surfaces are reasonably flush and even .
joints shall be made with a portland cement mortar b portland cement grout c rubber gaskets d oakum and mortar e oakum and joint compound by a combination of these types or any one type as may be specified .
mortar joints shall be made with an excess of mortar to form a bead around the outside of the pipe and finished smooth on the inside to the spring line of pipe larger than num inches .
for grouted joints molds or runners shall be used to retain the poured grout .
rubber ring gaskets shall be installed so as to form a flexible watertight seal .
where oakum is used the joint shall be caulked with this material and then sealed with the specified material .
all reinforced concrete pipe num inches or greater in diameter are to be installed with both rubber gaskets and a portland cement mortar joint .
when portland cement mixtures are used the completed joints shall be protected against rapid drying by suitable covering material .
ductile iron pipe shall be firmly joined in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer .
flexible pipe shall be firmly joined by coupling bands as recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the engineer .
num plastic pipe shall be firmly joined by plastic sleeve couplings welded to the pipe by the application of an appropriate adhesive as recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the engineer .
pipe shall be inspected before any backfill is placed .
any pipe determined by the engineer to be out of alignment unduly settled or damaged shall be taken up and relaid or replaced at no additional cost to the state .
num smooth interior corrugated polyethylene pipe .
the following requirements apply to this classification of pipe .
a .
limitation of use .
polyethylene pipe may only be used where the top of the pipe will be at least num feet below the finish grade .
b. bedding shall be class b as defined above in subsection num. c. trench excavation .
trench excavation shall conform to the requirements of section num of these specifications .
num .
where the engineer determines the excavation to be in an area of high water table an approved separation filter fabric shall be placed against the bottom and sides of the excavation to completely enclose the bedding material with a minimum numinch overlap to a minimum height of num inches above the top of the pipe .
after the bedding material is placed and compacted the filter fabric shall be lapped to completely enclose the bedding material .
num .
the trench shall be excavated to a minimum depth below the specified bottom of the pipe of num inches in soil trenches and num inches in rock trenches .
class b bedding shall be placed and compacted to a height of one inch above the specified bottom of the pipe .
the surface of the bedding shall be shaped to fit the contour of the pipe .
the pipe shall be installed and be supported to prevent its movement as the trench is filled and the material compacted .
class b bedding material shall be placed and compacted simultaneously on both sides of the pipe to the spring line .
hand tamping shall be used as needed to fill and compact under the bottom curvature of the pipe .
placement and compaction shall be simultaneous on both sides of the pipe to prevent damage to or movement of the pipe .
class b bedding material shall continue to be placed in numinch compacted lifts to a minimum of num inches above the top of the pipe .
the remaining backfill shall be placed in lifts no greater than num inches after compaction .
num .
with the approval of the engineer controlled low strength material as defined in section num of these specifications may be used above the spring line of the pipe in place of all or any portion of the bedding material above the spring line and the remaining backfill .
d. trench protection system .
the trench protection system shall be designed to meet acceptable engineering criteria and must be certified by a rhode island registered professional engineer .
the design shall include any effect of the pipe and on any bedding or backfill material providing support to the pipe of the movement including the advancement of a trench box or removal of the trench protection system .
e. testing .
no sooner than num days after the completion of the compaction of the backfill the contractor under the direction of the engineer shall conduct mandrel testing of the pipe .
testing may be required for up to num percent of the total length of pipe .
the engineer shall num determine the actual sections of pipe to be tested .
the mandrel shall be rigid steel with a pulling ring at each end an odd number of legs num legs minimum and an effective diameter at least num percent of the base inside diameter .
the base inside diameter is the nominal pipe size less a num percent fabrication tolerance .
any pipe through which the mandrel fails to pass shall be removed and a replacement pipe installed by the contractor .
removed pipe may be reused as the replacement pipe only when it is deemed by the engineer to be undamaged .
otherwise the removed pipe shall be removed from the work site by the contractor .
all costs associated with mandrel testing including the replacement of deflected pipe and any delays that are incurred shall be borne by the contractor at no additional cost the state .
num backfilling .
after the pipe is installed the trench shall be backfilled with material in accordance with the applicable requirements of section num trench excavation of these specifications .
when the top of the pipe is exposed above the top of the trench embankment material shall be placed and compacted for a distance on each side of the pipe equal to at least twice the horizontal inside diameter of the pipe or num feet whichever is less and to a minimum height of num feet above the pipe .
this material shall be placed and compacted simultaneously on both sides of the pipe for the full width of the roadbed all in accordance with the requirements of section num .
construction traffic over the pipe shall not be allowed until num feet of compacted backfill is in place over the pipe .
above this elevation embankment shall be placed and compacted in accordance with subsection num of these specifications .
num replacement of unsuitable material .
when the engineer determines that the material at the bottom of trenches is unsuitable for the support of drainage pipes additional excavation shall be authorized .
unsuitable material shall be removed to a depth not to exceed num feet or as determined by the engineer .
when the unsuitable material has been removed the bottom of the excavation shall be leveled and refilled with the appropriate class of bedding .
class b bedding shall be placed in numinch lifts and compacted to num percent of its maximum dry density in accordance with subsection num backfill and compaction of these specifications .
the final compacted lift in the replacement operation shall be graded to the original design elevation of the bottom of trenches .
num unauthorized excavation .
if the bottom of any trench has been excavated below the grade indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer it shall be brought back to grade by refilling with a wellcompacted bedding material of a type selected by the engineer .
no payment will be made for unauthorized excavation .
the contractor shall furnish place and compact the bedding material used to refill the trench to grade at no additional cost to the state .
num method of measurement .
num culverts and storm drains .
culverts and storm drains of the various types of materials and sizes indicated on the plans both new and relaid and including smooth interior corrugated polyethylene pipe will be measured in linear feet of continuous runs of such pipe actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
pipe with sloped or skewed ends will be measured along their respective inverts .
num num flared end sections .
flared end sections of the various types and sizes will be measured by the number of such units actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num branch connections and elbows .
branch connections and elbows will be included in the length of measurement for pipe .
in certain cases branches and elbows may be measured by the number of such pieces actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
for purposes of measurement the end of pipe in closed structures shall be considered to be flush with the inside face of said structures .
at masonry headwalls the end of pipe shall be considered to be flush with the face of headwalls .
num bedding material .
a .
class a b and c bedding material will be measured by the number of cubic yards of each type of bedding actually placed .
when bedding is specified and no measurement method is shown on the plans bedding material shall be measured within the horizontal pay limits specified for trench excavation under subsection num para .
a of these specifications and vertically from num inches below grade to a height of num percent of the diameter of the pipe excluding however the volume occupied by the pipe .
b .
class a b or c bedding material ordered placed to backfill authorized excavation of unsuitable material below grade shall be measured within the horizontal pay limits as referenced above and vertically to the depth of excavation authorized and directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
num culverts and storm drains .
the accepted quantities of the various types and sizes of culverts and storm drains indicated on the plans will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all trench excavation except for trench excavationrock trench rock excavationmechanical and excavation of unsuitable material below grade to a depth equal to the invert of the proposed pipes when bedding material is not required or to a depth sufficient to receive the appropriate layer of bedding material of whatever class when such material is required for the shaping of either the bottom of the trench or the top of bedding material whichever the case may be to receive the bell of the pipe for all dewatering including pumping draining or bailing for laying setting and jointing all pipe including connections to existing drainage structures or pipes for placing and compacting backfill for furnishing placing and subsequently removing all temporary timber or steel sheeting bracing or shoring for the legal disposal of all excess or unsuitable excavated materials and for all other work and incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
a .
smooth interior corrugated polyethylene pipe .
the accepted quantities of the various sizes of smooth interior corrugated polyethylene pipe indicated on the plans will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all trench excavation dewatering design and employment of trench protection pipe couplings fittings gaskets bedding material filter fabric backfill compaction laying of pipe postinstallation mandrel testing remedial work num including all labor equipment tools and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
b. trench excavationrock trench rock excavationmechanical .
trench excavationrock trench excavationmechanical and excavation of unsuitable material below grade will not be included in the contract unit prices for the various types and sizes of culverts and storm drains but will be paid for separately as set forth in subsection num of these specifications .
num flared end sections .
the accepted quantities of the various types and sizes of flared end sections indicated on the plans will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices per each such unit as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment for furnishing and placing said units and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num branch connections and elbows .
when the contract documents sospecify the accepted quantities of branch connections and elbows will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices per each such unit as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment for furnishing and placing said units and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num bedding material .
a .
class b bedding material will be paid for under the applicable culvert storm drains or flared end sections proposal items and therefore shall not be paid for separately .
the single exception relates to the replacement of unsuitable material .
in this case class b bedding will be paid for separately as set forth in subsection num of these specifications .
b .
the accepted quantities of class a bedding plain concrete and class c bedding crushed stone or gravel will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices per cubic yard as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment for providing such bedding materials and for other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num manholes inlets and catch basins num description .
this work consists of the construction of manholes inlets and catch basins in reasonably close conformity with the dimensions and details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num num materials .
num masonry unit construction .
a .
general .
clay brick concrete masonry units lime mortar frames grates covers and ladder rungs shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
b. gravel borrow .
gravel borrow shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
c. concrete .
concrete for these structures shall conform to the applicable requirements of section num portland cement concrete of these specifications .
d. reinforcing .
reinforcing bars shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num bar reinforcement of these specifications .
wire fabric reinforcing shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection m.num wire fabric of these specifications .
e. inspection of materials .
all materials used in the construction of drainage structures shall be subject to acceptance testing by the engineer .
the contractor shall provide sufficient time for the engineer to test and inspect said materials prior to their respective incorporation into the work .
num precast concrete construction .
a .
general .
precast concrete drainage structures will be considered acceptable alternatives to the corresponding masonry unit structures when the latter are specified in the contract documents .
b. precast concrete structures shall conform to the applicable requirements of sections num and num portland cement concrete and precastprestressed structure concrete masonry respectively of these specifications .
c. precast concrete catch basins and manholes shall be designed and manufactured in accordance with astm cnum precast concrete manhole sections with the additional stipulation that the concrete mix design shall be class xx as set forth in section num of these specifications .
d. other materials .
materials and the inspection of said materials as specified under subsection num paras .
a b d and e of this section shall apply equally to precast concrete drainage structures .
num construction methods .
num masonry unit construction .
a .
location .
drainage structures shall be constructed at the locations indicated on the plans .
if obstructions are encountered at these locations that can not be conveniently removed num the engineer will direct that said structures be constructed at either slightly revised or alternate locations .
b. excavation .
excavation for drainage structures shall be performed in accordance with the applicable requirements of section num structure excavation and backfill of these specifications .
excavation shall be made to the required horizontal cross section as directed by the engineer and shall be carried to a sufficient depth to accommodate the concrete bases andor bedding of the various drainage structures .
the bottom of the excavation shall be graded and thoroughly tamped prior to placement of concrete bases .
c. replacement of unsuitable material .
when the engineer determines that the material at the bottom of excavations is unsuitable for the support of drainage structures additional excavation to remove said material shall be ordered .
when the unsuitable material has been removed the bottom of the excavation shall be hand compacted and refilled with appropriate material as approved by the engineer .
d. concrete bases .
plain concrete bases of certain drainage structures shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable requirements of subsection num footings of these specifications .
e. restrictions on certain masonry units .
concrete brick will not be allowed as a construction material for drainage structures .
concrete masonry block will only be allowed for the vertical riser portions of structures and will not be allowed in the corbeling portions .
clay brick shall be used for corbeling up to the bottom of metal frames .
f. precast concrete sump .
if called for on the plans for use in wet areas a precast concrete sump section shall be utilized for standard numfoot round catch basins .
g. backfill .
after construction of drainage structures has proceeded to their respective full heights the excavation shall be backfilled and compacted in accordance with subsection num para .
c common backfill of these specifications .
h. unauthorized excavation .
if the bottom of any drainage structure excavation has been carried below the grade indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer it shall be brought back to grade by filling with appropriate material as approved by the engineer .
i .
final cleanup .
upon completion of construction each drainage structure shall be cleaned of any accumulation of silt earth debris or foreign matter of whatever kind and shall be maintained in such condition until final acceptance of the work .
catch basins manholes and inlets requiring subsequent cleaning through no fault of the contractor after the obligatory cleaning will be paid for in accordance with section num cleaning and flushing pipes and drainage structures of these specifications .
num precast concrete construction .
a .
testing and inspection .
precast concrete drainage structure units shall be inspected both at the point of manufacture and at the project site .
any such units exhibiting defects or damage that can not be corrected to the complete satisfaction of the engineer shall be removed and replaced by the contractor at no additional cost to the state .
num b .
other construction requirements .
construction methods specified under subsection num paras .
a b c d g h and i of this section shall apply equally to precast concrete drainage structures .
num method of measurement .
num manholes catch basins and drop inlets .
new manholes catch basins and drop inlets of the various types and sizes and between zero to num feet in depth all as indicated on the plans will be measured by the number of such drainage structures actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
the additional depth of manholes catch basins and drop inlets over num feet will be measured by the vertical height in linear feet of drainage structure from the numfoot depth to the top of the base slab .
num metal frames and grates andor covers .
metal frames and grates and metal frames and covers of the various types and sizes indicated on the plans will be measured by the number of such assemblies actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num precast concrete inlet and apron stones .
precast concrete inlet stones and precast concrete apron stones of the various types indicated on the plans will be measured by the number of such units actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
num manholes catch basins and drop inlets .
the accepted quantities of new man holes catch basins and drop inlets of the various types and sizes and between zero and num feet in depth all as indicated on the plans will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices per each such structure as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment for providing said structures including excavation except rock excavation placing and compacting backfill steps ½inch thick cement mortar coating on both the inside and outside wall surfaces except for precast structures the legal disposal of all surplus excavated andor unsuitable material and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
the accepted quantities of additional depth of manholes catch basins and drop inlets over num feet will be paid for at the contract unit price per vertical linear foot of such additional depths as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment for providing such additional structure depth complete and accepted by the engineer .
num metal frames and grates andor covers .
the accepted quantities of metal frames and grates and metal frames and covers of the various types and sizes indicated on the plans will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices per each such assembly as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor num materials and equipment for providing said assemblies and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num precast concrete inlet and apron stones .
the accepted quantities of precast concrete inlet stones and precast concrete apron stones of the various types indicated on the plans will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices per each such unit as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment for providing said units and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
structure excavationrock and structure excavation rockmechanical will not be included in the contract unit prices for the various types of drainage structures but will be paid for separately as set forth in subsection num of these specifications .
section num underdrains and combination drains num description .
this work consists of constructing underdrains andor combination drains in reasonably close conformity with the dimensions and details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num pipe .
unless otherwise indicated on the plans the following types of pipe shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num drainage of these specifications .
a. perforated concrete pipe .
b. perforated corrugated aluminum alloy underdrain pipe .
c. perforated corrugated polyethylene drainage pipe .
d. perforated corrugated polyvinyl chloride pipe .
num filter fabric .
filter fabric shall be a material suitable for underdrain applications and shall be one of those included on the departments approved materials list .
num inspection of materials .
all materials will be subject to periodic inspection for compliance with approved methods of manufacture .
material samples will be obtained by the engineer for laboratory testing to determine compliance with specifications .
in addition material test certificates shall be required .
such inspection of manufacturing plants materials testing and certificates shall provide the basis for acceptance of materials .
num filter and bedding materials .
a. filter stone fine aggregates and bedding stone shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num of these specifications .
num num construction methods .
num general .
the specified sizes and types of underdrains andor combination drains shall be constructed in accordance with the lines and grades shown on the plans .
the various types of pipe shall not be interchanged or interconnected except through the introduction of appropriate manholes or catch basins .
a .
structures .
manholes and catch basins required for underdrain andor combination drain installation shall conform to the applicable requirements of section num manholes inlets and catch drains of these specifications .
num installation of pipe .
a .
layout .
layout of pipe shall conform to the requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
b. trench excavation .
trenches shall be excavated in accordance with the applicable requirements of section num of these specifications .
trench excavation shall be carried to the width indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer to allow for both the thorough compaction of the bedding and backfill material under and around the pipe .
trench walls shall be either vertical or as near vertical as conditions will permit .
c. bedding and filter fabric .
a bedding layer of specified filter stone fine aggregate or a filter fabric shall be placed within the trench for its full width and length as indicated on the plans .
d. laying drains .
underdrains and combination drains of the type and size specified shall be embedded firmly in the filter stone .
perforated pipe shall be placed with the perforations down for underdrains and up for combination drains and the pipe shall be joined securely with the appropriate coupling fittings or bands .
the upgrade ends of all underdrain pipe shall be closed with plugs to prevent entry of soil materials as approved by the engineer .
after the pipe installation has been inspected and approved filter stone shall be placed to the required height above the top of pipe all as shown on the plans .
any remaining portion of trench above the filter stone shall be filled with fine aggregate as specified or shown .
the fine aggregate shall be compacted using moderate compactive effort by making two passes with a vibratory compactor .
e. outlets .
outlet pipes shall be placed in trenches with all ends securely jointed by methods recommended by the manufacturer of the particular type of pipe .
after inspection and subsequent approval of the outlet pipe installation by the engineer the trench shall be backfilled with approved granular material .
this material shall be placed in numinch layers and compacted with moderate compactive effort by use of approved vibratory equipment .
num unauthorized excavation .
if the bottom of any trench has been excavated below the grade indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer it shall be brought back to grade by refilling with a wellcompacted bedding material of a type selected by the engineer .
num no payment will be made for unauthorized excavation .
moreover the contractor shall furnish place and compact the bedding material used to refill the trench to grade at no additional cost to the state .
num method of measurement .
underdrains and combination drains of the various types and sizes indicated on the plans together with their respective outlets will be measured in linear feet of continuous runs of such drains and outlets actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of the various types and sizes of underdrains and combination drains will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment for providing said underdrains and combination drains including all trench excavation except trench excavation rock and trench rock excavationmechanical bedding filter stone filter fabric placing and compacting backfill and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
trench excavation rock and trench rock excavationmechanical will not be included in the contract unit prices for the various types of underdrains and combination drains but will be paid for separately as set forth in subsection num of these specifications .
section num reconstruct catch basins and manholes num description .
this work consists of reconstructing existing catch basins and manholes in accordance with the dimensions and details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
materials used in reconstructing existing drainage structures shall conform to the requirements of subsection num masonry unit construction of these specifica tions .
num construction methods .
manholes and catch basins shall be reconstructed in the following sequence first the structures shall be thoroughly cleaned .
next the cast iron frames and covers or grates are carefully removed and stockpiled on the site for subsequent reuse .
then the tops of the structure immediately below the castings are removed .
subsequently a portion of the vertical walls of the structure is removed to a depth sufficient for the reconstructed unit to make the transition to the lines grades and dimensions indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
any excavation required around the existing drainage structure shall be carried out in such manner as to cause the least disturbance to both the surrounding area and those portions of the existing structure that are to remain .
num actual reconstruction of the drainage structures shall then commence in accordance with the details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
construction methods to be employed in this effort shall conform to the applicable requirements as set forth in subsection num of these specifications .
num method of measurement .
reconstruct catch basin and manholecorbel cones will be measured by the number of the tops of such units actually reconstructed .
reconstruct catch basin and manholevertical walls will be measured by the vertical height in linear feet of drainage structure walls actually reconstructed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of reconstruct catch basin and manholecorbel cones will be paid for at the contract unit price per each such cone as listed in the proposal .
the accepted quantity of reconstruct catch basin and manholevertical walls will be paid for at the contract unit price per vertical linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment for reconstructing drainage structures including removing stockpiling and resetting castings excavation and backfill examining and cleaning the existing basin before and after reconstruc tion the legal disposal of all surplus excavated andor unsuitable materials and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num reconstruct existing type d catch basin to catch basin with gutter inlet num description .
this work consists of reconstructing existing type d catch basins either square or round into catch basins with gutter inlet conforming to the details and at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
materials used in reconstructing existing type d catch basins shall conform to the requirements of subsection num masonry unit construction of these specifications .
num construction methods .
catch basins shall be thoroughly cleaned .
if repairs are required they will be made and paid for under the provisions of section num reconstruct catch basins and manholes of these specifications .
the existing granite inlet stones and the existing frames and covers are to be retained if they are in good condition .
if the existing granite inlet stones or the existing frames and covers are not in good condition they shall be replaced and paid for under the applicable provisions of section num manholes inlets and catch basins of these specifications .
all concrete inlet stones regardless of condition shall likewise be replaced .
num actual reconstruction of the type d catch basins shall then commence in accordance with the details indicated on the plans .
construction methods to be employed shall conform to the applicable requirements as set forth in subsection num of these specifications .
in special cases the referenced construction methods may be revised andor modified by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
reconstruct existing type d catch basin to catch basin and gutter inlet will be measured by the number of such catch basins actually somodified in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of reconstruct existing type d catch basin to catch basin with gutter inlet will be paid for at the contract unit price per each such modified structure as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including removing and reconstructing existing walls excavation backfill examining and cleaning the existing basin before and after reconstruction saw cutting and matching of the full pavement and sidewalk depth gravel borrow compaction concrete and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
furnishing and installing new precast concrete inlet stones granite inlet stones metal frames and grates and metal frames and covers will not be included in the above contract unit prices but will be paid for separately as set forth in subsection num of these specifications .
reconstruct existing catch basins will not be included in the above contract unit price but will be paid for separately as set forth in subsection num of these specifications .
section num plug and cap pipe all sizes num description .
this work consists of providing plugs and caps for various sizes and types of pipe at locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
plugs and caps for cast iron pipe shall be of the type approved by the utility company for a particular application .
a. plugs and caps for vitrified clay pipe shall be of the type recommended for this purpose by the manufacturers of said pipe .
b .
cement or brick masonry plugs shall consist of approved cement or brick masonry units securely bedded with cement mortar .
c. cement mortar shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num num construction methods .
the plugs described above shall be placed in all lines where indicated or directed when such lines are broken into during construction .
all such plugs shall produce watertight joints .
plugs and caps installed in pressure lines shall be properly strapped and blocked to withstand the anticipated back pressure .
vitrified clay and cement or brick masonry shall be properly and securely set in place blocked and protected to preclude infiltration or exfiltration due to hydrostatic pressure .
num method of measurement .
plug and cap pipe all sizes will be measured by the number of each such unit actually installed regardless of the size or type .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of plug and cap pipe all sizes will be paid for at the contract unit price per each such unit as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated is full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment required to provide said plugs or caps and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num adjust drainage and utility structures num description .
this work consists of adjusting existing drainage structures telephone electrical and sanitary manholes to those new grades and details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
materials shall conform to the applicable paragraphs of subsection num masonry unit construction of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num general .
in addition to the applicable paragraphs of subsection num of these specifications the following special requirements shall also apply .
when structures are to be adjusted in paved areas cutting and matching pavement will be required .
cutting and matching pavement will be performed in accordance with section num of these specifications .
castings shall be carefully removed and stored and the walls of the structure adjusted to the proper line and grade by the removal or addition of bricks and mortar .
walls shall be plastered with ½inch cement mortar where required .
castings shall be reset to the proper line and grade in a bed of mortar .
prior to the placement of the final bituminous concrete course and following the secondary bituminous num concrete course binder an area of num foot outside the top of the frame will be removed to a depth of num inches below the surface course .
this area will then be compacted and replaced with a class aae concrete collar to the level of the secondary bituminous course .
upon completion of each structure it shall be cleaned of any accumulations of silt debris or foreign matter of any kind and shall be kept clear of such accumulation until basic project acceptance has been achieved .
for this specific purpose basic project acceptance is defined as the successful completion of the numday punch list period as set forth in subsection num para .
b.num of these specifications .
the contractor must maintain access to all catch basins and utility manholes at all times .
num narragansett bay commission structures .
in addition to the requirements of subsection num the contractor must obtain a sewer facility permit from the narragansett bay commission prior to removing any frame cover or grate from any manhole or catch basin and prior to modifying andor exposing any manhole catch basin or service connection within the boundaries of the narragansett bay water quality management district .
the contractor must strictly adhere to all conditions set forth in the bay commissions permit .
num method of measurement .
adjust catch basins adjust manholes adjust telephone manholes adjust electrical manholes adjust sanitary manholes and adjust narragansett bay commission sanitary manholes will be measured by the number of each type structure actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of adjust catch basins adjust manholes adjust telephone manholes adjust electrical manholes adjust sanitary manholes and adjust narragansett bay commission sanitary manholes will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices per each such structure as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment required to provide these adjustments including cutting and matching pavement cement concrete collar backfilling and disposal of all surplus material and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by both the engineer and the representative of the particular utility company involved .
in the case of adjust narragansett bay commission sanitary manholes the contract unit price will also include the application fee for the sewer facility permit .
section num cleaning and flushing pipes and drainage structures num description .
this work consists of cleaning storm drains and drainage structures of all types and sizes as designated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num num materials .
num equipment .
equipment for cleaning pipe lines includes hoses rodding machines balls hydraulic cleaners root cutters small clam shell buckets steel porcupines pumps or other suitable and approved means .
num water .
water used for cleaning and flushing drainage pipes shall be fresh and free of oil acid salt alkali organic matter or any other deleterious substances .
the contractor shall provide all water required for the cleaning operation .
num construction methods .
num operation of drainage system during cleaning .
the contractor shall be responsible for the proper operation of the storm drainage system during the cleaning operations .
the safe control of storm flows shall be accomplished by the contractor such as to preclude any injury to persons or property due to flooding .
num cleaning methods .
the contractor shall clean and flush those storm drain lines designated on the plans by use of pressure hoses suction pumps andor any other methods required to perform this work .
a suitable weir or dam shall be constructed in the nearest downstream manhole or catch basin in such a manner that debris material will be trapped .
under no circumstances shall such material be passed on from one section to the next .
each manhole or catch basin shall be cleaned independently of other portions of the storm drainage system .
all cleaning work shall be performed to the complete satisfaction of the engineer .
num disposal of debris collected .
disposal of all material collected shall be done in accordance with all requirements of applicable state agencies as described below .
a .
sand andor gravel .
this debris is sand that may be mixed with salt used on streets roads or highways for winter storm operations or gravels which have entered the storm drainage system .
num .
acceptable uses .
this material must be dry prior to placement .
a landfill cover may require screening .
b road base or any base course applicable that will be covered with an asphalt or concrete layer .
c backfill for public works construction projects other than areas adjacent to concrete pipes and structures .
d clean fill only when analytical testing for total petroleum hydrocarbons tph toxicity characteristic leaching procedure tclp and total lead tl have been performed and submitted to ridem division of waste management for review of reuse application .
num num .
unacceptable uses .
as unrestricted clean fill in areas that will expose the debris to human contact such as a fill on residential properties public parks or playground .
b fill near pristine waterways drinking water watersheds wellhead protection areas areas with groundwater classified as gaa and areas within num feet of a private drinking water well or in any other manner that would be inconsistent with state and federal laws or regulations .
num .
other debris .
all other debris collected from pipes and structures shall be legally disposed of in accordance with all applicable state agencies laws and regulations .
num method of measurement .
cleaning and flushing pipe all sizes will be measured in linear feet from centertocenter of drainage structures for all pipe lines actually cleaned regardless of the sizes of said pipe in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
cleaning manholes and cleaning catch basins will be measured by the number of such drainage structures actually cleaned regardless of size or type in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of cleaning and flushing pipe all sizes will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the accepted quantities of cleaning manholes and cleaning catch basins will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices per each such structure as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment required to conduct this operation by normal methods and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num concrete for thrust blocks headwalls and miscellaneous purposes num description .
this work consists of providing portland cement concrete for thrust and bearing blocks headwalls and other miscellaneous purposes at locations designated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
the classifications of concrete for thrust blocks headwalls and other miscellaneous purposes shall be as set forth in table i of subsection num of these specifications .
such concrete shall also conform to other applicable requirements of section num portland cement concrete of these specifications .
num num construction methods .
num thrust or bearing blocks .
concrete thrust or bearing blocks for backing up tees bends and hydrants shall be installed at designated locations or as directed by the engineer .
installation of thrust blocks shall include the placing of concrete and any additional excavation as required .
straps associated with thrust blocks shall likewise be provided .
num headwalls .
concrete construction shall conform to the applicable requirements of sections num and num castinplace structure concrete masonry and manholes inlets and catch basins respectively of these specifications .
num method of measurement .
concrete for the purposes specified in this section will be measured by the number of cubic yards of such material actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of concrete used for thrust or bearing blocks headwalls or for any other miscellaneous purpose will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per cubic yard as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num cutins for manholes catch basins and pipe num description .
this work consists of cutting into existing manholes catch basins and pipe to accommodate new construction at locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
materials for brickwork shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection m.num .
of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num manhole and basin cutins .
the existing manholes andor catch basins shall be cut into at the grade shown on the plans .
the cutin shall be made with the approval and acceptance of the engineer .
overbreakage shall be restricted to not more than num inches beyond the outside circumference of the connecting pipe .
brick shall be laid as headers on edge around the pipe and mortared in place .
excavation for cutins shall be carried out in accordance with the applicable requirements of section num trench excavation of these specifications .
num the outside face of brick walls shall be plastered to a thickness of ½inch with mortar proportioned as specified herein .
mortar shall be troweled to a smooth hard finish and no backfill shall be placed until the mortar has thoroughly hardened .
num pipe cutins .
pipe cutins shall be made at locations where a new manhole or catch basin is to be inserted on an existing line .
pipe cutins shall be performed by either of the following methods a .
cutting the pipe prior to performing any work in constructing the new manhole .
in exercising this option the contractor shall provide the engineer with the methods he contemplates on using to maintain the flow or service provided by the pipe to be cut .
the contractor shall receive approval from the engineer prior to commencing work .
b. constructing the manhole on and around the pipe prior to making the cutting .
under this method the contractor shall excavate around the pipe to the outer limits of the new manhole .
the pipe shall be supported and braced in an approved manner to insure against breakage or misalignment that will result in leakage .
the contractor shall obtain approval from the engineer regarding the method for handling the pipe flow should breakage occur .
the man hole invert may be constructed using the lower half of the existing pipe .
jointing between the pipe and manhole wall shall be watertight .
excavation for pipe cutins shall be carried out in accordance with the applicable requirements of section num structure excavation and backfill of these specifications .
num method of measurement .
not applicable .
num basis of payment .
num manhole and catch basin cutins .
payment for manhole and catch basin cutins will not be made separately but will be included in the contract unit price per linear foot of the particular pipe involved as set forth in section num culverts and storm drains of these specifications .
num pipe cutins .
payment for pipe cutins will not be made separately but will be included in the contract unit price per each of the particular drainage structure involved as set forth in section num manholes inlets and catch basins of these specifications .
section num paved waterways num description .
this work consists of constructing paved ditches flumes or gutters with cobble stones portland cement concrete bituminous concrete or other such materials or combinations thereof in reasonably close conformity with the lines and grades indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num num materials .
gravel borrow base shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
concrete shall be class aae and shall otherwise conform to the applicable requirements of section num portland cement concrete of these specifications .
bituminous concrete shall conform to the requirements for class inum surface course material as set forth in subsection m.num of these specifications .
cobblestones shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
cement mortar shall meet the requirements of subsection m.num mortar of these specifications .
bedding sand shall be natural or manufactured material conforming to the requirements of aashto mnum .
num construction methods .
num excavation .
excavation for paved waterways shall be carried forth in accordance with the applicable requirements of sections num or num of these specifications .
num plain cobble paving .
a layer of bedding sand shall be placed upon a prepared subgrade .
this course shall be sufficiently thick to bring the cobblestones which will be embedded in it to the proper tamped grade and cross section all as indicated on the plans .
the cobblestones shall then be placed .
each stone is to be rammed to an unyielding foundation .
the work shall proceed from the sides toward the center keeping the sides in advance of the center .
after the stones have been set all joints and cavities shall be filled with bedding sand .
stones shall be carefully and thoroughly rammed until no further settlement occurs .
during the ramming the joints shall be kept full of clean fine sand .
if from any cause the stones shall have been disturbed and left uneven they must be replaced by the contractor at no additional cost to the state .
the finished surface shall be smooth even and reasonably close to the finished line grade and cross sections .
concrete headers or stone headers shall be installed in reasonably close conformity to the lines and grades indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num grouted cobble paving .
a layer of bedding stone shall be placed upon a prepared subgrade .
this course shall be sufficiently thick to bring the stones to the proper grade and cross section .
the cobblestones shall then be placed .
the work shall proceed from the sides toward the center keeping the sides in advance of the center .
after the stones have been set all joints and cavities shall be filled with bedding stone to such a height that after tamping the joints shall be filled to within num inches of the top .
after the stones are thoroughly rammed and at the proper grade the cement mortar shall be poured and broomed into the spaces between and over the stones .
this operation shall be continued until the mortar is flush with the tops of the stones .
num concrete headers or stone headers shall be installed in reasonably close conformity to the lines and grades indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num bituminous mixture paving .
a layer of gravel borrow shall be placed upon a prepared subgrade .
unless otherwise indicated on the plans this course shall be num inches thick such that it conforms to the proper grade and cross section after compaction .
the bituminous mixture shall be spread on the gravel borrow base prepared as herein specified and compacted by tamping or rolling to a finished depth of num inches or such other depth as may be indicated on the plans .
the finished surface shall reasonably conform to the proposed lines grades and cross sections .
num cement concrete paving .
a layer of gravel borrow shall be placed upon a prepared subgrade .
unless otherwise indicated on the plans this course shall be num inches thick such that it conforms to the proper grade and cross section after compaction .
the cement concrete shall be placed on the gravel borrow base to the designated thickness .
the finished concrete surface shall reasonably conform to the proposed lines grades and cross sections .
expansion joints as required shall be constructed at the indicated locations and to the required dimensions .
concrete headers or stone headers shall be installed in reasonably close conformity with the lines and grades indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
paved waterways of the various types indicated on the plans will be measured by the number of square yards of each such type actually provided in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
widths and lengths measured in the horizontal plane .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of the various types of paved waterways indicated on the plans will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including excavation except rock excavation or rock excavationmechanical concrete or stone headers if required and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
trench excavation rock trench rock excavationmechanical or channel excavation rock will not be included in the contract unit prices for the various types of paved waterways but will be paid for separately as set forth in sections num or num of these specifications .
section num water and gas gate boxes num description .
this work consists of removing and disposing existing water or gas gate boxes and subsequently providing new water or gas gate boxes at the locations num indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifica tions .
num materials .
num castings .
iron castings shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num para .
f of these specifications .
num fabrication .
the contractor shall provide documentation to the effect that water and gas gate boxes conform to the requirements of the respective manufacturers utility companies and municipalities .
a .
finish .
the gate boxes including covers shall be thoroughly cleaned and thereafter all surfaces shall be coated painted or dipped in an asphalt or bituminous base paint or coating .
num construction methods .
num removal of existing boxes .
the existing gate valve boxes are to be carefully removed so as not to damage or disturb the valves or appurtenant fittings which are to remain .
after the gate boxes have been removed they shall become the property of the contractor and legally disposed of .
num installation .
the boxes shall be set to the proposed line and grade as indicated on the plans .
once the boxes are set the contractor shall take sufficient care not to disturb them .
all installations shall be subject to the approval of the applicable gas andor water company .
the boxes shall be carefully fitted together to the valve and securely held during backfilling .
the backfill material shall be thoroughly tamped in place .
the boxes shall be constructed as to prevent the separation of the upper section from the lower section and to prevent the upper section from turning when removing the lid .
num method of measurement .
water gate boxes and gas gate boxes will be measured by the number of such assemblies actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of water gate boxes andor gas gate boxes will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each such assembly as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment for providing said assemblies including removal and disposal of existing gate boxes excavation backfill and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num section num adjust curb stop water gate and gas gate boxes num description .
this work consists of adjusting existing utility gate boxes and curb stops to new grades indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
any materials required for the adjustment of boxes shall conform to the applicable paragraphs of subsection num of these specifications .
num construction methods .
utility gate boxes and curb stops shall be carefully loosened from the surrounding material and adjusted to the designated new grades .
in this regard the use of gate box adapters will be allowed .
the contractor shall then carefully place approved granular material around the gate boxes and curb stops and hand tamp this material until it is well compacted .
the contractor must maintain access to the curb stops and utility gate boxes at all times .
when an existing gate box or curb stop is determined by the engineer not to be adjustable a new gate box or curb stop will be provided in accordance with the applicable provisions of section num water and gas gate boxes of these specifications .
however if a utility gate box or curb stop is damaged due to improper construction methods the contractor shall replace the damaged unit with the corresponding new unit at no additional cost to the state .
num method of measurement .
adjust curb stop boxes adjust water gate boxes and adjust gas gate boxes will be measured by the number of such units actually adjusted in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of adjust curb stop boxes adjust water gate boxes and adjust gas gate boxes will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each such unit as listed in the proposal .
each and every adjustment authorized by the engineer will be paid for .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including excavation backfill compaction adapter collar and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by both the engineer and the representative of the particular utility company involved .
num section num remove and relocate post type hydrants num description .
this work consists of removing and relocating post type hydrants to locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
all materials shall meet the applicable requirements established by both the water company that owns the particular system involved and these specifications .
num construction methods .
existing hydrants shall be carefully removed and transported to the stockpile location as directed by the engineer .
there the hydrants shall be cleaned and made ready for use .
hydrants shall be relocated and installed in accordance with established practices of the water company that owns the particular system involved .
num method of measurement .
remove and relocate post type hydrants will be measured by the number of said hydrants actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of remove and relocate post type hydrants will be paid for at the contract unit price per each such unit as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including excavation backfill compaction piping plugs testing thrust blocks bedding materials and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer and the water company .
in the event the relocated hydrant is to be installed over an existing water main the required tapping sleeve and valve will be paid for separately under the appropriate water service item in the proposal .
num part num bridge structures section num general num description .
num aashto specifications .
unless otherwise specified the latest edition of the standard specifications for highway bridges division ii adopted by the american association of state highway and transportation officials together with all current interim specifications shall be considered as part of these rhode island standard specifications for road and bridge construction revision of num .
num materials .
num reports .
all material reports shall be submitted under the letterhead of the submitter andor supplier and should contain the following identifying information a. r. i .
state contract number .
b. bridge number or numbers involved .
c. manufacturers name .
d. suppliers name .
e. product identity name type class lot drawing number catalogue number or other reasonably complete identity which will establish the relevance of the submitted reports to the products involved and the date of its manufacture .
f. shipping identity by bill of lading including number of pieces markings packaging addressee shipping date and route when no inspection of mill or shop is made .
num mill reports .
it shall be the responsibility of the contractor to insure the delivery of multiple copies of mill reports certificates of compliance tests or other evidence as required by section num control of materials .
mill reports shall be prepared in quadruplicate .
unless otherwise prescribed such reports shall properly attest to manufacturers production quality control tests reports or comparable tests performed by an approved laboratory .
they should include listed test results required by specifications or the test results required by the standard designation for establishing the chemical and physical properties of the material .
num certificates of compliance when approved by the engineer in lieu of ridot acceptance testing shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with subsection num certification of compliance of these specifications .
num materials schedule .
sampling testing and certification of materials shall be performed in accordance with the project schedule for each individual project .
the project schedule shall be prepared in accordance with the publication entitled master schedule for the preparation of a project schedule for sampling testing and certification of materials latest edition .
num inspection by others .
when state inspection work is contracted to an independent inspection agency the reports required herein shall be furnished to the representative of that agency .
section num temporary bridges num description .
this work consists of the construction maintenance and subsequent removal of temporary bridges at locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
the materials used for the construction of temporary bridges shall conform to the applicable requirements of part m materials together with the requirements of the current aashto standard specifications for highway bridges all applicable requirements of these specifications the plans and special provisions .
num construction methods .
num general .
the bridges shall be built in a workmanlike manner in accordance with the plans special provisions and applicable requirements of these specifications .
num approaches .
approach embankments excavation surfacing and other incidental work as specified shall be provided as necessary to make the temporary structure ready for traffic .
the temporary facility shall be completed and opened to traffic prior to any work which might interfere with existing traffic .
temporary safety appurtenances shall be installed on approaches where necessary and as directed by the engineer for the full protection of vehicular and pedestrian traffic .
num maintenance .
the contractor shall maintain in good condition all temporary structures approaches and fills with respect to both safety and rideability until the permanent structure is opened to traffic .
traffic shall be maintained and protected as provided for in subsection num maintenance of traffic .
if the contractor fails to properly maintain the structure the engineer shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of subsection num failure to maintain roadway or structure .
num num removal of temporary bridge .
on completion of the permanent structure the contractor shall remove and legally dispose of the temporary structure .
the approach surfaces shall be broken up the surplus material removed and legally disposed of and the areas trimmed and graded as specified .
structure removal work shall meet the requirements of section num removal of existing bridges .
materials from the temporary structure shall become the property of the contractor unless specified otherwise .
num method of measurement .
this item does not require a measurement for payment .
num basis of payment .
temporary bridges will be paid for at the contract lump sum price as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials tools and equipment including construction maintenance subsequent removal and area restoration and all other incidentals required to perform the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num partial payment .
for the purpose of payment the temporary structure will be considered num percent complete when it is available for use and the item will be considered completed when all materials have been removed and the site has been restored .
section num removal of existing bridges num description .
this work consists of the removal in whole or in part of existing bridges at locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
removal shall include either the salvage and storage or the legal disposal of resulting materials together with the restoration of disturbed areas all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction methods .
num salvaged materials .
materials that are designated to be salvaged under provisions of the contract for subsequent reuse by the department and which the engineer deems suitable for such reuse shall be carefully removed in sections which may be readily transported .
if the contractor damages or destroys such materials they will be required to restore or replace them without additional compensation .
steel superstructures scheduled for reuse shall be dismantled in an approved workmanlike manner matchmarked with paint and carefully removed to avoid damage to any member .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer a diagram showing the matchmarking of all dismantled members .
num all structural materials having salvage value and reserved for the state shall be stored as indicated on the plans .
num disposable materials .
unless otherwise indicated on the plans or directed by the engineer all exposed portions of abutments piers walls etc .
not to be used as part of the new structure shall be completely removed to the elevation designated on the plans .
materials that are not to be salvaged or stockpiled for reuse by the state shall become the property of the contractor and shall be removed from the site and legally disposed of in accordance with applicable provisions of section num site preparation .
num partial removal of structures .
where portions of existing structures are to remain in service those portions to be removed shall be removed in such a manner as to leave the structure undamaged and in suitable condition for the contemplated use .
any damage to the portions remaining in service shall be repaired by the contractor at its expense .
num restoration of disturbed areas .
areas disturbed by the removal of existing structures shall be filled with common borrow as required to the level of the surrounding ground and compacted in accordance with subsection num compaction of these specifications .
the area shall then be graded to blend with adjacent areas and left in a clean and safe condition .
num method of measurement .
this item does not require a measurement for payment .
num basis of payment .
removal of existing bridges will be paid for at the contract lump sum price as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials tools and equipment including removal salvaging stockpiling and disposing of materials restoration of disturbed areas and all other incidentals required to perform the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num driven piles num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing foundation piles and trestle piles at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
the work shall also conform to the applicable require ments of section num driven foundation piles division ii of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
this work shall also include wave equation analysis static pile load and dynamic pile testing preconstruction structure surveys and vibration monitoring as may be required in the contract .
num definitions of driven piles .
a .
foundation piles include piles embedded throughout their length below footings or pile caps located below ground surface .
num b. trestle piles include piles which are exposed for a portion of their length above the ground or water surface and below a pile cap or grillage .
all such footings and pile caps shall be constructed according to the provisions of other sections of these specifications .
num piles types included .
driven piles shall include treated and untreated timber steel hsection openend and closedend steel pipe mandreldriven or selfsupporting driven metal shells precastprestressed concrete piles and composite piles consisting of two or more sections of differing materials .
placement of concrete and steel reinforcement in driven shell or pipe piles shall be included in the work of this specification .
piles driven for soldierpile retaining walls shall be furnished and installed under the provisions of section num earth retaining systems of these specifications and are not included in this specification .
num wave equation analyses and pile load testing .
the contractor shall perform and submit a wave equation analysis for each pile type and capacity to be installed and for each driving hammer and system proposed for use .
where required by the project plans and special provisions the contractor shall perform pile load tests in accordance with astm dnum piles under static axial compressive load using the quick load compression test method as modified herein .
dynamic pile tests shall be performed in accordance with these specifications and the special provisions .
num pile lengths .
production piles shall be furnished in sufficient lengths to be driven to the required minimum tip elevations and meet the required driving criteria established by the wave equation analysis and to the design cutoff elevation .
production pile lengths shown on the contractors order list shall generally include only those lengths anticipated for use in the final structure .
the contractor shall furnish without added compensation in addition to pile lengths shown or ordered increased lengths of production or preliminary test piles to provide for fresh heading and such additional pile lengths as may be needed to suit his method of operation .
when preliminary test piles are required in the contract production pile lengths shown on the plans shall be for estimating purposes only .
actual pile lengths to be furnished for production piles will be as required to reach minimum tip elevations and to develop the required capacities subject to the engineers approval after driving preliminary piles .
preliminary piles shall be furnished in lengths greater than the estimated production pile lengths .
such increased pile lengths shall be approved by the engineer prior to ordering preliminary piles .
the contractor shall drive preliminary test piles at the locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer to the minimum tip elevations and driving criteria established for production piles .
preliminary piles may be incorporated into the work as permanent piles if approved by the engineer .
num defective piles .
the contractor shall repair or remove and replace any and all improperly installed broken damaged or misaligned piles to the satisfaction of the engineer at no additional cost to the state .
num num materials .
num treated and untreated timber piles shall conform to the requirements of subsections m.num and m.num respectively of these specifications .
num steel hpiles shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num openend and closedend steel pipe poles shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num concretefilled shell piles shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num precastprestressed concrete piles shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num portland cement concrete shall conform to the applicable requirements of sections num and m.num respectively of these specifications .
num steel reinforcement and prestressing steel shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection m.num and m.num respectively of these specifications .
num steel closure plates driving shoes and points lugs and splicers shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsections m.num and m.num of these specifications .
num paint .
paints and undercoats to be applied to steel piles or metal shells shall conform to the requirements of both section m.num of these specifications and contract special provisions .
num wood preservatives and treatment .
wood preservatives and treatment methods for treated timber piles shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num of these specifications and aashto mnum preservatives and pressure treatment process for timber .
num construction methods .
num pile lengths and order lists .
the contractor shall furnish piles in accordance with details indicated on the plans andor in the special provisions .
when preliminary test piles are not specified the contractor shall furnish production piles of sufficient length to be driven to the minimum tip elevation and to meet the approved driving criteria determined from the wave equation analysis and to provide the required cutoff elevation .
in determining the lengths of production piles to be ordered the lengths indicated in the order list shall be based upon lengths which are assumed to remain in the completed structure .
such pile lengths shall be calculated from the design cutoff elevation to the estimated tip elevation .
the contractor shall at his own expense increase the lengths given to provide for fresh heading and for such additional length as may be necessary to suit his method of operation .
num when preliminary test piles are specified in the contract documents the contractor shall furnish and drive piles of lengths and at the locations designated in the contract documents .
the lengths of production piles indicated on the plans are for estimating purposes only .
actual production pile lengths to be furnished will be as required to reach minimum tip elevations and to develop required capacities subject to the approval of the engineer after test piles have been driven .
test piles shall be furnished in lengths subject to the engineers approval greater than the estimated length of production piles and driven at least to the minimum tip elevations and required capacities established for production piling .
num timber piles .
a .
general .
untreated and treated timber piles shall be stored and handled such as to avoid injury to the piles .
canthooks dogs or pike poles shall not be used .
cuts or breaks in the surface of treated piling and bolt holes shall be treated as set forth in these specifications .
the butt ends of timber piles shall be sawn square to the longitudinal axis of the pile prior to driving .
when required in the plans or as ordered by the engineer timber piles shall be further prepared for driving as specified below .
b. collars bands or strapping .
collars bands or strapping shall be affixed at the butt intermittently along the length and near the tip of each pile as shown in the plans .
c. trimming and drive points .
the tips of timber piles shall be sawn square or tapered to a diameter of not less than num inches .
when required in the plans timber piles shall be provided with metal boots or steel point attachments .
the contractor shall suitably trim pile tips to fit the type of boot or point attachment specified .
num precastprestressed concrete piles .
a .
manufacture .
precastprestressed concrete piles shall be manufactured to conform to the design and finish shown on the plans .
concrete for precastprestressed piles shall conform to the applicable requirements of section num of these specifications .
precastprestr essed piles whether plantproduced or manufactured on site shall be manufactured and prestressed in accordance with both aashto standard specification section num prestressing and section num precastprestressed structure concrete masonry of these specifications .
b .
shape and minimum dimensions .
precastprestressed concrete piles may be either solid piles of rectangular or cylinder section or hollow cylinder piles .
solid piles may be either of uniform section or tapered .
in general solid precastprestressed concrete piles shall have a crosssectional area measured above the taper of not less than num square inches and where used in salt water or other areas subject to salt intrusion not less than num square inches .
the tip diameter or least dimension through the center of precastprestressed piles shall be not less than num inches .
the dimensions and thicknesses of hollow cylinder piles shall be as shown on the plans .
c. prestressing .
the contractor shall submit shop drawings for the engineers approval in accordance with para .
b of subsection num of these specifications .
in addition shop drawings shall show the pile dimensions materials prestressing methods tendon arrangement and prestressing forces proposed for use and any addition or positioning of reinforcing steel num differing from that shown on the plans .
manufacture of the piles shall not commence until the shop drawings have been approved by the engineer .
d. curing storage and handling .
removal of forms storage transport and handling of precastprestressed concrete piles shall be done in such a manner as to prevent excessive bending stresses cracking spalling or other injurious results .
a curing plan shall be submitted to the engineer as specified in subsection num of these specifications .
when lifted or moved precastprestressed concrete piles shall be supported at the quarter points or other designated pickup points .
piles shall not be driven until the specified curing period is completed and the concrete has attained the specified numday compressive strength or such longer period as may be specified in the plans or special provisions .
e. extensions .
when required extensions for precastprestressed concrete piles shall be made by removing concrete at the end of the pile end to clear num diameters of reinforcement steel and to produce a face perpendicular to the axis of the pile .
reinforcement of the same size as that used in the pile shall be securely fastened to the projecting steel .
necessary formwork shall be placed to prevent leakage along the pile .
immediately before placing concrete the tops of piles shall be cleaned and wetted thoroughly and covered with a thin coating of approved suitable bonding material .
concrete of the same mix design and quality as that used in the pile shall be placed .
forms shall remain in place for not less than seven days .
extensions shall be cured and finished according to the applicable requirements of section num .
extended precastprestressed piles shall not be driven .
num concretefilled shell piles .
a .
general .
concretefilled shell piles shall be constructed by driving metal shells with or without a mandrel placing reinforcement steel and filling the driven shell with concrete .
shells shall be driven to the required tip elevation and capacities in accordance with these specifica tions .
b .
shape and minimum dimensions .
concretefilled shell piles may have a uniform cross section or may be tapered over any portion .
unless otherwise specified the minimum diameter at the tip shall be num inches .
steptapered or tapered piles shall step increase or taper at a rate of not less than one inch in num feet as the contractor may elect until the nominal diameter is not less than num inches or more than num inches within which range the shaft may be extended with a substantially uniform diameter section .
in any event not less than num feet of the numinch butt section shall be provided below the cutoff .
uniform diameter shells shall have a minimum net effective diameter of not less than num inches .
the minimum size of uniform piles shall be as shown on the plans .
for numton capacity reinforced concrete castinplace piles the following limitations shall apply .
steptapered or tapered piles shall have a minimum net effective tip diameter of not less than num inches and shall stepincrease or taper at a rate of not less than one inch in num feet as the contractor may elect until the nominal diameter is not less than num inches or more than num inches in which range the shaft may be extended with a substantially uniform diameter section .
in any event not less than num feet of the numinch butt section shall be provided below the cutoff .
so called uniform diameter shells shall have a minimum net effective diameter of not less than num inches for a length not to exceed num feet and thereafter the uniform diameter shaft shall have a num nominal diameter of not less than num inches .
a minimum of num feet of the numinch butt section shall be provided below the cutoff .
c. metal shells .
metal shells shall meet the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications and shall be of sufficient thickness and strength to hold original form and show no harmful distortion after driving or driving of adjacent shells or after withdrawal of the driving core .
shell designs other than that shown on the plans shall be approved by the engineer prior to use .
the thickness of metal shells driven without a mandrel shall be a minimum of no .
num gauge for fluted shells and numinch for pipe shells .
shells driven with a mandrel shall have a thickness not less than no .
num gauge .
d. cleanout and dewatering .
accumulated soil cuttings and water shall be evacuated from driven shell piles prior to placement of any concrete .
the contractor shall use those methods as needed to cleanout and dewater the shell and which shall not result in damage to the shell .
the contractor shall provide equipment and facilities for containment temporary storage and separation of soil cuttings and shall legally dispose of water accumulations .
e. inspection of driven shells .
each driven shell pile shall be inspected and approved by the engineer before any concrete is placed .
the contractor shall provide access to the pile and furnish a suitable illuminating device for inspection of the shell interior throughout its length .
any broken improperly driven or otherwise defective shell pile shall be removed and replaced as directed by the engineer at no additional cost to the state .
f. placement of reinforcement and concrete .
accumulated soils and water shall be removed from driven shells before concrete is placed .
the class of concrete and arrangement of reinforcing shall be as shown and specified in the plans .
reinforcing steel cages shall be fabricated secured and lowered down the shell pile in such a manner as to insure proper placement throughout the length of the pile and to provide pile cap connections as shown in the plans .
concrete in steelreinforced shell piles shall be placed and consolidated by vibration throughout the length of the pile interior unless otherwise indicated on the plans or directed by the engineer .
no concrete shall be placed until all other shell pile driving within a radius of num feet of the driven pile has been completed .
alternatively if approved by the engineer or where allowed as specified in the plans all driving within the specified limits shall be discontinued until concrete in the last shell driven has set for at least five days .
num steel pipe piles .
a .
general .
steel pipe piles shall be furnished and driven either as openend or closed piles as indicated on the plans or otherwise authorized by the engineer .
when specified in the contract documents steel pipe piles shall be concretefilled throughout or across a portion of their length .
where practicable steel piles shall be furnished full length .
b. dimensions and minimum thicknesses .
steel pipe piles of outside diameter less than num inches shall have a minimum wall thickness of numinch .
piles of outside diameter num inches and larger shall have a minimum wall thickness of numinch .
num c. painting .
when specified in the plans or special provisions before being driven or placed steel pipe piles closure plates and splices shall be shoppainted with zincsilicate primer .
when specified after piles are driven and all bracing members concrete caps and encasements are in place all exposed steel shall be given one complete coat of field paint .
d. drive points drive shoes and closure plates .
when specified in the plans or ordered by the engineer steel pipe piles shall be fitted with closure plates andor drive points .
closedend steel pipe piles shall generally be furnished with flat closure plates of the thickness and weight of steel as specified in the plans .
when specified end closure plates shall be single piece cast steel num degree conical points astm anum with an external flange unless otherwise permitted and as indicated in the plans .
when specified openend or closedend steel pipe piles shall be furnished with onepiece cast steel astm anum drive shoes provided with a thickened ridge along the bearing surface between the pile tip and the shoe .
shoe flanges shall be external unless otherwise permitted in the plans or special provisions and shall be of the dimensions and weight of steel as indicated in the plans .
plates drive points and shoes shall provide full bearing with pile tips and shall be affixed to the piles using numinch continuous fillet welds along the flange or ridge contact with the pile tips .
e. cleanout and dewatering .
steel pipe piles driven openended shall be cleaned out to remove accumulated soil materials and dewatered .
the contractor shall use those methods as needed and appropriate to the soil materials encountered and which shall not result in damage to the driven pipe pile to remove soil cuttings from the interior of the pile .
the contractor shall provide equipment and facilities for containment temporary storage and settlement and separation of soil cuttings and accumulated water .
the contractor shall legally dispose of water and accumulated soil cuttings .
f. inspection of driven pipe piles .
the contractor shall provide access and facilities for the engineer to inspect the interior of each driven pipe pile .
no driven steel pipe pile shall be accepted unless inspected and approved by the engineer as described above in subsection num para .
e. g. placement of concrete and steel reinforcement .
where driven steel pipe piles shall be concretefilled and no interior steel reinforcement is to be installed except within num feet of the cutoff elevation concrete shall be placed in one continuous operation with flow directed down the center of the pile to consolidate by impact .
vibration or rodding shall be required only to a depth of num feet below the design cutoff elevation .
all steel pipe piles at each structure footing or within the radius indicated on the plans shall be driven cleaned out and inspected prior to placement of concrete .
alternatively if approved by the engineer or all driving within the specified limits shall be discontinued until concrete in the last pile driven has attained its numday compressive strength .
num steel hsection piles .
a. dimensions and section thicknesses .
steel hsection piles shall be rolled structural steel shapes of the sections indicated on the plans or otherwise authorized by the engineer .
num where practicable steel hsections shall be furnished full length .
hsection piles shall have a minimum web thickness of numinch .
b .
drive points .
when specified or authorized by the engineer hsection piles shall be fitted with drive points of the design specified .
drive points shall be cast in one piece steel conforming to astm anum grade num .
they shall have sufficient flange and continuous web vertical backups to provide proper alignment and secure fit with the pile .
flange surfaces to bear on rock or in soil may be horizontal or sloped minimum num degrees to not more than num degrees and may be provided with individual or continuous cutting teeth .
the minimum weight of pile points shall be as specified in the plans .
c. painting .
where specified in the plans steel hsection piles shall be provided with a shop application of one coat of zincoxide primer .
additionally exposed sections of piles as driven shall receive one or more fieldapplied surface coats as specified .
lengths of pile to be concreteencased shall not receive field coats unless otherwise specified .
d. concrete encasement .
where specified in the plans or special provisions exposed lengths of driven steel hsection piles shall be encased in concrete .
the length shape and thickness of encasement and required reinforcement shall be as shown on the plans .
concrete encasements shall be furnished and placed in accordance with the applicable requirements of sections num and num respectively of these specifications .
num composite piles .
composite piles shall be furnished and fabricated of the materials and dimensions indicated on the plans and described in the special provisions .
composite piles may consist two or more sections of different materials fabricated into a single pile which is then driven or a driven section to which an upper section of different material is then added and then driven or will be exposed in the completed work .
the installation of composite piles shall conform to the requirements of the special provisions .
num splices and splicing piles .
a .
general .
where splicing is permitted the splice shall develop the full strength of the unspliced pile .
splices shall be fabricated and installed as shown on the plans .
any alternative method of splicing or commercial splice proposed for use shall provide equal results and shall have been approved by the engineer prior to use .
b .
timber piles .
unless otherwise provided for in the special provisions timber piles shall not be spliced .
c. steel pipe shell and hsection piles .
full length piles shall be used where practicable .
where splicing is required or authorized by the engineer the splice shall be as shown on the plans .
splices shall be made by full penetration electric arc welding or as approved by the engineer .
proprietary or other fabricated steel splicers shall conform to astm anum be approved by the engineer before use and shall develop the full strength of the unspliced pile .
the flanges of fabricated splicers shall be chamfered to enable effective welding .
prior to splicing the top of any pile that is bent deformed or twisted by driving shall be cut off or trued up normal with the axis of the pile before placing the next pile section .
the end surfaces of piles shall provide full bearing with the next pile section or splicers .
axes of all spliced num sections shall be in the same straight alignment .
all extensions splices and buildups shall conform to the design shown on the plans .
the flanges of hsection piles shall be either spliced by butt welding or with plates that are welded or bolted .
prefabricated splicers may be used if the splice can develop the net section of the pile in compression tension shear and bending .
pipe piles shall be spliced either by butt welding or by the use of welded sleeves .
surfaces to be welded shall be smooth uniform and free from loose scale slag grease or other material which would prevent proper welding .
steel may be oxygen cut .
carbonarc gouging chipping or grinding may be used for joint preparation .
welding shall be permitted in all cases for splicing metal shells .
welding shall be used for splicing steel piles attaching pile points and attaching bracing or other steel members to steel piles when specified in the plans .
all welding and qualifications for welders shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num welding of these specifications .
d. precastprestressed concrete piles .
precastprestressed concrete piles shall not be spliced other than to produce short extensions as permitted herein unless specifically allowed by the plans the special provisions or by written approval of the engineer .
dowels or other mechanical splices shall be approved by the engineer before incorporated into the work .
splices shall be designed to develop the full axial and moment capacity of the unspliced cross section .
num determination of bearing capacity .
a .
general .
piles shall be driven to the bearing capacity shown on the plans or specified in the special provisions .
pile bearing capacity shall be determined by the engineer using one or a combination of the following methods .
num .
method a wave equation analysis .
the ultimate bearing capacity of piles with design loads of less than or equal to num tons shall be determined by using a wave equation analysis prepared by a rhode island registered professional engineer .
unless otherwise stated in the special provisions the contractor shall be responsible for performing the wave equation analysis .
the results of the analysis driving system specifications and data and the proposed driving criteria shall be submitted by the contractor to the engineer for approval .
project test boring logs shall be provided in the plans or otherwise made available to the contractor for his use in preparing the analysis .
unless otherwise specified the contractor shall perform a separate wave equation analysis for each design pile type load and length shown in the plans and for each driving system the contractor proposes for use .
the analysis shall take into account the proposed hammer assembly pile cap blocks and cushion characteristics pile properties and estimated lengths and anticipated soil properties .
pile driving equipment properties shall be as recommended or provided by the manufacturer of such materials and equipment .
the design bearing capacity of a pile shall be num of the calculated ultimate bearing capacity as determined by a wave equation analysis alone .
the analysis may at the discretion of the engineer be used to establish design capacities of greater than num tons if similar piles have been installed in similar soil conditions in close proximity to the site .
num num .
method b wave equation analysis calibrated with dynamic pile tests .
when specified in the contract the contractor shall perform a wave equation analysis and conduct dynamic load testing for each design pile type load and length and proposed driving system .
the contractor shall retain or employ a rhode island registered professional engineer to perform supervise and interpret the analysis and dynamic measurements .
the results of the dynamic load test the wave equation analysis results and proposed ultimate pile capacity shall be submitted to the engineer for approval .
wave equation analyses calibrated with dynamic pile load test measurements may be used to determine the ultimate bearing capacity of piles with design loads of equal to or less than num tons .
at the discretion of the engineer this method may be used to establish design capacities of greater than num tons if similar piles have been installed in similar soil conditions in close proximity to the project site .
the design bearing capacity of a pile shall be num of the ultimate bearing capacity determined from a wave equation which has been calibrated to the results of a dynamic pile load test .
the contractor shall furnish and maintain in working order all force or stain transducers accelerationvelocityordisplacement transducers transmission cables and appropriate instrumentation for recording reducing and displaying the dynamic testing data .
the contractor shall furnish the electrical power required .
field generators shall be equipped with functioning meters for monitoring voltage and frequency .
the contractor shall also provide temporary shelter of adequate size to protect the dynamic test equipment from the elements .
a general procedures for wave equation analysis calibrated with dynamic pile tests .
num pretest pile calibration .
for timber and concrete piles the contractor shall initially determine strain wave speed for each pile to be dynamically tested during driving .
initial wave speed determination shall not be required for steel piles .
the pile shall be supported horizontally above the ground clear of other piling or obstructions and its length measured and recorded .
an accelerometer shall be securely attached to one end of the pile bolted glued or welded .
the contractor shall provide and affix an impact cushion at the pile head as directed by the engineer .
a sledge hammer or other suitable weight shall be used to strike the end of the pile .
the accelerometer signal shall be recorded and displayed and the time between acceleration peaks measured for as many cycles as deemed necessary by the engineer .
the first impact should not be counted .
the wave speed for the particular pile shall be calculated as the time divided by the corresponding travel length of the strain waves during the time interval .
num prior to driving .
the contractor shall furnish and attach transducers to the pile or provide access to the pile for the engineer to attach instruments .
transducers shall be capable of independently measuring strain and acceleration verses time at a specific location along the pile axis during driving impact .
a minimum of two each of strain and acceleration transducers shall be attached to the pile at the locations specified or directed by the engineer .
for mandrel driven piles the mandrel may be instrumented similarly to a driven pile .
at any point along the length of the pile as specified or directed by the engineer a minimum of two each of strain and acceleration transducers shall be attached to the pile face or web as the case may be .
transducers shall be located at equal radial or crosssectional distances on diametrically opposite sides of piles .
they shall be located the same axial distance num num determination of bearing capacity continued .
from the bottom of the pile and when near the upper end they shall be attached at least num½ pile diameters below the pile head .
the contractor shall align and protect the transmission cables to suit his method of operation but maintain the operation of the equipment during driving .
num driving .
the test pile shall be clearly marked at appropriate intervals throughout its length .
the pile shall be positioned and aligned in the leads such that hammer impact is applied axially and concentrically with the pile .
the contractor shall drive the test pile to the depth at which the dynamic test equipment indicates that the design bearing capacity indicated on the plans or specified in the special provisions has been achieved unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
if upon further driving test piles break through after attaining the design bearing capacity at the discretion of the engineer the contractor shall further advance piles until the required bearing capacity is again indicated .
the contractor shall adjust the driving energy to maintain acceptable stresses in the pile and shall realign the driving system if the testing equipment indicates that hammer impact is not delivered axially to the pile .
the contractor shall monitor and record ram travel length bounce chamber pressure andor steam or air pressure at the inlet to the hammer as appropriate for the driving system used and a record of blow counts for specific intervals of penetration during driving of test piles .
dynamic force and velocity measurements for a specific penetration shall be taken for the impacts during the specified intervals to be monitored and for routine observations of penetration resistance as the engineer may direct .
properties shall be determined from the specified minimum number of impact records during initial driving and from representative blows at the beginning of any restriking .
as specified or directed by the engineer the contractor shall delay restriking a sufficient period of time after the end of initial driving to allow pore water pressure and soil strength changes to occur .
the maximum amount of penetration or maximum total number of blows on restrike shall be as specified or directed by the engineer .
pile capacity shall be determined from the results of the dynamic testing and wave equation analysis and submitted to the engineer for approval .
num .
method c static pile load tests .
when the design capacity of piles is greater than num tons or as otherwise specified in the contract the driving criteria and ultimate load capacity shall be established for each pile type and capacity following procedures set forth in astm dnum piles under static axial compressive load using the quick load compression test except that the test shall be taken to plunging failure or three times the design load or num tons whichever first occurs .
testing equipment and measuring systems shall conform to astm dnum or as specified in the special provisions .
telltales andor elastic strain gauges appropriately sheathed shall be installed in or along piles at the intervals specified and vertical movements or incremental strain measurements shall be monitored .
dial gauges capable of reading increments of numinch shall be calibrated and used to monitor relative movements or strains at the pile tip head or specified interval along the pile length .
the contractor shall submit for the engineers approval a wave equation analysis for each type and capacity of pile to be tested and detailed plans of the proposed pile load test apparatus including load frame and reference members load cell or jacking apparatus reaction system and proposed method and intervals for telltale installation and protection .
the wave equation analysis and pile load test plans shall be prepared by a rhode island registered professional engineer retained or employed by the contractor .
the load test apparatus shall be designed and num constructed to allow the various load increments to be placed gradually without causing vibration to the pile .
the wave equation analyses shall demonstrate that piles will not be damaged during driving and shall determine the blow count necessary to achieve the required ultimate static capacities .
the driving criteria proposed by the contractor shall be subject to review and approval by the engineer .
the design bearing capacity shall be defined as num percent of the failure load .
the failure load of a pile under axial compressive load is that load which produces a settlement of the pile head at failure equal to sr s num numd where sr settlement at failure in inches d pile diameter or width in inches s elastic deformation of total unsupported pile length in inches piles to be utilized for load tests shall be manufactured or furnished with telltales and protective sleeves incorporated into or along the length of the pile as specified in the plans or special provisions .
the contractor shall submit his proposed telltale design and method of installation to the engineer for approval prior to manufacture or furnishing of piles .
the telltales shall be suitably sleeved and protected during driving and shall be functional throughout the pile load test .
sleeves shall be properly secured and cast in the interior of precast or castinplace concrete piles secured to the interior walls of steel pipe piles or affixed to the faces of steel pipe timber and precast piles or the web of hsection piles as shown on the plans .
telltales shall consist of solid flushjoint sections of steel rods which shall extend to and screw into threaded steel mounts affixed to or cast into the pile at the specified points along the pile length .
telltale sleeves shall be plastic or steel tubing as specified and shall be properly aligned installed and affixed to the screw mounts to the extent that tell tale rods can be lowered into the sleeves entirely under their own weight .
where permitted by the dimensions of the test pile the contractor may choose to protect the tubes by installing them inside steel or pvc pipe .
sleeves and rods shall be furnished with end caps and otherwise suitably protected during driving of piles .
prior to installation of the telltale rods sleeves shall be filled with a sufficient quantity of oil or grease to fully occupy the annular space between the sleeve and the rod .
telltale rods shall be installed into sleeves under the inspection of the engineer .
any telltale rod installed without the engineers inspection shall be removed measured and reinserted under the inspection of the engineer .
the number and location of test piles shall be as shown in the plans or specified in the special provisions or as directed by the engineer .
load test piles shall be driven to the minimum tip elevations and to the driving criteria determined based upon the wave equation analysis .
the elevation of the top of the test pile shall be determined immediately after driving after driving anchor piles and just before load testing to determine heave .
any test pile which has heaved more than numinch shall be redriven or jacked to the original tip elevation prior to load testing .
unless otherwise specified in the special provisions a minimum threeday waiting period shall be observed between the driving of any anchor piles or the load test pile and the commencement of the pile load test .
num the contractor shall exercise care to prevent eccentric loading of the pile .
if the test fails due to eccentric loading no payment shall be made for the test and no future test shall be performed on the eccentrically loaded pile .
when the approved test method requires the use of tension anchor piles which will later be used as permanent piles in the work such tension piles will be of the same type and diameter as the production piles and shall be driven in the location of the permanent piles .
the boot strap method shall be performed by jacking down on the test pile or piles with a calibrated hydraulic jack placed beneath a girder .
the girder shall be anchored to tension piles located at least num feet from the test pile or piles .
in no case shall piles closer than numfeet from the test pile or piles be used to assist in anchoring the girder .
connections of the girder to the anchors and hydraulic jack shall be tight when the test is commenced and the jack shall be capable of moving the test pile or piles a vertical distance of at least num inches during the test .
if the load is applied to the test pile or piles by jacking against a dead load such dead load shall not have supports closer than num feet from the test pile or piles .
the jack shall be capable of moving the test pile or piles a vertical distance of num inches .
the contractor shall have a qualified employee present at all times during the performance of the test to maintain the required load .
if the test is stopped before completion and the load wholly or partially removed from the pile or piles due to defects in the jack yield of connections insufficient load or travel capacity of the jack or for other mechanical reasons the engineer shall order the load test abandoned and replaced by a new test to be conducted on another pile or piles at an adjacent location .
where a loading test is abandoned because of reasons for which the contractor is responsible there shall be no payment for such an aban doned test .
num pile driving equipment .
a .
general approval of driving system .
all pile driving equipment including the hammer hammer cushion drive head pile cushion and other appurtenances to be furnished by the contractor shall be approved in advance by the engineer prior to beginning work .
the contractor shall submit a description of his proposed equipment a minimum of two weeks before starting work .
whenever the bearing capacity of piles is specified to be determined by a wave equation analysis the contractor shall submit calculations based upon the wave equation analysis weap or other equivalent analysis which shall demonstrate that the piles can be driven to the ordered length with a reasonable driving energy without damage to the piles .
in the absence of other supporting data the following hammer efficiencies shall be used in the analysis hammer type efficiency percent singleacting airsteam num doubleacting airsteam num diesel num the contractors proposed driving equipment shall be evaluated based upon the required number of hammer blows per inch of pile penetration and the pile stresses at the required ultimate pile capacity .
the required number of hammer blows indicated by the calculations for num the required bearing capacity shall be between num and num blows per inch in order for the equipment to be considered acceptable .
in addition for the driving equipment to be considered acceptable calculated pile stresses corresponding to the driving criteria and required pile capacity shall be less than the stress level that will result in damage to the pile .
for steel piles compressive driving stresses shall not exceed num percent of the yield point num fy of the pile .
for concrete piles tensile stresses shall not exceed num times the square root of the concrete compressive strength fc of the pile plus the effective prestress value i.e .
num x fc½ prestress .
compressive stresses in concrete piles shall not exceed num percent of the concrete compressive strength minus the effective prestress num fc prestress .
for timber piles compressive stresses shall not exceed num times the allowable static design strength listed in the plans .
during pile driving operations the contractor shall use the approved driving system .
any change in the driving system or equipment will be considered only after the contractor has submitted revised pile driving equipment data and calculations for corresponding driving criteria and pile stresses .
the engineers approval of the pile driving equipment shall not relieve the contractor of his responsibility to drive piles free of damage to the required bearing and tip elevations shown on the plans or specified in the special provisions .
b. hammers .
piles may be driven with drop hammers single double or differential action compressed air or steam operated hammers diesel hammers conforming to these specifications .
vibratory or other pile driving methods may be used only when specifically authorized by the engineer or allowed in the special provisions .
hammers shall be selected to suit the conditions to be encountered .
if the selected hammer used is found to be unsatisfactory it shall be replaced with a larger or smaller hammer of the same type or an alternate hammer type .
num .
gravity or drop hammers .
gravity or drop hammers may be used for driving timber piles but shall not be used for precast concrete piles or for piles with design capacities greater than num tons .
when gravity hammers are allowed the ram weight shall be at least equivalent to the combined weight of the drive cap and the pile .
in no case shall the ram weight be less than num pounds and the fall height shall not exceed num feet .
all drop hammers shall be equipped with hammer guides to insure concentric impact on the drive head or pile cushion .
in general energy developed by the hammer shall be at least one footpound for each pound of weight of the pile or casing being driven but in no case shall it be less than num foot pounds energy per blow .
num .
air or steamoperated hammers .
the weight of the striking part of air or steam operated hammers shall not be less than num of the combined weight of the pile and drive cap and in no case shall the striking part weigh less than num pounds .
steam or air hammers to drive timber piles less than num feet in length shall develop not less than num footpounds of energy per blow for timber piles num feet or greater in length not less than num footpounds of energy per blow .
unless otherwise specified hammers used for driving precast concrete piles metal shells steel hsection or pipe piles shall develop not less than num footpounds of energy per blow .
num the plant and equipment furnished shall have sufficient capacity to maintain under working conditions the pressure at the hammer as specified by the manufacturer .
boilers and compressors shall be equipped with accurate pressure gauges and a second gauge shall be applied at the hammer intake unless other methods of determining hammer efficiency are authorized .
num .
diesel hammers .
openend singleacting diesel hammers shall be equipped with a device to permit the engineer to determine hammer stroke at all times during pile driving operations .
closedend doubleacting diesel hammers shall be equipped with a bounce chamber pressure gauge in good working order mounted near ground level so that it can be easily read .
a correlation chart of bounce chamber pressure and delivered hammer energy shall be provided by the contractor .
num .
vibratory pile drivers .
vibratory pile drivers may be used subject to the engineers approval provided that sufficient correlated data is developed and furnished to permit a satisfactory evaluation of pile loadcarrying capacity and performance .
these characteristics shall be established by direct comparison with the penetration and performance of the same types of pile driven with conventional impact hammers under similar conditions and in corresponding locations .
a number of length determination piles as ordered by the engineer shall be driven using a conventional hammer to determine with reasonable accuracy the depth of acceptable penetration throughout the area of each foundation or trestle bent .
subsequent piles to be driven using the accepted alternative method shall be driven to corresponding depths of penetration with minor adjustments if driving conditions change .
a representative number of such piles as designated by the engineer shall be load tested to the required capacity along with a corresponding number of those piles driven using the alternative method and equipment .
load test data shall be carefully recorded and correlated .
a sufficient number of load tests shall be performed on piles driven using the alternative method as required to verify the results and insure design capacity .
no payments will be made to the contractor for pile load tests in excess of those which would be required for piles driven by conventional methods unless field conditions are such that the alternative methods must be used to advance piles .
in such cases such additional load tests will be measured for payment provided the engineer has ordered the tests in writing and the tests are carried to completion .
num driving appurtenances .
a .
hammer cushions .
all impact driving equipment except gravity hammers shall be equipped with a suitable thickness of hammer cushion material to prevent damage to the pile or hammer and to insure uniform driving behavior .
hammer cushions shall be made of durable manufactured materials which will retain uniform properties during driving .
wood wire rope and asbestos hammer cushions shall not be permitted .
a striker plate shall be placed on the hammer cushion to insure uniform compression of the cushion material .
the hammer cushion will be inspected by the engineer prior to beginning pile driving and after each num hours of pile driving .
the contractor shall replace the hammer cushion when there has occurred a thickness reduction of num percent of the original cushion thickness .
num b .
pile drive head .
piles driven with impact hammers shall be fitted with an adequate drive head to distribute the hammer blow to the pile head .
the drive head shall be axially aligned with the hammer and pile .
the drive head shall be guided by leads and shall not be free swinging .
the drive head shall fit around the pile in such a manner as to prevent transfer of torsional forces during driving while maintaining proper alignment of hammer and pile .
for steel and timber piles the pile shall be cut off square and a drive head provided to hold the pile in line with the axis of the hammer .
for precast and precastprestressed concrete piles the pile head shall be plane and perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the pile to prevent eccentric impacts from the drive head .
for special pile types appropriate drive heads mandrels or other devices shall be provided so that piles can be driven without damage .
c. pile cushion .
concrete piles shall be protected by a pile cushion when the nature of driving is such as to unduly injure the piles .
where plywood is used a minimum of num inches shall be placed on the pile head prior to driving .
a new cushion shall be placed when the initial cushion is compressed to onehalf its original thickness or when the cushion begins to burn .
the pile cushion dimensions shall be such that the hammer energy is uniformly distributed to the pile head .
d. leads .
pile driving leads shall be used throughout the pile driving operation and shall support the pile and hammer in proper positions .
leads shall be constructed in a manner that affords freedom of movement of the hammer while maintaining alignment of the hammer and pile to insure concentric impact for each blow .
the leads shall be of sufficient length to make the need for a follower unnecessary and shall be designed to permit proper alignment of batter piles .
e. followers .
followers shall only be used when specifically allowed in the special provisions or authorized in writing by the engineer .
when permitted the first pile in every bent and the tenth pile driven thereafter shall be furnished sufficiently long and driven full length without a follower to verify that adequate pile penetration is being attained to develop the required capacity for those piles driven using a follower .
the follower and pile shall be held and maintained in equal and proper alignment during driving .
the follower shall be of such material and dimensions to permit piles to be driven to the length determined to be necessary from the driving of the full length piles without a follower .
the final position and alignment of the first two piles installed with followers in each substructure unit shall be verified to be in accordance with the location tolerances specified herein before additional piles are installed .
num preparation for driving .
a. preconstruction survey and vibration monitoring .
unless otherwise specified in the special provisions a preconstruction survey of any structure within num feet of pile driving shall be performed by a rhode island registered professional engineer employed or retained by the contractor and submitted to the engineer prior to beginning work .
the survey shall document the existing preconstruction condition of structures such that potential impacts due to pile driving can be assessed .
during pile driving the contractor shall monitor vibrations at structures within num feet of pile driving using a seismograph capable of measuring vibration accelerations velocities and amplitudes in three mutually perpendicular directions .
the vibration monitoring shall be num performed under the direction of a rhode island registered professional engineer .
the contractor shall adjust his pile driving operations to limit construction vibration peak particle velocities to num inch per second unless a lower limit is warranted based on the preconstruction survey .
daily summaries of peak particle velocities and vibration records shall be submitted to the engineer on a weekly basis .
b .
layout and elevation and location control .
unless otherwise specified in the plans or special provisions the contractor shall be responsible for layout of all pile locations using offsets from the project baselines .
the contractor shall establish ground surface elevation at the proposed driving locations to the nearest numfoot referenced to the project elevation datum .
the contractor shall set tideboards as needed and as specified in the plans or special provisions when driving piles on water .
mudline elevations shall be determined at each pile location on water prior to starting driving .
the contractor shall verify the tip elevation of driven piles to the nearest numfoot relative to the project elevation datum .
where foundation or trestle piles are driven in groups or where piles are to be restruck the contractor shall check each pile tip elevation prior to and after restriking as required by the engineer .
c. excavations and sheeting .
in general piles shall not be driven until after excavations are completed .
any material forced up between or around piles as a result of driving shall be removed to the correct elevation and that surface densified before any foundation concrete is placed .
where sheeting or cofferdams are to be constructed and piles will be driven within sheeting alignments unless otherwise specified in the special provisions the contractor shall submit his proposed sequence of operations for the engineers approval prior to beginning any driving of sheeting or piles .
the contractor shall use those methods such that sheeting installation shall not interfere with obstruct damage or otherwise impact the function of bearing piles .
d. preboring .
when required by the special provisions or as shown in the plans the contractor shall prebore holes at pile locations to the depths shown on the plans specified in the special provisions or authorized by the engineer .
prebored holes shall generally smaller in diameter than the diameter or diagonal of the cross section of the pile except in the case where preboring is specified where driving vibrations are not permissible .
preboring shall be of sufficient depth to allow penetration of the pile to the specified depth .
if subsurface obstructions are encountered the hole diameter may be increased to the least dimension which is adequate for pile installation .
any void space remaining around the pile after completion of driving or other installation shall be filled with sand or other approved material .
the use of spuds to make a hole for inserting a pile shall not be permitted in lieu of preboring unless specifically allowed in the special provisions or authorized in writing by the engineer .
piles to be driven through newly constructed embankments shall be driven in holes drilled or spudded through the embankment when the embankment is in excess of num feet in height .
the hole shall have a diameter of not less than the greatest dimension of the pile cross section plus num inches .
after driving the pile the space around the pile shall be filled to the surface of the embankment with dry sand or fine gravel .
material resulting from drilling holes shall be disposed of as approved by the engineer .
num e. templates and support spuds .
the contractor shall furnish and fabricate templates as he deems necessary to align and maintain piles at their proper location alignment or batter throughout driving .
such templates shall be securely fixed using such temporary spud piles or other appropriate bracing at the option of the contractor .
template configurations and support piles shall be situated so as not to injure or displace driven piles nor interfere with pile driving or other portions of the work .
the contractor shall maintain templates in place after initial driving and until restriking has been completed .
the contractor shall dismantle and remove templates and temporary supports or piles so as not to damage or misalign completed production piling .
templates and support piles shall remain the property of the contractor and no separate payment shall be made for furnishing materials or labor to construct templates or for support piles .
f. measurement and marking of piles .
the contractor shall measure the total length of each pile to be driven and shall clearly mark each pile in the increments and using the marking material specified in the plans the special provisions or as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall notify the engineer of the total measured length of each pile and shall allow the engineer time to verify the length and to approve the pile marking prior to placing piles in the leads for driving .
during driving the contractor shall provide such markings on the leads or shall provide a graduated gauge which shall be clearly marked and situated at ground level to allow verification of the final driving resistance for each pile driven .
g. jetting .
water jetting shall not be permitted unless specifically allowed in the special provisions or authorized in writing by the engineer .
when water jetting is used the contractor shall determine the number of jets and volume and pressure at the jet nozzles which are sufficient to freely erode material adjacent to the pile without affecting the lateral stability of the final inplace pile .
the contractor shall be responsible for restoring or repairing all damage to the site resulting from jetting .
when jetting is specifically required in the special provisions the plant shall have sufficient capacity to deliver at all times a pressure of num pounds per square inch at two numinch jet nozzles .
whether specified or approved by the engineer jetting shall be ceased and the jets removed when the pile tip is at a minimum of num feet above the required tip elevation .
the pile shall then be driven by impact hammer to the required tip elevation and bearing capacity .
the contractor shall control treat as necessary construct and maintain appropriate settlement basins and legally dispose of sediments and expended jetting water as specified in the special provisions or as approved by the engineer .
num driving piles .
a .
pile driving records .
the contractor shall keep records for each pile driven of the number of blows required for each foot of penetration for the entire pile and penetration under the final series of blows blows per inch for a minimum of the last num inches of driving .
the records shall include the type and size of hammer used rate of hammer operation type and dimensions of driving helmet and cushion block .
the records shall include the date starting time total driving time pile location and identification number pile type and size ground elevation from which the pile is driven and final elevation of the pile tip and butt .
the records shall also indicate the quantity of concrete which may be placed in the pile .
b .
general .
driving shall in general conform to the following procedure in order to offset the progressive consolidation effect of pile grouping where underground utilities are located in the immediate vicinity the first pile driven shall be the one nearest the utility .
num if in the opinion of the engineer conditions during driving indicate that resistance is due to an obstruction the contractor shall employ adequate methods to drive the pile through the obstruction or he shall remove the obstruction .
in the event that the engineer agrees that the obstruction can not be economically removed the contractor shall be allowed the option of driving an alternative pile or piles at a location designated by the engineer .
the initial pile shall be removed or cut off as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall be paid for the alternate pile or piles at contract unit prices .
however there shall be no payment for the initial pile or for any costs of attempting to remove the obstruction .
the contractor shall have no claim for delay if this contingency should arise and no claim for moving his equipment to and from the pile location .
c. driving test piles .
when specified in the special provisions preliminary test piles and piles designated for dynamic or static load tests shall be driven at the locations and to the depths directed by the engineer before other production piles are ordered or driven in the area represented by the test .
all test piles shall be driven with equipment identical to that which the contractor proposes to use for production piles .
test piles shall be driven to a hammer blow count established by the engineer at the estimated tip elevation .
test piles which do not attain the specified hammer blow count at a depth of num foot above the estimated tip elevation shall be allowed to set up for a period determined by the engineer before being redriven .
if possible the hammer shall be warmed up before redriving begins by applying at least num blows to another pile .
if the specified hammer blow count is not attained upon redriving the engineer may direct the contractor to drive a portion or all of the remaining pile length and repeat the set up and redrive procedure .
when ordered by the engineer test piles driven to plan tip elevation without attaining the required hammer blow count shall be spliced and driven until the required blow count is attained .
d. utilization of preliminary test piles and loaded test piles .
after the completion of loading tests loaded test piles may be utilized in the permanent structure if found satisfactory for such use .
preliminary test piles driven to the required capacities may similarly be utilized in the permanent structure .
loaded test piles or preliminary piles determined not suitable for use in the permanent structure shall be removed or cut off below ground and below baseoffooting or pile cap elevation or disposed of in any other manner all as directed by the engineer .
e. penetration of piles .
all piles shall be driven to a penetration such that the minimum pile tip elevation is attained and such that the pile bearing value determined as specified herein is not less than that indicated on the plans .
piles located offshore alongshore in stream beds or along stream banks shall be driven to such penetration as the engineer deems necessary for protection from scour .
if after a test pile or production pile is driven through and below a hard stratum the bearing value of the pile drops below the capacity required on the plans the engineer may require the contractor to drive permanent piles through the hard stratum to a penetration at which the required capacity is again attained .
when production friction piles fail to achieve design bearing capacities after driving the full finished lengths these piles when approved by the engineer can be left for a minimum of num hours to allow soil setup before attempting to splice .
after the waiting period has passed the contractor shall redrive one representative pile in each pile group to check the gain in bearing num upon soil setup .
the soil setup bearing shall be based upon the number of redriving blows necessary to drive the pile an additional num inches .
these piles may be accepted without splicing if they exhibit the required bearing capacities upon redriving .
f. driven pile location and alignment tolerances .
all piles shall be driven at the locations and alignments shown on the plans unless otherwise authorized by the engineer .
piles shall be driven to within an axial tolerance not to exceed numinch per foot variation from the vertical or from the design batter orientation .
piles for trestle bents shall be driven such that the bent cap may be constructed in its design location without inducing excessive stresses in the piles .
the final position of the axial center of driven foundation piles measured in the plane of the cutoff elevation shall not deviate from the design location by more than num inches or num of their diameter whichever is greater provided that num .
the average deviation along a line of piles in any direction within the bent shall not exceed num inches from the line through the pile center locations shown on the plans and num .
the nearest edge of any pile shall not be closer than num inches from the design position of the edge of footing or pile bent cap and num .
the minimum distance between the centers of any two adjacent piles is not less than num inches at the cutoff elevation .
num .
the center of gravity of the pile group at any trestle bent or foundation as calculated at the cutoff elevation shall not exceed the tolerances specified in the plans or special provisions for that pile group .
if the location of any pile exceeds these tolerances then it shall be the contractors responsibility to provide appropriate calculations to show the center of gravity of the pile group at the cutoff elevation as driven .
should the center of gravity of any pile group exceed the limits specified or otherwise presented in the plans or special provisions it shall be the contractors responsibility to submit a detailed remedy including all relevant engineering calculations for review and approval by the engineer .
the contractor shall further be responsible for performing the approved corrective action including replacement of misaligned piles andor furnishing materials and constructing any required increase in footing dimensions at no additional cost to the state .
manipulation of piles after driving in order to force them into proper position will not be permitted the contractor shall remove or if space allows and as allowed by the engineer cut off misdriven piles and then redrive or replace mislocated piles to the satisfaction of the engineer .
g. pile heave and restriking .
the top elevation of each pile head shall be determined immediately after driving and again after completion of the driving of all piles within any foundation or trestle pile group .
any pile which heaves more than numinch or otherwise specified in the special provisions shall be redriven to the design tip elevation and to the required driving resistance .
for concretefilled piles the contractor shall restrike heaved shells or steel pipe piles prior to placing concrete in any pile within that pile group which has not evidenced heave .
num num defective damaged or broken piles .
the contractors driving operations and procedures shall not subject piles to excessive or undue injury or stresses producing spalling and crushing of concrete splitting splintering or brooming of timber piles or splitting or excessive deformation of steel piles and shells .
any pile damaged by reason of internal defects improper driving driven out of position or driven below the butt elevation indicated on the plans or as authorized by the engineer shall be corrected by the contractor by one of the following methods as approved by the engineer a .
the pile shall be withdrawn and replaced by a new and if necessary longer pile b .
the defective or low pile shall be cut off below baseoffooting elevation and a second pile shall be driven adjacent to the defective or low pile .
c. the pile shall be spliced or otherwise builtup as provided for herein or the footing shall be sufficiently extended and reinforced to properly embed the pile .
any and all such remedial materials and work shall be provided and performed by the contractor at no additional expense to the state .
num pile dewatering cleanout and spoilwater containment and disposal .
the contractor shall remove soil materials debris andor accumulated water from driven steel pipe piles and metal shell piles to the satisfaction of the engineer to allow inspection of pile interiors and prior to placement of any concrete .
the contractor shall provide for the control containment separation of sediments and legal disposal of sediments and water volumes removed from such piles .
the contractor shall further be responsible to restore or repair any damage to the site incurred by dewatering and cleanout of piles .
this work shall be considered included and integral to the installation of these pile types .
no separate measurement or payment shall be made for this work .
num pile cutoffs .
piles shall not be cut off until all piles within a pile group or within the area specified have been checked for heave and any required restriking or redriving has been completed .
unless otherwise specified all piles shall be cut off perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the pile at the elevations specified in the plans .
piles which support timber caps or grillages shall be sawed or otherwise cut off to conform to the plane of the bottom of the superimposed structure .
in all cases the amount of cutoff length shall be sufficient to remove any portion of the pile top which has been trimmed for driving bruised or otherwise deformed or damaged during driving .
cutoff piles shall be anchored to the structure or otherwise protected as specified until incorporated into the remainder of the work .
the cutoff portions of all piles including test piles shall be retained and made available for use in splicing or building up piles as required until the pile driving is complete .
upon completion of the work piling cutoff lengths shall become the property of the contractor and shall be legally disposed of offsite at the contractors expense .
cutoff pile heads cuts for bracing and exposed abrasions of treated timber piles shall be trimmed and then given field coatings of preservatives as specified in the special provisions .
predrilled bolt holes shall be impregnated with the approved field preservative .
if treated holes will remain open fieldtreated wood plugs or other temporary plugs approved by the engineer shall be installed in the holes .
num where specified after trimming and applying the approved field preservative a sheet of threeply roofing felt or a sheet of galvanized iron not lighter than num gauge and of sufficient area to project at least num inches outside and completely around the pile head shall be bent down over the top of the pile to fit tightly around the pile .
the edges of this cover shall trimmed and fastened securely to the pile face with largeheaded galvanized roofing nails or by being bound with galvanized wire .
the tops and faces of precast concrete piles which are to be embedded in the structure shall be cleaned and minor chipping or spalling removed .
steel pipe piles and metal shells shall be cut off at the design elevation prior to emplacement of concrete fills .
if steel pipe or shell piles are to remain unfilled the contractor shall provide and install protective caps as specified in the plans or special provisions .
num method of measurement .
num piles furnished and driven .
timber piles treated or untreated precastpre stressed concrete piles solid rectangular cylindrical or hollow cylindrical steel piles h piles or pipe piles or steel shell piles or composite piles to be furnished and driven shall be measured to the nearest linear foot of pile calculated from the tip elevation to the specified cutoff elevation in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num piles furnished .
precastprestressed concrete piles solid rectangular cylindrical or hollow cylindrical to be furnished shall be measured to the nearest linear foot of pile delivered to or manufactured at the site of the work and inspected and accepted in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
a .
preliminary test piles .
measurement for payment for preliminary test piles shall be made for that length authorized by the engineer in writing prior to delivery of piles .
that additional footage of production or preliminary piles furnished by the contractor at his option shall not be included in the quantity measured for payment .
piles furnished by the contractor to replace piles which were previously accepted by the engineer but subsequently damaged prior to completion of the contract shall not be measured for payment .
num piles driven .
precastprestressed concrete piles solid rectangular cylindrical or hollow cylindrical to be driven shall be measured to the nearest linear foot calculated from the tip elevation to the cutoff elevation of pile permanently remaining in place and inspected and accepted in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num pile cutoffs .
pile cutoffs shall be measured by the number of pile cutoffs actually performed by the contractor in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num pile load tests .
pile load tests shall be measured by the number of pile load tests actually performed by the contractor in accordance with the plans and or as directed by the engineer .
anchor or tension piles installed solely at the option of the contractor for his use in conducting pile load tests shall not be measured separately for payment .
num num metal boots drive points drive shoes and closure plates .
metal boots drive points drive shoes and closure plates when called for shall be measured by the number of the respective items actually installed by the contractor in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num preboring .
preboring when called for shall be measured by the number of prebored holes actually installed by the contractor in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num painting .
painting when called for shall be measured by the linear foot of pile actually painted in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num mobilization and demobilization of pile driving equipment .
this item does not require measurement for payment .
num related items .
steel reinforcement for steel shell piles or steel pipe piles shall be measured for payment under the provisions of section num reinforcing steel of these specifications .
concrete for steel shell piles or steel pipe piles shall be measured for payment under the applicable provisions of section num portland cement concrete and section num castinplace structure concrete masonry of these specifica tions .
excavations for foundations dug prior to installation piles shall be measured for payment under the applicable provisions of section num structure excavation and backfill of these specifications .
sheeting driven prior to installation of piles shall be measured for payment under the applicable provisions of section num earth retaining systems of these specifications .
test piles driven prior to the installation of production piles and used for the purpose of pile load tests shall be measured for payment under the appropriate paragraph of this section .
num incidental items .
the following items of work shall not be measured separately for payment but shall be considered incidental to the other items of work inherent to this section wave equation analysis preconstruction survey and monitoring layout elevation and location control templates and support spuds measurement and marking pile splices concrete encasement for hpiles cleanout and dewatering of shell piles and pipe piles collars bands strapping and trimming for timber piles extensions of precastprestressed concrete piles hammer cushions drive heads pile cushions leads followers and jetting .
num basis of payment .
num piles furnished and driven piles furnished and piles driven .
the accepted quantities of piles furnished and driven piles furnished and piles driven for the specific size and type of piles specified shall be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated shall constitute full and complete compensa tion for all labor materials tools equipment and all other incidental items of work necessary to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num pile cutoffs .
the accepted quantity of pile cutoffs will be paid for at the contract unit price per each such cutoff as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num num pile load tests .
the accepted number of static pile load tests or dynamic load tests will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each such test as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including instrumentation and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num metal boots drive points drive shoes and closure plates .
the accepted quantities of metal boots drive points drive shoes and closure plates will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each such item as listed in the proposal .
the prices so stated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
when these items are not specified in the contract documents but ordered by the engineer they will be paid for under the provisions of subsection num extra work of these specifications .
no payment shall be made for splicers or splicing made at the contractors initiative .
num preboring .
the accepted quantity of preboring will be paid for at the contract unit price per each such hole actually installed as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num painting .
the accepted quantity of painting will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot of pile as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num mobilization and demobilization of pile driving equipment .
when mobilization and demobilization of pile driving equipment is specified for separate payment in the contract such payment will be made at the contract lump sum price as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment necessary for the handling and driving of piles and for the removing of same on completion of the work .
a .
partial payment .
one half num percent of the lump sum price may be made when equipment has been set up at the site and when the wave equation analysis and preconstruction survey have been completed submitted and approved by the engineer .
the remaining num percent of the lump sum price may be made when the driving and vibration records have been submitted and approved and the equipment removed from the site all to the complete satisfaction of the engineer .
section num earth retaining systems num description .
this work consists of the provision of temporary andor permanent sheet piling temporary andor permanent sheet piling with ground anchors and soldier piles and lagging at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num sheet piling shall be untreated timber treated timber or rolled steel sections .
for sheet piling in cofferdams refer to subsection num of these specifications .
soldier piles shall be steel hp sections or treated or untreated timber piles and shall be driven or installed in predrilled shaft excavations .
lagging shall consist of timber or steel sections which shall span adjacent soldier piles .
num permanent sheet piling .
permanent sheet piling and supports shall be furnished installed cutoff and left in place as part of the finished structure .
the plans may require the removal of waling and other bracing members .
sheet piling will be of the section dimension and length as indicated on the plans .
num temporary sheet piling and temporary sheet piling abandoned in place .
a .
temporary sheet piling shall be installed maintained and removed from the job site either after its function has been accomplished or when ordered to do so by the engineer .
unless otherwise specified the section dimension and lengths of sheet piling shall be as determined by the engineer .
the contractors attention is directed to the required construction sequence and the temporary sheet piling necessary to accomplish the work in accordance with the plans and specifications .
b .
temporary sheet piling abandoned in place is defined as sheeting used during construction but which is not a necessary structural component of the completed highway facility or bridge structure .
temporary sheet piling abandoned in place and supports shall be furnished installed cut off and left in place as shown on the plans .
the plans may require the removal of waling and other bracing members .
temporary sheet piling abandoned in place shall be of the section dimensions and lengths as specified on the plans .
num soldier pileandlagging .
soldier pilesandlagging shall be furnished installed cut off and left in place unless otherwise indicated .
the plans or special provisions may require removal or cutoff of piles and removal of lagging and supports .
soldier pileandlagging will be installed to the elevation and be of the section and dimension indicated on the plans .
num design and approval of sheet piling and soldier pileandlagging .
unless otherwise noted on the plans or special provision sheet piling and soldier piles and lagging shall be installed in accordance with the design and details provided on the plans .
should the contractor wish to deviate from the design provided he shall then submit complete design drawings computations and layout drawings for the temporary or permanent sheeting .
all drawings and computations shall be prepared and stamped by a rhode island registered professional engineer .
the shop drawing submittal shall conform to the requirements of subsection num plans and shop drawings .
sheet piling or soldier pileandlagging located adjacent to railroad property shall also be submitted to the railroad company for their review and approval .
see the general provisionsconstruction section of the project specifications for specific requirements regarding the installation of sheeting adjacent to railroad properties .
num utilities .
the contractors attention is specifically directed to the proximity of utilities in the area of the proposed sheeting or pile installation work .
in regard thereto it shall be the contractors responsibility to give notice to each public utility whose facilities could be affected num by the work fortyeight hours in advance and request that a representative of the utility be present at all times during the work .
if a utility refuses andor fails to send a representative to the work site when and as requested by the contractor the contractor shall notify the engineer of such refusal .
the engineer shall then notify the public utilities administrator of the division of public utilities and carriers of the state of rhode island of such refusal andor failure to appear and request said administration to order such utility to send a representative to the work site .
the contractor and the engineer shall maintain detailed records of all such communication regarding the above .
num materials .
num untreated timber sheet piling shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num treated timber sheet piling shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num steel sheet piling shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num steel soldier piles shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num .
num untreated timber soldier piles shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num .
num treated timber soldier piles shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num .
num timber lagging walers and bracing shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num .
num steel lagging walers and bracing shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num .
num hardware fixtures bolts and lag screws shall conform to the applicable requirements of either subsection m.num or subsection m.num of these specifications except as modified by plans and special provisions .
num metal casings for stabilization of drilled shaft excavations shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num .
num concrete backfill for drilled shaft excavations shall be excavatable or lean concrete which conforms to the requirements of section num controlled low strength material of these specifications .
num anchors .
a. anchor material shall consist of either single or multiple elements of the following num num .
uncoated seven wire stress relieved strand conforming to the requirements of astm anum .
num .
uncoated highstrength steel bars conforming to the requirements of astm anum .
b .
bearing plates brackets stiffeners andor rolled steel shapes shall conform to the requirements of astm anum grade num. c. sheathing of the unbonded length of a tendon shall consist of one of the following num .
seamless polyethylene tube with a minimum wall thickness of num mils .
num .
seamless polypropylene tube with a minimum wall thickness of num mils .
num .
corrugated polyvinyl chloride tube with a minimum wall thickness of num mils .
d. anchor grout .
the grout to be used for anchorage shall consist of a pumpable mixture of types i ii or iii portland cement sand water and admixtures .
chemical additives which can control bleed or retard set may be used with the anchor grout .
additives if used shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
expansive additives and accelerators will not be allowed .
portland cement shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum .
cement used for grouting shall not contain any lumps or other indications of hydration or pack set .
water for mixing grout shall be potable clean and free from injurious quantities of substances known to be harmful to portland cement or the anchor steel .
the grout shall be capable of reaching a cube compressive strength of num psi in seven days when tested in accordance with astm tnum .
e. grease shall conform to the requirements of astm dnum .
f. centralizers shall be fabricated from plastic steel or material which is not detrimental to the anchor tendon .
wood will not be allowed .
the centralizer shall be able to maintain the position of the tendon so that a minimum of numinch of grout cover is obtained on the tendons .
g. spacers for separation of elements of a multielement tendon shall permit the free flow of grout and shall be fabricated from plastic steel or material which is not detrimental to the anchor tendon .
wood will not be allowed .
num construction methods .
the contractor shall furnish and install sheet piling or soldier pileandlagging as shown on the plans or as indicated in the special provisions .
num general .
the engineer may order additional or stronger bracing and supports at any point where in his opinion sufficient and proper bracing and supports have not been provided .
the engineer may order additional temporary sheet piling to be installed when in his opinion field conditions make it necessary to properly protect the work under construction or any existing installation affected by the construction .
the estimated amount of sheet piling and soldier pilesandlagging for the contract as shown on the plans or indicated in the proposal is the only amount for which the state will make num direct reimbursement to the contractor unless additional sheeting or soldier pilesandlagging is ordered in writing by the engineer .
additional temporary sheet piling may also be ordered by the engineer when indicated by field conditions as specified above .
additional compensation shall be provided for such additional or modified temporary or permanent sheet piling or soldier pilesandlagging which has been directed andor approved by the engineer .
num driving sheet piling and soldier piles .
when required by the plans or special provisions the preconstruction survey of adjacent structures shall be performed and the findings submitted to the engineer for his review .
no driving shall commence until the engineer has approved the preconstruction survey .
if required in the plans or special provisions the contractor shall perform vibration monitoring during driving of sheeting or piles .
the preconstruc tion survey and vibration monitoring work shall conform to the requirements described in subsection num para .
a of these specifications .
sheet piling and soldier piles shall be driven reasonably true to the line and depth as indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
steam pneumatic or diesel powered vibratory hammers of appropriate capacity shall be used to drive all sheet piling and soldier piles .
any material which interrupts the driving shall be removed by the contractor .
soldier piles shall be driven to the location and axial tolerances specified in para .
f of subsection num of these specifications or as otherwise indicated on the plans .
num predrilled soldier pile installation .
soldier piles shall be installed in predrilled or preaugered holes when required by the plans or special provisions or num when vibratory or impact driving is not permitted or num when obstructions prevent driving and the engineer authorizes predrilling or preaugering .
in the case of num above standard driving shall be resumed when the obstruction has been removed or bypassed .
predrilled or preaugered holes shall be of the diameter shown on the plans and shall be of sufficiently large diameter such that concrete lean concrete or other backfill approved by the engineer can be installed in the annulus between the soldier pile and the sidewalls of the drilled hole .
drilled or augered holes shall be advanced to the required depth as indicated on the plans or to the depth approved by the engineer .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to use those methods and equipment to maintain the sidewalls of the excavated shaft and to completely clean out and remove soil materials cuttings and water from the shaft excavation prior to the installation of soldier piles and concrete backfill .
such efforts and equipment shall be considered as part of the work and shall not be considered for additional compensation .
soldier piles shall be placed into the shaft such that they do not sustain damage and shall be vertically centered and aligned such that their final position when backfilled meets the specified location and axial tolerances .
damaged or outoftolerance soldier piles which must be removed and reinstalled or replaced shall not be measured for payment .
concrete lean concrete or other approved backfill shall be placed in the shaft to completely encase the soldier pile .
concrete shall be placed from the bottom of the drilled shaft up to the specified elevation or ground surface .
the shaft shall be dewatered before placing num concrete backfill .
if during pumping excessive water inflow is encountered the engineer may require alternative methods to reduce inflow alter the concrete mix or approve alternative backfill materials .
concrete backfill shall cure for a minimum of num days before excavation and lagging installation begins .
equipment or other construction operations which might disturb the concrete shall not be allowed in the vicinity of the installed pile until the concrete has cured .
num earthwork and installation of lagging .
excavation shall conform to the requirements of subsections num or num of these specifications .
placement and securing of lagging shall closely follow excavation in front of pileandlagging such that loss of ground is minimized .
lagging shall be installed horizontally between soldier piles .
excavation shall proceed only as required to set one row of lagging .
when one row of lagging has been placed excavation for the next lower row may commence .
num openings and cutoffs .
the contractor shall prepare and cut openings within the sheet piling or pilesandlagging to permit the passage of all necessary utilities .
cost of preparation of openings for passing of utilities shall be included in the applicable unit bid price for sheet piling or soldier pileandlagging .
sheet piling whether temporary or permanent shall be cut off as necessary during construction to allow work to proceed .
permanent sheet piling shall be cut off in a straight line at the elevations indicated on the plans .
soldier piles shall be cut off cleanly and horizontally at the elevations indicated on the plans .
concrete backfill lagging and other supports shall be removed to the elevations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num installation of ground anchors .
the contractor shall select the drilling method the grouting procedure and the grouting pressure to be used for the installation of the ground anchor as necessary to satisfy the load test requirements .
the method of drilling used shall prevent loss of ground above the drilled hole that may be detrimental to the structure or existing structures .
if water is used in the drilling operation the contractor shall be responsible for controlling and disposing of the water in such a manner that is not harmful to the site environment and adjacent property .
any damage caused by loss of ground or inadequate control of water shall be repaired immediately by the contractor at no cost to the state .
the hole diameter in free length shall not be less than num inches nor greater than num inches .
the hole shall remain open until grouting begins .
casing may be necessary to maintain a clean open hole .
casing if used shall be removed as grouting progresses unless permitted by the engineer to be left in place .
the tendon shall be inserted into the drilled hole without difficulty .
when the tendon can not be completely inserted it shall be removed and the drill hole cleaned or redrilled to permit insertion of the tendon without difficulty .
partially inserted tendons shall not be driven or forced into the hole .
the location inclination and alignment of the drilled hole shall be as shown on the plans .
inclination and alignment shall be within plusorminus num degrees of the planned angle at the bearing plate and within plusorminus num inches of the planned location at the ground surface point of entry .
num the engineer shall be responsible for determining the anchor bond length necessary to develop adequate load capacity to satisfy anchor testing acceptance criteria for the design load shown on the plans .
however the drilled anchor hole shall not extend outside of the rightofway limits shown on the plans .
the minimum bond length shall be num feet in competent rock num feet in soil or the minimum shown on the plans .
the anchor hole shall extend a minimum of num foot beyond the tendon length to be installed by the contractor .
the grouting equipment shall produce a grout free of lumps and undispersed cement .
a positive displacement grout pump shall be equipped with a gauge to monitor and record grout pressures .
the pressure gauge shall be capable of measuring pressures of at least num psi or twice the actual grout pressures anticipated whichever is greater .
the grouting equipment shall be sized to enable the grout to be pumped in one continuous operation .
the mixer shall be capable of continuously agitating the grout .
the grout shall be injected at the lowest point of the drill hole .
the hole shall be filled with grout progressively from the bottom to the top to prevent air voids .
the grout may be pumped through grout tubes casings hollowstem augers or drill rods .
the grout shall be placed after the insertion of the tendon into the drill hole .
the quantity of grout and the grout pressures shall be recorded by the contractor .
the grout pressures and quantities shall be controlled to prevent heave of the ground or fracturing of rock formations .
except where modified below the grout above the top of the bond length may be placed at the same time as the bond length grout but it shall not be placed under pressure .
the grout at the top of the hole shall stop a minimum of num inches from the back of the structure or trumpet whichever is lowest .
if the ground anchor is installed in fine grained soil using a drilled hole larger than num inches in diameter then the grout above the top of the bond length shall be placed after the ground anchor has been successfully load tested .
if the grout is placed in two stages the initial stage must completely fill the hole to a point num feet above the bond length portion of the ground anchor .
the entire drill hole may be grouted at the same time if the contractor can demonstrate that the ground anchor system does not derive a significant portion less than num percent of its load resistance from the soil above the bond length portion of the ground anchor .
upon completion of grouting the grout tube may remain in the drill hole provided it is filled with grout .
also after grouting the tendon shall not be loaded for seven days unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
tendons shall be free of dirt detrimental rust see below or other deleterious substances .
prior to installation tendons shall be handled and stored in such a manner as to avoid corrosion and physical damage .
damage such as abrasions cuts nicks welds weld splatters or heavy corrosion and pitting will be cause for rejection of the element .
a slight rusting provided it is not sufficient to cause pits visible to the unaided eye shall not be cause for rejection .
rejected elements shall be replaced at no additional cost to the state in terms of either material replacement andor resulting time delays .
grounding of welding leads to the tendon is not permitted .
the bond length of the tendon shall be degreased prior to installation in the hole .
no solvent residue shall remain on the tendon .
each ground anchor shall be load tested by the contractor .
no load greater than num percent of the design load may be applied to the ground anchor prior to load testing .
the stressing equipment shall be placed over the ground anchor in such a manner that the jack bearing plates load cell and stressing anchorage are axially aligned with the tendon and the tendon is centered within the equipment .
the test shall be simultaneously applied to the entire num tendon .
during all testing the movement of the tendon shall be recorded at each load increment to the nearest numinch with a dial gauge or vernier scale .
measurements shall be taken from a fixed reference point and shall have adequate travel clearance so that total ground anchor movement can be measured without resting the device .
the jack load should be monitored with a load cell .
each load increment shall be fully applied as rapidly as possible preferable in less than num seconds after the jack pump is started .
when the theoretical elastic elongation of the total anchor length at the maximum test load exceeds the jacks ram length the procedure for recycling the jack ram must be approved by the engineer .
the load testing shall be proceeded by incrementally loading the ground anchor in accordance with the following schedule .
the load shall be raised from one increment to another immediately after recording the ground anchor movement .
test load schedule al num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl num dl lo where al alignment load dl design load lo lock off load except for the num dl load each load shall be held until movement stabilizes but a minimum of num minute and the ground anchor movement measured to the nearest numinch from a fixed reference point .
the maximum test load num dl shall be held constant for a minimum of num minutes with movement measurements made at num num num num and num minutes .
if the difference between the num and num minutemeasurement is greater than numinch then the num dl shall be held constant for an additional num minutes with measurements taken at num num num num and num minutes .
a graph shall be constructed showing a plot of ground anchor movements versus load for each load increment in the test .
at the completion of a successful load test the anchor load shall be reduced to num dl and transferred to the permanent stressing anchorage .
the ground anchor may be completely unloaded prior to lockoff .
after transferring the load and prior to removing the jack a liftoff load reading shall be made .
the liftoff load shall be within num percent of specified lockoff load .
if the load is not within num percent of the lockoff load the anchorage shall be reset and another liftoff reading shall be made .
this process shall be repeated until the desired lockoff load is obtained .
a .
proof loading testing .
acceptance criteria at the maximum specified test load num dl are as follows num .
the total movement measured at the anchor head shall be greater than num percent of the theoretical elastic elongation of the stressing length .
num .
the total movement measured at the anchor head shall be less than the theoretical elastic elongation of the tendon length measured from the head of the jack to the center of the installed bond length .
num num .
the creep movement measured at the anchor head shall be less than numinch between the num and num minutereadings or less than numinch between the num and num minute readings .
the stressing length shall be measured from the stressing anchorage to the bond length top .
if any anchor fails to meet acceptance criteria num the contractor shall either release tension on or remove the anchor and provide an additional anchor .
if any anchor fails to meet acceptance criteria num or num the contractor shall retest the anchor and determine the actual capacity which will produce the acceptance criteria .
an additional anchor shall be installed in accordance with this specification at a location specified by the engineer and tested to verify if the total capacity of the two anchors exceeds the num dl load .
if it is determined that the anchor failure is through no fault of the contractor then compensation will be made for additional anchors and the subsequent testing thereof .
num method of measurement num permanent sheet piling temporary sheet piling and temporary sheet piling abandoned in place .
permanent sheet piling temporary sheet piling and temporary sheet piling abandoned in place each will be measured by the number of square feet of exposed face actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
exposed face is measured from the bottom of foundation level or approved excavation level to the top of the adjacent ground surface to be maintained .
num driven soldier piles will be measured by the number of soldier piles actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num predrilled soldier piles will be measured by the number of soldier piles actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num drilling or augering when specified for the installation of soldier piles shall not be measured separately for payment .
however when drilling or augering to remove obstructions is approved by the engineer such drilling or augering shall be measured for payment to the nearest linear foot as calculated from ground surface to the approved depth .
num concrete backfill around soldier piles shall not be measured separately for payment .
such backfill shall be considered incidental to the installation of the soldier pile .
num lagging installed will be measured by the number of square feet of lagging actually installed and exposed when excavation is complete in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
exposed face shall be measured vertically from the bottom of approved excavation to the top of adjacent ground surface and horizontally between adjacent soldier piles .
num walers bracing and hardware fastenings .
where specified and shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer walers and bracing shall be measured by the linear foot of walers and bracing actually installed and suitably secured as specified .
hardware andor other fastenings shall not be measured separately for payment .
num num ground anchors will be measured by the number of units actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
no change in the number of ground anchors to be paid for will be made because of the use by the contractor of an alternative number of ground anchors .
num basis of payment .
num permanent sheet piling temporary sheet piling and temporary sheet piling abandoned in place .
the accepted quantity of permanent sheet piling temporary sheet piling and temporary sheet piling abandoned in place will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per square foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including driving bracing cutting and removal of excess quantities removal of temporary sheet piling and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num soldier piles driven .
the accepted quantity of soldier piles driven shall be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials equipment and all other incidentals required to furnish and install piles completed and cut off and accepted by the engineer .
num soldier piles predrilled .
the accepted quantity of soldier piles predrilled or pre augered shall be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment to pre drill and maintain holes including dewatering and clean out furnish and install piles other materials including casing concrete or other specified backfill and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num drilling or augering to remove obstructions .
when approved by the engineer the accepted quantity of predrilling or preaugering to remove or pass obstructions shall be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to predrill clean out and maintain holes complete and accepted by the engineer .
num lagging installed .
the accepted quantity of lagging shall be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials equipment and all other incidentals required to furnish install and secure lagging between soldier piles including removal of concrete backfill as necessary to secure lagging walers or bracing to piles complete and accepted by the engineer .
num walers and bracing .
the accepted quantity of walers and bracing shall be paid for at the contract price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor equipment and materials required to furnish install and secure walers and bracing complete and accepted by the engineer .
num ground anchors .
the accepted quantity of ground anchors shall be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor equipment tools and materials and all other num incidentals required to finish the work including testing complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num timber construction num description .
this work consists of the provision of heavy timber construction for bridge superstructures roadway decks sidewalks railings and for other similar purposes at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num .
timber .
sawn lumber structural glued laminated timber and wood preservative treatment shall conform to the requirements of section m.num timber .
num hardware .
metal fastenings required for timber connections or for connecting timber to concrete or steel work shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num workmanship .
all timber shall be accurately cut and framed to a close fit in such manner that the joints will have even bearing over the entire contact surfaces .
unless otherwise specified nails and spikes shall be driven just sufficiently to set the heads flush with the surface of the wood .
deep hammer marks in wood surfaces shall be considered evidence of poor workmanship and shall be deemed sufficient cause for rejection of the work .
num preservative treatment of timber and lumber .
all timber and lumber designated for treatment in the contract documents shall be treated by the pressure process in accordance with the standard practices of the american wood preservers association awpa .
awpa standard specifications and practices for preservatives commodities analysis miscellaneous standards and evaluation standards shall be as specified in the contract documents .
if not so specified the appropriate standards and specifications from awpa for the project conditions shall be utilized .
unless otherwise specified the pressure process utilized shall be the empty cell process followed by an expansion bath where applicable vacuum to num inches of mercury at sea level and final steam cleaning .
the preservative utilized shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num handling of timber and lumber .
a. untreated timber .
untreated timber and lumber at the site of the work shall be open stacked on supports at least num inches above the ground and shall be so stacked and stripped as to permit free circulation of air between the tiers and courses .
when required by the engineer it shall be protected from the weather by suitable covering .
num b .
treated timber .
treated timber and lumber shall be closestacked and placed in a position as to facilitate thorough drainage of any preservative remaining on the material and shall otherwise conform to the requirements of awpa standard mnum .
num .
handling .
treated timber shall be handled carefully without sudden dropping bruising breaking of outer fibers or penetrating the surface with tools .
it shall be handled with rope or web slings .
cant hooks peaveys pikes or hooks shall not be used .
corner protectors shall be provided to prevent damage to timber bundled with metal bands or straps .
num .
cuts and abrasions .
all cutting framing and boring of treated timber shall be performed before treatment insofar as is practicable .
all cuts and abrasions made after treatment shall be given num brush coats of hot preservative oil .
each coat shall be allowed to dry before the next coat is applied .
num .
holes .
all holes bored after treatment shall be treated with preservative oil by means of an approved pressure bolt hole treater or with hot preservative oil by other approved methods .
any unfilled holes after being treated with preservative oil shall be plugged with treated plugs .
num .
temporary attachments .
forms or temporary braces may be attached to treated timber with nails or spikes only when approved by the engineer .
upon their removal the holes shall be filled by driving galvanized nails or spikes flush with the surface or by plugging as required for holes .
num installation of connectors .
the split ring and the shear plate types shall be installed in precut grooves of dimensions as recommended by the manufacturer .
spike grids shall be forced into the wood so that timbers will be in firm contact .
pressure equipment that does not damage the wood shall be utilized .
connector grooves in timber shall be cut concentric with the bolt hole shall conform to the crosssectional shape of the rings and shall provide a snug fit .
inside groove diameter shall be larger than nominal ring diameter in order that the ring will expand slightly during installation .
fabrication of all structural members using connectors shall be done prior to preservative treatment .
when prefabricated from templates or shop details bolt holes shall not be more than numinch from required placement .
bolt holes shall be numinch larger than the finished bolt diameter .
bolt holes shall be bored perpendicular to the face of the timber .
timber after fabrication shall be stored in a manner that will prevent changes in the dimensions of the members before assembly .
timber should be cured before fabrication so that it will remain stable in its dimensions .
timber that shrinks during storage causing predrilled grooves for split rings or plates to become elliptical or causing bolt hole spacing to change will be sufficient reason for rejection .
num countersinking .
countersinking shall be done wherever smooth faces are required .
recesses formed in treated timber for countersinking shall be treated as required for cuts and abrasions .
num num hardware .
a .
rods .
rods connecting only sawed timbers shall be threaded sufficiently at each end to provide tight connections allowing only for permissible variations in dimensions of material .
b. bolts .
the length specified shall be the length measured under the head .
bolts may be substituted for rods for timber connections where the length of threaded portion provided by the bolt is sufficient .
c. lag screws .
lag screws shall be installed by turning them into place .
they may be driven sufficiently to start them into the holes and hold them firmly in place for turning .
predrilling shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection num below .
d. nuts and washers .
washers or plate washers shall be used under all nuts bolt heads and lag screws that would otherwise come in contact with wood except under large diameter heads of specially designed flat head bolts .
all nuts shall be standard square nuts .
they shall be tightened sufficiently to prevent the rods or bolts from becoming loose during service and after being tightened they shall be effectively secured against backing off by burring of the rod or bolt threads or as otherwise specified or approved by the engineer .
e. nails and spikes .
nails shall not extend through all material into which they pass except when approved by the engineer .
when soindicated nails and spikes shall be driven in the pattern and quantities indicated on the plans .
distance and spacing requirements shall generally adhere to the following end distance tension members numd end distance compression members numd edge distance numd when d equals the diameter of nails or spikes .
nails or spikes shall be driven through the thinner member into the thicker member and be flush or countersunk to the member surface .
prebored holes when required shall be drilled in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection num below .
num holes for bolts dowels rods lag screws nails and spikes .
holes for round drift bolts and dowels shall be bored with a bit sized numinch less in diameter than the bolt or dowel to be used .
the diameter of holes for square drift bolts or dowels shall be equal to the least dimension of the bolt or dowels .
holes for machine bolts shall be bored with a bit of the same diameter as the bolt with a tolerance of plus numinch minus zero .
holes for rods shall be bored with a bit numinch greater in diameter than the rod .
holes for lag screws shall be bored with a bit not larger than the body of the screw at the base of the thread .
to prevent splitting or stripping of the threads a lead hole for the shank shall be bored with a bit of the same diameter and to the same depth as the shank .
the depth of holes for lag screws shall be oneinch less than the length under the thread .
lag num screws shall not be driven into the lead hole with a hammer but shall be turned in by means of a wrench .
spikes and nails are generally handdriven but may be power driven for the smaller diameters and lengths .
holes for large diameter spikes and nails generally greater than numinch shall be prebored to prevent the wood from splitting during driving .
the diameter of the lead hole must not exceed num times the diameter of the fasteners for wood species with specific gravities greater than num and no more than num times the diameter of the fastener for wood species with specific gravities less than num .
prebored holes shall not extend into the members which will be holding the point of the nail or spike .
num framing .
all lumber and timber shall be accurately cut and framed to a close fit in such manner that the joints will have even bearing over the entire contact surfaces .
mortises shall be true to size for their full depth and tenons shall fit snugly .
no shimming will be permitted in making joints nor will open joints be accepted .
num framed bents .
a. mud sills .
mud sills shall be firmly and evenly bedded to solid bearing and tamped in place .
mud sills shall be pressure preservative treated for ground contact .
where untreated timber is permitted for mud sills it shall be of heart cedar heart cypress redwood or other durable timber as approved by the engineer .
b .
concrete pedestals .
concrete pedestals for the support of framed bents shall be carefully finished so that the sills or posts will take even bearing .
dowels for anchoring sills or posts shall be not less than numinch in diameter and project at least num inches above the tops of the pedestals .
these dowels shall be cast in the concrete pedestals .
c. sills .
sills shall have true and even bearing on mud sills piles or pedestals .
they shall be driftbolted to mud sills or piles with bolts of not less than numinch diameter and extending into the mud sills or piles at least num inches or by other types of connectors as detailed on the plans .
when possible all earth shall be removed from contact with sills so that there will be free air circulation around the sills .
d. posts .
posts shall be fastened to pedestals with dowels of not less than numinch diameter extending at least num inches into the posts or by other types of connectors as detailed on the plans .
posts shall be fastened to sills by one of the following methods as indicated on the plans num .
by dowels of not less than numinch diameter extending at least num inches into posts and sills .
num .
by driftbolts of not less than numinch diameter driven diagonally through the base of the post and extending at least num inches into the sill .
drift bolts shall be driven in holes at a num degree angle and shall enter the post at least num inches above the post base .
num .
by other types of connectors as detailed on the plans .
num e. caps .
timber caps shall be placed with ends aligned in a manner to secure an even and uniform bearing over the tops of the supporting posts or piles .
all caps shall be secured by driftbolts of not less than numinch diameter extending at least num inches into the posts or piles or by other types of connectors as detailed on the plans .
the driftbolts shall be approximately in the center of the post or pile .
f. bracing .
bracing shall be bolted through the pile post or cap at the ends and at all intermediate intersections using a bolt of not less than numinch in diameter .
bracing shall be of sufficient length to provide a minimum distance of num inches between the outside bolt and the end of the brace .
num stringers .
stringers shall be sized at bearings and shall be placed in position so that knots near edges will be in the top portions of the stringers .
other stringers may have butt joints with the ends cut on a taper but interior stringers shall be lapped to take bearing over the full width of the floor beam or cap at each end .
the lapped ends of untreated stringers shall be separated at least ½inch for the circulation of air and shall be securely fastened by driftbolting where specified .
when stringers are two panels in length the joints shall be staggered .
timber stringers shall be placed in position so that the deck will have an even bearing on all stringers and so that any knots near edges will be in the top portions of the stringers .
outside stringers may have butt joints centered over caps or floor beams but interior stringers shall be lapped to take bearing over the full width of the cap or floor beams at each end .
unless otherwise shown on the plans stringers shall be toenailed to caps and intermediate stringers of adjoining spans shall be spiked together where they lap .
crossbridging between stringers shall be neatly and accurately framed and securely toe nailed with at least num nails in each end .
all crossbridging members shall have full bearing at each end against the sides of stringers .
unless otherwise specified num x num crossbridging shall be placed at the center of each span .
num plank floors .
unless otherwise specified planks for flooring shall be surfaced four sides s num s. single plank floors shall consist of a single thickness of plank supported by stringers or joists .
the planks shall be laid heart side down with numinch openings between them for seasoned material and with tight joints for unseasoned material .
each plank shall be securely spiked to each joist .
the planks shall be carefully graded as to thickness and so laid that no two adjacent planks shall vary in thickness by more than numinch .
twoply timber floors shall consist of two layers of flooring supported on stringers or joists .
the top course shall be laid either diagonal or parallel to the centerline of roadway as specified and each floor piece shall be securely fastened to the lower course .
joints shall be staggered at least num feet .
if the top flooring is placed parallel to the centerline of the roadway special care shall be taken to securely fasten the ends of the flooring .
at each end of the bridge these members shall be beveled .
num nailed or glued laminated strip floors .
nailed or glued laminated strip floors consist of individual lumber strips placed on edge and nailed glued or nailed and glued to the num previous strip thereby forming a continuous surface .
the laminated strip floors may be constructed on top of stringers at right angles to the centerline of roadway or they can be constructed on top of floor beams and run parallel to the roadway centerline .
spikes shall be of sufficient length to pass through two strips and at least onehalf way through the third strip .
the size of spikes shall be as indicated on the plans .
if timber supports are used every other strip shall be toenailed to every other support .
if steel supports are used the strips shall be securely fastened to the supports at the locations and spacing indicated on the plans .
the attachment device shall be approved galvanized clips as detailed on the plans .
care shall be exercised in order that each strip shall be vertical and tight against the preceding strip and shall bear evenly on all supports .
num laminated panel decks .
laminated panel decks consist of stress laminated sawn lumber strips placed with their wide side vertical and fastened together to form panels .
fastening may be accomplished by nails glue glue and nails or dowels .
panels may be interconnected utilizing spliced bolted or doweled shiplap joints steel dowels or high strength steel stressing rods .
alternatively panels may be assembled in a noninterconnected fashion .
panels may be utilized longitudinally with stringers composite stringers without stringers or transversely across steel or wood stringers .
num wheel guards and railings .
wheel guards and railings shall be accurately framed in accordance with the plans and erected true to line and grade .
unless otherwise specified wheel guards rails and rail posts shall be surfaced foursides s num s. wheel guards shall be laid in sections not less than num feet long except where necessary to match expansion joints or end joints .
num trusses .
trusses when completed shall show no irregularities of line .
chords shall be straight and true from end to end in horizontal projection and in vertical projection shall show a smooth curve through panel points conforming to the correct camber .
all bearing surfaces shall fit accurately .
uneven or rough cuts at the points of bearing shall be cause for rejection of the piece containing the defect .
num method of measurement .
unless otherwise specified in the special provi sionsconstruction section of project specifications timber construction will be measured by the number of thousand board feet actually placed in various parts of the completed structure in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
computation of quantity will be based on the nominal commercial widths and thicknesses of the respective materials .
num basis of payment .
unless otherwise specified in the special provisionsconstruction section of project specifications timber construction will be paid for at the contract unit price per thousand board feet as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including all lumber preservative treatment hardware and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num section num masonry construction num description .
this work consists of the construction of masonry structures and masonry portions of composite structures of various types at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num cut stone masonry ashlar .
cut stone masonry or masonry veneer shall be dressed and tooled to fixed dimensions as indicated on the plans or otherwise specified and shall be laid in range or random courses in a cement mortar bed .
num split face masonry .
split face masonry or veneer shall be composed of quarry stone laid in range or random courses in a cement mortar bed shall be substantially level and follow the pattern shown on the plans .
it shall include unless otherwise specified coping quoin and belt stones shaped to line and grade .
a reasonable proportion of the joints shall be splayed from the vertical as indicated .
split faced masonry may consist of a fascia wall one stone thick backed with concrete or constructed of solid stone masonry .
num rubble masonry .
rubble masonry shall be composed of irregular stones laid as coursed or uncoursed rubble in a cement mortar bed .
rubble masonry may consist of either a fascia wall one stone thick backed with concrete or constructed of solid stone masonry .
rubble masonry shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable requirements of section num stone masonry walls of these specifications .
num dry rubble masonry .
dry rubble masonry shall be composed of irregular stones laid as coursed or uncoursed rubble without the use of cement mortar .
dry rubble masonry shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable requirements of section num remove and rebuild dry stone masonry walls of these specifications .
num concrete block or brick masonry .
concrete block and brick masonry shall consist of concrete blocks or brick laid in cement mortar and may be unreinforced or reinforced with steel reinforcing .
block or brick pavements are not included under this designation .
num materials .
num stone .
stone shall be the material indicated on the plans and shall otherwise conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num of these specifications .
num block and brick .
a .
concrete block .
unless otherwise specified in the special provisions or approved in writing by the engineer all concrete block for masonry construction shall be type i moisture controlled units grade ni that meet the requirements of astm cnum .
the value of fm shall be as shown on the plans or as specified in the special provisions .
concrete block units should be protected from rain snow or other moisture during storage on or off the job site to assure that they will meet the type i moisture requirements at the time they are placed in the construction .
num b .
brick .
brick for masonry construction shall conform to the specification for building brick solid masonry units made from clay or shale aashto mnum astm cnum concrete building brick astm num or solid loadbearing concrete masonry units astm num .
the type and grade of brick to be furnished shall be as shown on the plans or as specified in the special provisions .
the bricks shall have a finegrained uniform and dense structure free from lumps of lime laminations cracks checks soluble salts or other defects which may in any way impair their strength durability appearance or usefulness for the purpose intended .
bricks shall emit a clear metallic ring when struck with a hammer .
num mortar .
mortar shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num lead dowels and cramps .
leaded joints wrought iron and galvanized steel dowels or cramps shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num of these specifica tions .
num concrete .
concrete backing of stone fascia walls shall be class aae and shall develop a minimum compression strength of num psi when tested at num days and shall otherwise conform to the applicable requirements of section num portland cement concrete .
num reinforcing steel .
reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num grout .
grout for filling voids in hollow masonry units shall conform either to the requirements of astm cnum or the following requirements a .
fine grout .
for fine grout if proportioned by volume the cementitious materials shall consist of one part portland cement to no more than num part hydrated lime or lime putty and the aggregates shall consist of sand in the amount of num¼ to num times the total volume of cementitious materials .
b. coarse grout .
for coarse grout the proportions shall be the same as for fine grout except that coarse aggregate in the amount of num to num times the total volume of cementitious materials shall be added .
coarse aggregate shall be of either ½inch or numinch maximum gradation .
num sampling and testing .
sampling and testing shall be in accordance with the rhode island department of transportation project schedule for the sampling testing and certification of material andor as modified by these specifications .
num construction methods .
num weather limitations .
stone brick or block masonry utilizing mortar or grout shall not be constructed when the temperature is below numof when the respective units contain frost or when the temperature is expected to drop below numof within num hours of placement except with the written permission of the engineer and subject to such conditions as he or she may require .
such permission and the use of the methods prescribed shall not release the contractor from his num obligation to build a satisfactory structure .
all work damaged by cold weather shall be removed and replaced .
in hot or dry weather the masonry shall be satisfactorily protected from the sun and cured by keeping the masonry or its covering wet for a period of three days after completion .
num mixing of mortar and grout .
the mortar and grout for masonry construction shall be proportioned as specified above in subsections num and num respectively of these specifications .
the mortar shall be hand or machine mixed as may be required by the engineer .
in the preparation of handmixed mortar the sand and cement shall be thoroughly mixed together in a clean tight mortar box until the mixture is of uniform color after which clean water shall be added in such quantity as to form a stiff plastic mass .
machinemixed mortar shall be prepared in an approved mixer and shall be mixed not less than num minutes nor more than num minutes .
sufficient water shall be added to make the mortar of such consistency that it can be handled easily and spread with a trowel .
mortar andor grout shall be mixed only in those quantities required for immediate use .
mortar not used within num minutes after water has been added or before initial set begins whichever occurs first shall be discarded .
num stone masonry construction .
a .
manufacture of stone for masonry .
num .
general .
each stone shall be free from depressions and projections that might weaken it or prevent it from being properly bedded and shall be of a shape to meet the requirements for the class of masonry specified .
when no dimensions are shown on the plans the stones shall be furnished in the sizes and face areas necessary to produce the general characteristics and appearance as indicated on the plans .
the thickness of courses if varied shall diminish regularly from bottom to top of wall .
the size of ring stones in arches shall be as shown on the plans .
when headers are required their lengths shall be not less than the width of bed of the widest adjacent stretcher plus num inches .
num .
surface finishes .
for the purpose of this specification the surface finishes of stone are defined as follows smoothfinished having a surface in which the variations from the pitch line do not exceed numinch .
finefinished having a surface in which the variations from the pitch line do not exceed numinch .
roughfinished having a surface in which the variations from the pitch line do not exceed ½inch .
num scabbled having a surface in which the variations from the pitch line do not exceed num inch .
rockfaced having an irregular projecting face without indications of tool marks .
the projections beyond the pitch line shall not exceed num inches and no part of the face shall recede back of the pitch line .
num .
rubble masonry .
a size .
individual stones shall have a thickness of not less than num inches and a width of not less than num½ times the thickness .
no stones except headers shall have a length less than num½ times their width .
b shape .
the stones shall be roughly squared on joints beds and faces .
selected stone roughly squared and pitched to line shall be used at all angles and ends of walls .
if specified all corners or angles in exterior surfaces shall be finished with a chisel draft .
bed surfaces of face stones shall be normal to the faces of the stones for about num inches and from this point may depart from normal not more than num inches in num inches .
joint surfaces of face stones shall form an angle with the bed surfaces of not less than num degrees .
all shaping or dressing of stone shall be done before the stone is laid in the wall and no dressing or hammering which will loosen the stone will be permitted after it is placed .
c dressing .
stone shall be dressed to remove any thin or weak portions .
face stones shall be dressed to provide bed and joint lines with a maximum variation from true line of num½ inches unless otherwise indicated on the plans or in the special provisions .
num .
ashlar masonry .
a size .
the individual stones shall be large and well proportioned .
they shall not be less than num inches nor more than num inches in thickness .
b dressing .
stones shall be dressed to exact sizes and shapes before being laid and shall be cut to lie on their natural beds with top and bottom truly parallel .
hollow beds will not be permitted .
the bottom bed shall be the full size of the stone and no stone shall have an over hanging top .
in rockface construction the face side of any stone shall not present an undercut contour adjacent to its bottom arris giving a topheavy unstable appearance when laid .
beds of face stone shall be finefinished for a depth of not less than num inches .
vertical joints of face stone shall be finefinished and full to the square for a depth of not less than num inches .
exposed surfaces of the face stone shall be given the surface finish indicated on the plans with edges pitched to true lines and exact batter .
chisel drafts num½inches wide shall be cut at all exterior corners .
face stone forming the starling or nosing of piers shall be rough finished unless otherwise specified .
holes for stone hooks shall not be permitted to show in exposed surfaces .
num c stretchers .
stretchers shall have a width of bed or not less than num½ times their thickness .
they shall have a length of bed not less than twice nor more than num½ times their thickness and not less than num feet .
num .
arch ring stones .
arch ring stone joint surfaces shall be radial and at right angles to the front faces of the stones .
they shall be dressed for a distance of at least num inches from the front faces and the soffits from which points they may depart from a plane normal to the face not to exceed numinch to num inches .
the back surface in contact with the concrete of the arch barrel shall be parallel to the front face and shall be dressed for a distance of num inches from the intrados .
the top shall be cut perpendicular to the front face and shall be dressed for a distance of at least num inches from the front .
when concrete is to be placed after the masonry has been constructed adjacent ring stones shall vary at least num inches in depth .
stratification in arch ring stones shall be parallel to the radial joints and in other stones shall be parallel to the beds .
when specified in the special provisions a fullsize template of the arch ring shall be laid out near the quarry site showing face dimensions of each ring stone and thickness of joints .
the template shall be approved by the engineer before the shaping of any ring stone is started and no ring stone shall be placed in the structure until all ring stones have been shaped dressed and approved by the engineer .
b .
selection and placing of stone .
num .
general .
when masonry is placed on a prepared foundation bed the bed shall be firm and normal to or in steps normal to the face of the wall and approved by the engineer before any stone is placed .
when it is placed on foundation masonry the bearing surface of the foundation masonry shall be cleaned thoroughly and in a saturatedsurface dry condition when the mortar bed is spread .
all masonry shall be constructed by experienced workmen .
face stones shall be set in random bond to produce the effect shown on the plans .
care shall be taken to prevent the bunching of small stones or stones of the same size .
when weathered or colored stones or stones of varying texture are being used care shall be exercised to distribute the various kinds of stones uniformly throughout the exposed faces of the work .
large stones shall be used for the bottom courses and large selected stones shall be used in the corners .
in general the stones shall decrease in size from the bottom to the top of work .
each stone shall be cleaned and thoroughly saturated with water before being set and the bed which is to receive it shall be clean and well moistened .
all stones shall be well bedded in freshly made mortar .
the mortar joints shall be full and the stones carefully settled in place before the mortar has set .
no spalls will be permitted in the beds .
no pinning up of stones with spalls will be permitted in beds .
stone shall not be dropped upon or slid over the wall nor will hammering rolling or turning of stones on the wall be allowed .
they shall be carefully set without jarring the stone num already laid and they shall be handled with a lewis or other appliance that will not cause disfigurement .
in case any stone is moved or the joint broken the stone shall be taken up the mortar thoroughly cleaned from bed and joints and the stone reset in fresh mortar .
num .
rubble masonry .
rubble masonry shall be laid to line and in courses roughly leveled up .
the bottom or foundation courses shall be composed of large selected stones and all courses shall be laid with bearing beds parallel to the natural bed of the material .
the vertical joints in each course of rubble masonry shall break with those in adjoining courses at least num inches .
in no case shall a vertical joint be so located as to occur directly above or below a header .
num .
ashlar masonry .
for all range cut stone masonry the stone shall be laid with alternate stretchers and headers shall conform to the general dimensions shapes and arrangement shown on the plans .
the stones in any one course of ashlar masonry shall be placed so as to form bonds of not less than num inches with the stones of adjoining courses .
headers shall be placed over stretchers and in general the headers of each course shall equally divide the spaces between the headers of adjoining courses but no header shall be placed over a joint and no joint shall be made over a header .
the thickness of stretches and headers shall be as shown on the plans or as specified in section m.num stone for masonry .
num .
split face .
for all split faced masonry selected stones squared and pitched to line shall be used at all angles wall expansion and contraction joints and other arrises .
copings and belt stones shall be dressed for the required jointing and exposed corners shall be pitched parallel to each other .
exposed surfaces shall have projections of not more than num inch .
the bed and interior ends shall be cut normal to the pitch lines .
num .
sample section .
if required the contractor shall build at a location designated a sample section of wall not less than num feet high and num feet long showing examples of face wall and method of forming joints .
the sample section shall be subject to the engineers approval prior to the start of wall facing .
c. beds joints and pointing .
num .
beds and joints .
face joints for all cut stone shall not exceed ½inch face joints for split face masonry shall not exceed num inch and face joints for rubble masonry shall not exceed num½inches .
the joints in the interior of the wall shall average not more than num½inches for rubble masonry .
the thickness or beds in ashlar masonry may vary as shown from the bottom to the top of the work .
however in each course the beds shall be of uniform thickness throughout .
beds shall not extend in an unbroken line through more than five stones .
joints in ashlar masonry shall be vertical .
in all other masonry joints may be at angles with the vertical from num degrees to num degrees .
num each face stone shall bond with all contiguous face stones at least num inches longitudinally and num inches vertically .
ring stone joints on the faces and soffits shall be not less than numinch nor more than num½inches in thickness .
cross beds for vertical walls shall be level and for battered walls may vary from level to normal to the batter line of the face of the wall .
all joints shall be completely filled with mortar .
num .
pointing .
pointing shall not be done in freezing weather or when the stone contains frost .
whenever possible face joints shall be properly pointed before the mortar sets .
joints which can not be immediately pointed shall be prepared for pointing by raking them out to a depth of num inches before the mortar has set .
the face surfaces of stones shall not be smeared with mortar forced out of joints or that used in pointing .
joints not pointed at the time the stone is laid shall be thoroughly wet with clean water and filled with mortar .
the mortar shall be well driven into the joints and finished with an approved pointing tool .
the mortar in joints on top surfaces shall be crowned slightly at the center of the masonry to provide drainage .
walls shall be kept wet while pointing is being performed and in hot or dry weather the pointed masonry shall be protected from the sun and kept wet for a period of at least num days after completion .
after the pointing is completed and the mortar set the wall shall be thoroughly cleaned and left in a neat and workmanlike condition .
num .
leaded joints .
when shown on the plans or specified horizontal and vertical joints shall be leaded to the designated size and depth .
the mortar joints shall be raked out clean to the specified depth but in no case less than numinch .
joints shall not be leaded before the concrete backing has been placed .
lead wool shall be thoroughly tamped into place with a caulking tool and finished with a bead for the width of the joint .
d. headers .
headers shall hold in the heart of the wall the same size as shown in the face and shall extend not less than num inches into the core .
they shall occupy not less than one fifth of the face area of the wall and shall be evenly distributed .
headers in walls num feet or less in thickness shall extend entirely through the wall .
headers in ashlar masonry shall be placed in each course and shall have a width of not less than num½ times their thickness .
in walls having a thickness of num feet or less the headers shall extend entirely through the wall .
in walls of greater thickness the length of headers shall be not less than num½ times their thickness when the course is num inches or less in height and not less than num feet in courses of greater height .
headers shall be spaced not further apart than num feet center to center .
there shall be at least one header to every two stretchers .
e. cores and backing .
num .
general .
cores and backing shall consist either of compactly laid and interlocked stones including headers and stretchers or of concrete .
num the headers and stretchers in walls having a thickness of num feet or less shall have a width or length equal to the full thickness of the wall .
no backing or core will be allowed .
num .
stone .
when stone is used for cores or backing at least onehalf of the stone shall be of the same size and character as the face stone and the remaining stones shall be of sizes and shapes that facilitate proper interlocking with face stones .
no course shall be less than num inches thick .
stone backing shall be laid in the same manner as specified above for face stone with headers interlocking with face headers when the thickness of the wall will permit .
backing shall be laid to break joints with the face stone .
stone cores shall be laid in full mortar beds so as to bond not less than num inches with face and backing stone and with each other .
bed joints in cores and backing shall not exceed num inch in thickness and vertical joints shall not exceed num inches in width .
num .
concrete .
the placement and consolidation of concrete adjacent to the ashlar masonry facing shall be done in a manner that will insure the filling of all spaces around the stones and secure full contact and efficient bond with all stone surfaces .
num .
leveling courses .
stone cores and backing shall be carried up to the approximate level of the face course before the succeeding course is started .
num .
concrete backing .
unless otherwise specified the stone masonry shall be constructed before placing concrete .
steel anchors as shown on the plans or specified in the special provisions shall be used .
to improve the bond between the stone masonry and the concrete backing the back of the masonry shall be made as uneven as the stones will permit .
after the stone facing has been laid and the mortar has attained sufficient strength all surfaces against which concrete is to be placed shall be cleaned carefully and all dirt loose material and accumulations of mortar droppings removed .
when placing concrete all interstices of the masonry shall be filled and the concrete thoroughly spaded and worked until it is brought into intimate contact with every part of the back of the masonry .
unless otherwise indicated on the plans horizontal construction joints in the concrete backing shall be made at grades which will break joints of the stone facing .
concrete courses shall be approximately num feet in depth .
f. dowels and cramps .
where required coping stone stone in the wings of abutments and stone in piers shall be secured with wrought iron or galvanized steel cramps or dowels as shown on the plans or ordered by the engineer .
dowel holes that will be covered by stone masonry shall be drilled through each stone before the stone is placed and after it is in place such dowel holes shall be extended by drilling into the underlying course not less than num inches .
on those stones where it is desirable to avoid num drill holes through the top surfaces they shall be concealed by setting and grouting the stones over dowels set in the preceding course or by some similar method .
the size and number of dowel holes and size and length of dowels shall be as shown on the plans or as directed .
cramps or dowels shall be of the shapes and dimensions shown on the plans or approved by the engineer .
they shall be inset in the stone so as to clear the bed of the succeeding course and shall be located in such a manner as to securely bond the stone courses together or stone facing to the concrete backing .
cramps and dowels shall be set in lead care being taken to completely fill the surrounding spaces with the molten metal or shall be rigidly anchored by other means approved by the engineer .
g. copings .
stones for copings of wall pier and abutment bridge seats shall be carefully selected and fully dimensioned stones .
on piers not more than two stones shall be used to make up the entire width of coping .
the copings of abutment bridge seats shall be of sufficient width to extend at least num inches under the backwall .
each step forming the coping of a wingwall shall be formed by a single stone which shall overlap the stone forming the step immediately below it at least num inches .
tops of copings shall be given a bevel cut at least num inches wide and beds bevel cuts and tops shall be finefinished .
the vertical joints shall be smoothfinished and the copings shall be laid with joints not more than numinch in thickness .
the underside of projecting copings preferable shall have a drip bead .
joints in copings shall be located so as to provide not less than a numinch bond with the stones of the under course and so that no joint will come directly under the superstructure masonry plates .
h. bracing .
when in the opinion of the engineer bracing is necessary to hold the stone in proper position the contractor shall construct such bracing in a manner satisfactory to the engineer .
i .
cleaning exposed surfaces .
all face stones shall be thoroughly cleaned of mortar stains immediately after being laid and while the mortar is fresh .
the stones shall be kept clean until the work is completed .
after the pointing is completed and the mortar set the wall shall be thoroughly cleaned and left in a neat and workmanlike condition .
num brick or block masonry .
a .
laying brick and block .
the blocks or bricks shall be laid in such manner as will thoroughly bond them into the mortar by means of the shovejoint method buttered or plastered joints will not be permitted .
all clay or shale brick must be thoroughly saturated with water before being laid .
dampening of concrete masonry units before or during construction shall not be permitted unless approved by the engineer .
the arrangement of headers and stretchers shall be such as will thoroughly bond the mass and unless otherwise specified work shall be of alternate headers and stretchers with consecutive courses breaking joints .
other types of bonding as for ornamental work shall be as specified on the plans .
all joints shall be completely filled with mortar .
they shall not be less than numinch and not more than numinch in thickness and the thickness shall be uniform throughout .
all joints shall num be finished properly as the work progresses and on exposed faces they shall be neatly struck using the weather joint .
no spalls or bats shall be used except for shaping around irregular openings or when unavoidable to finish out a course in which case full bricks shall be placed at the corners the bats being placed in the interior of the course .
each masonry unit shall be adjusted to its final position while mortar is still soft and plastic .
units which are disturbed after mortar has stiffened shall be removed and relayed in fresh mortar .
vertical cells to be filled with grout shall be aligned to provide a continuous unobstructed opening .
piers and walls may be built of solid brick work or may consist of a brick or block shell backed with concrete or other suitable material as specified on the plans .
all details of the construction shall be in accordance with approved practice and to the satisfaction of the engineer .
b .
placement of reinforcement .
prior to and during grouting the reinforcing steel shall be securely held in position at the top and bottom and at intermediate points not exceeding num bar diameters or num feet apart .
bars shall be maintained clear of the cell walls and within plus or minus ½inch of their planned position transverse to the wall and within plus or minus num inches of their planned position longitudinal to the wall .
c. grouted brick or block construction .
grouted masonry shall be constructed in such a manner that all elements of the masonry act together as a structural element .
prior to grouting the grout space shall be clean so that all spaces to be filled with grout do not contain mortar projections greater than ½inch mortar droppings or other foreign material .
grout shall be placed so that all spaces to be grouted do not contain voids .
grout materials and water content shall be controlled to provide adequate fluidity for placement without segregation .
size and height limitations of the grout space or cell on the average shall not be less than shown in table no .
num .
higher grout pours or smaller cavity widths or cell size than shown in table num may be used when approved by the engineer if it is demonstrated that grout spaces are properly filled .
when required by table no .
num cleanouts shall be provided in the bottom course at every vertical bar but shall not be spaced more than num inches on center for solidly grouted masonry .
cleanouts shall be of sufficient size to allow removal of debris .
units may be laid to the full height of the grout pour and grout shall be placed in a continuous pour in grout lifts not exceeding num feet .
if construction joints are used in columns of grout they shall be located at least num½inches below the level of a mortar bed joint .
segregation of the grout materials and damage to the masonry shall be avoided during the grouting process .
num grout shall be consolidated before loss of plasticity in a manner to fill the grout space .
grout pours greater than num inches in height shall be mechanically reconsolidated to minimize voids due to water loss .
grout not mechanically vibrated shall be puddled .
table no .
num grouting limitations least clear dimensionsnum grout pour width of cell maximum height grout space dimensions cleanout grout type feet in.num in .
x in .
requirednum fine num ¾ num½ x num no fine num num½ num½ x num no fine num num½ num½ x num yes fine num num½ num¾ x num yes fine num num num x num yes coarse num num½ num½ x num no coarse num num num½ x num no coarse num num num x num yes coarse num num½ num x num yes coarse num num num x num yes notes num the clear dimension is the cell or group space width less mortar projects .
num grout space width shall be increased by the horizontal projection of the diameters of the horizontal bars within the cross section of the grout space .
num cleanouts may be omitted if approved provisions are made to keep the grout space clean prior to grouting .
in nonstructural elements mortar of pouring consistency may be substituted for grout when the masonry is constructed and grouted in pours of num inches or less .
vertical barriers of masonry may be built across the grout space .
the grouting of any section of wall between barriers shall be completed in one day with no interruption longer than one hour .
d. copings bridge seats and backwalls .
the tops of retaining walls abutment wingwalls and similarly exposed brick or block work shall be provided in general with a stone coping .
the underside of the coping shall have a batter or drip bead at least num inch beyond the face of the block or brick work wall .
the coping upon an abutment backwall will commonly have no projection beyond its bridge seat face .
for thin copings mortar of the same proportions as used for laying the block or brick may be used to produce precast sections not less than num feet nor more than num feet in length .
no coping shall be less than num inches thick .
copings of piers and abutment bridge seats shall be of ashlar stone work and shall conform to the requirements of para .
b.num of subsection num of these specifications .
num num method of measurement .
num stone masonry .
structural stone masonry of the types described in this section will be measured by the number of cubic yards or square feet of exposed wall surface actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
fascia walls one stone thick will be measured by the cubic yard by assuming the stone surfaces as a course having an average thickness of num inches .
the volume in cubic yards of all railings cap stones and belt courses will be determined from the dimensions indicated on the plans .
num pointing and grouting .
when listed as a separate item in the proposal pointing and grouting will be measured by the number of linear feet actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num block and brick masonry .
concrete block masonry andor brick masonry will be measured by the number of cubic yards or the number of square feet as the case may be actually placed in the structure in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num concrete backing .
concrete backing of stone fascia walls will be measured by the number of cubic yards actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
num stone masonry .
the accepted quantity of stone masonry will be paid for at either the contract unit price per cubic yard or square foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num pointing and grouting .
the accepted quantity of pointing and grouting will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num block and brick masonry .
the accepted quantities of concrete block masonry andor brick masonry will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per cubic yard or per square foot as the case may be as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
filling material for the interior of the wall reinforcing steel and concrete or mortar copings shall be considered as included in the price paid for number of cubic yards or square feet of block or brick masonry actually placed .
num concrete backing .
the accepted quantity of concrete backing of stone fascia walls will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard as listed in the proposal .
the price so stated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num section num castinplace structure concrete masonry num description .
this work consists of the provision of castinplace concrete in bridges walls culverts and other miscellaneous structures at the locations and to the details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
the work includes structures constructed by castinplace methods using either plain or reinforced concrete or a combination of both .
num related items of work covered elsewhere .
related items of work covered in other sections of these specifications include the following a .
section num reinforcing steel b .
section num pavement subdrains and wall drains .
c. section num water stops and flashings d. section num roadway joints expansion and fixed num materials .
num concrete .
all materials required for the production and curing of structure concrete shall conform to the applicable requirements of sections num and m.num portland cement concrete and section num concrete with calcium nitrite based corrosion inhibitor respectively of these specifications .
num joint fillers and sealants .
the following materials shall conform to the applicable requirements of the indicated subsections of part m materials a. subsection m.num preformed joint filler .
b. subsection m.num poured joint sealer .
c. subsection m.num preformed neoprene compression seals .
d. subsection m.num preformed expansion joint filler the bituminous type the nonextruding type and the polyethylene foam joint filler type .
e. subsection m.num joint seal .
poured and caulked types f. subsection m.num mastic joint sealer .
g. subsection m.num polyurethane joint sealant .
h. subsection m.num polyurethane elastomeric joint sealant .
num num construction methods .
num general .
the requirements for classification proportioning batching mixing transportation placing curing and testing of concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num portland cement concrete .
num footings .
preparation of foundations shall conform to the requirements of section num structure excavation and backfill .
no concrete shall be placed until after the engineer has approved the depth and dimensions of the excavation the character of the material and the condition of the foundation .
no footing shall be supported partially on rock and partially on soil .
the rock shall be excavated as necessary to allow the placement of num inches of gravel in accordance with subsection num excavation .
the engineer may direct in writing such changes in dimensions or elevations of footings as may be necessary to obtain satisfactory foundations .
the plans will be revised accordingly .
a .
foundations under water .
when required by the contract special provisions foundations to be constructed under water shall be inspected by divers hired by the contractor independently and solely for the purpose of the inspection requirements of the contract .
the diver shall be a professional engineer registered by the state of rhode island and shall be appropriately certified to perform the intended work .
in general the divers tasks shall include inspection of the excavations for foundations to determine their completeness and suitability for the placement of concrete inspection of the drilling and grouting operations for any dowels that may be specified and inspection of the tremie placement operations to insure that the concrete placement is proceeding properly and is completed in accordance with applicable contract specifications .
the diver shall be responsible to report any discrepancies in materials or workmanship to the engineer .
the diver shall record hisher findings by written and photographic methods and a final report of findings recommendations and actions taken shall be prepared for the engineer .
measurement and payment for the diving services shall be as outlined in the special provisions .
num falsework and centering .
all falsework or centering shall be adequate for the type of construction involved and shall conform to the requirements of paragraph num falsework and forms of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges latest revision .
the contractor shall submit all shop drawings for falsework and centering including design computations formally signed and sealed by the contractors rhode island registered profes sional engineer all in accordance with subsection num plans and shop drawings of these specifications .
the contractors professional engineer shall certify that the falsework system has been assembled and constructed according to the approved falsework drawings prior to placing loads on such falsework .
when structures are to be constructed over railroad tracks the centering shall also conform to the requirements of the railroad company as to temporary operating clearances safety and design .
num num forms .
a .
general .
when required the contractor shall prepare detailed plans for all important forms .
this requirement includes design computations formally signed and sealed by the contractors rhode island registered professional engineer and otherwise in accordance with subsection num plans and shop drawings of these specifications .
such plans shall be approved by the engineer before any work is started on construction of the forms .
socalled snap ties shall not be used and removable cones shall be of minimum diameter .
where forms are to be suspended from the structural steel girders snaptie hangers wires or other devices that can not be readily adjusted to provide mortartight joints will not be approved .
slab forms shall not bear on interior diaphragms .
forms shall not be installed over steel supporting members until after the steel erection and touchup painting is completed .
provision shall be included in the form for a standard numinch symmetrical chamfer at all square entrant concrete corners unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
b .
wood forms .
all face forms shall be constructed of lumber numinch or more in thickness lined with pressed woodfibre or plywood not less than numinch in thickness .
sheet metal preferably noncorrosive of approved gauge may be substituted .
as an alternate method of construction face forms may be made up of plywood numinch or more in thickness without backing boards if properly designed and supported .
such alternate construction shall provide a rigid form which will prevent unacceptable deformations in the finished concrete surface .
all pressed woodfibre or plywood forms shall be suitably tempered or waterproofed at the time of manufacture to prevent the absorption of moisture and shall be of an approved type .
when lining is used the wood forms shall be of the usual construction with the boards closely spaced .
the lining shall be in sheets of maximum useable size and shall be applied smooth side to the concrete .
joints between panels shall be taped or filled to provide a smooth tight form surface .
metal ties or anchorages which are required within the forms to hold them to correct alignment and location shall be so constructed that the metal work can be removed to a depth of at least num inches from the exposed surface of the concrete without causing injury to such surface by spalling or otherwise .
when permitted for secondary forms all wires upon removal of the forms shall be cut back at least ½inch from the face of the concrete with sharp chisels or nippers .
all fittings for metal ties shall be of such design that upon their removal the cavities which are left shall be of the smallest possible size .
the cavities shall be filled with cement mortar of fine aggregate and cement in the proportion that has been employed for the particular class of concrete treated and the surface left smooth even and uniform in color .
formwork lines shall be straight and true and forms shall be mortartight and well tied and braced to prevent bulging .
block shims or wedges must be properly secured before placing num concrete .
formwork shall be treated with a form release agent approved by the engineer or be saturated with water just before placing concrete .
the form release agent used shall not discolor or otherwise injuriously affect the concrete surface or subsequent finish .
release agents must be applied to the forms before the reinforcement is placed .
all excess release agent shall be removed from the face surfaces and the ties and reinforcement shall be thoroughly cleaned with an approved solvent where necessary .
c. metal forms .
the applicable requirements for wood forms shall apply to metal forms .
the metal used for forms shall be of such thickness that the forms will remain true to shape .
all bolt and rivet heads shall be countersunk .
clamps pins or other connecting devices shall be designed to hold the forms rigidly together and to allow removal without injury to the concrete .
metal forms which do not present a smooth surface or line up properly shall not be used .
special care shall be exercised to keep metal forms free from rust grease or other foreign matter which will discolor the concrete .
num placing concrete conventional method .
a .
general .
in preparation for the placing of concrete all sawdust chips standing water and other construction debris and extraneous matter shall be removed from the interior of forms .
struts stays and braces serving temporarily to hold the forms in correct shape and alignment pending the placing of concrete at their locations shall be removed when the concrete placing has reached an elevation rendering their service unnecessary .
these temporary members shall be entirely removed from the forms and not buried in the concrete unless directed otherwise by the engineer .
any hardware allowed to remain in the formwork shall be cut back to the design cover for reinforcement .
the resulting recess in the concrete surface shall then be filled with a patching mortar approved by the engineer .
the contractor will be required to notify the engineer twentyfour hours in advance of placing concrete in order to provide ample time for the inspection of forms steel reinforcement materials and equipment .
concrete shall be placed and consolidated by methods that will neither cause segregation of materials nor displacement of reinforcement and that will result in a dense homogeneous concrete which is free of voids and rock pockets .
prior to the actual placement of concrete the engineer may require the contractor to demonstrate the capability of the equipment to convey the concrete mixture to maintain the specified quality .
if the quality of concrete reaching the form is found to be inadequate as a result of the method of concrete placement the engineer may order the work to be discontinued and require the substitution of a satisfactory method of concrete placement .
the use of aluminum for chutes on pipes shall not be permitted .
open chutes shall be of metal or metal lined .
where steep slopes are required the chutes shall be equipped with baffles erected in short lengths to slow the movement of concrete .
concrete shall not be dropped a distance of more than num feet and special care shall be taken to fill each part of the form by depositing the concrete as near to its final position as possible .
where placing operations would involve dropping the concrete more than num feet such num as piers columns thin walls etc .
it shall be deposited through sheet metal or other approved pipes .
as far as practical pipes shall be kept full of concrete during placing and their lower ends shall be kept buried in the newly placed concrete .
all chutes and pipes shall be kept clean and free from coatings of hardened concrete by thoroughly flushing with water after each run .
concrete shall be consolidated by mechanical high frequency internal or external vibrators or both in a manner acceptable to the engineer .
vibrators shall be of a type and size suited to the purpose .
handheld vibrators shall be equipped with rubber tipped heads when used to consolidate around epoxycoated reinforcement .
vibrators shall be manipulated so as to thoroughly work the concrete around the reinforcement and embedded fixtures and into the corners and angles of forms .
the vibration at any point shall of sufficient duration to accomplish thorough consolidation but shall not be prolonged to the point where segregation or bleeding occurs .
vibration shall not be applied directly to or through the reinforcement to sections or layers of concrete which have hardened to the degree the concrete ceases to be plastic under such vibration .
vibrators shall not be used to transport concrete in the forms .
concrete shall be placed in horizontal layers not more than num inches thick except as hereinafter provided .
when less than a complete layer is placed in one operation it shall be terminated in a vertical bulkhead .
each layer shall be placed and consolidated before the preceding course has taken initial set to avoid the formation of a cold joint with the preceding course .
in case the placing of concrete is temporarily delayed the concrete shall be covered immediately and kept moist to retard initial set until placement can resume .
in case the placing of concrete is temporarily discontinued a construction joint shall be formed immediately .
laitance and other objectionable material shall be cleaned from the new construction joint when placement is scheduled to resume .
to avoid visible joints as far as possible upon exposed faces the top surface of the concrete adjacent to the forms shall be smoothed with a trowel .
where a feather edge might be produced at a construction joint as in the sloped surface of a wingwall an inset form shall be used to produce a blockedout portion in the preceding layer which shall produce an edge thickness of not less than num inches in the succeeding layer .
work shall not be discontinued within num inches of the top of any face unless provision has been made for a coping less than num inches thick .
in such case and if permitted by the engineer the construction joint may be made at the underside of the coping .
immediately following the discontinuance of placing concrete all accumulations of mortar splashed upon the reinforcing steel and the surface of forms shall be removed .
dried mortar chips and dust shall not be puddled into the unset concrete .
if the accumulations are not removed prior to the concrete becoming set care shall be exercised not to injure or break the concretesteel bond at and near the surface of the concrete while cleaning the reinforcing steel .
b. vertical members .
concrete for columns substructure and culvert walls and other similar vertical members shall be placed and allowed to set and settle for a period of time before num concrete for integral horizontal members such as caps slabs or footings is placed .
such period shall be adequate to allow completion of settlement due to loss of bleed water and shall be not less than num hours for vertical members over num feet in height and not less than num minutes for members over num feet but not over num feet in height .
when friction collars or falsework brackets are mounted on such vertical members and unless otherwise approved the vertical member shall have been in place at least seven days and shall have attained its specified strength before loads from horizontal members are applied .
c. slabs .
before any slab concrete is placed an approved templet and finishing tools shall be on hand for striking off the surface of the slab to the required crown as shown on the plans .
for bridge deck slabs refer to section num placement of concrete bridge decks of these specifications .
d. superstructure .
unless otherwise permitted no concrete shall be placed in the superstructure until substructure forms have been stripped sufficiently to determine the character of the supporting substructure concrete .
concrete for tbeam or deck girder spans whose depth is less than num feet may be placed in one continuous operation or may be placed in two separate operations first to the top of the girder stems and second to completion .
for tbeam or deck girder spans whose depth is num feet or more and unless the falsework is nonyielding such concrete shall be placed in two operations and at least five days shall elapse after placement of stems before the top deck slab is placed .
concrete for box girders may be placed in two or three separate operations consisting of bottom slab girder stems and top slab .
in either case the bottom slab shall be placed first and unless otherwise permitted by the engineer the top slab shall not be placed until the girder stems have been in place for at least five days .
e. arch rings .
the concrete in arch rings shall be placed in such a manner as to load the centering uniformly .
arch rings and ribs preferably shall be cast in a single continuous opera tion .
however with the permission of the engineer they may be divided by radial bulkheads into transverse sections of such size that each section can be cast in a continuous operation .
the arrangement of the sections and the sequence of placing shall be as approved by the engineer and shall be such as to avoid the distortion of the centering and consequent creation of initial stress in the newly placed concrete or its reinforcement .
the sections shall be bonded together by suitable keys .
where special key sections are required the concrete shall be mixed as dry as possible and consolidated by means of vibration .
the spandrel walls or columns and the beams shall not be cast until after the centering is struck and no part of the coping railing or floor shall be cast until the spandrel walls or columns are complete .
f. depositing concrete under water .
concrete shall not be deposited in water except with the approval of the engineer and under his immediate supervision .
in this case the method of placing shall be as specified .
concrete deposited in water shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num classification of these specifications .
to prevent segregation it shall be carefully placed in a compact mass in its final position by means of a tremie or other approved method num and shall not be disturbed after being deposited .
still water shall be maintained at the point of deposit and the forms under water shall be watertight .
for parts of structures under water when possible concrete seals shall be placed continuously from start to finish .
the surface of the concrete shall be kept as nearly horizontal as practicable at all times .
to insure thorough bonding each succeeding layer of a seal shall be placed before the preceding layer has taken initial set .
a tremie shall consist of a tube having a diameter of not less than num inches constructed in sections having flanged couplings fitted with gaskets .
the tremies shall be supported so as to permit free movement of the discharge over the entire top surface of the work to permit rapid lowering when necessary to retard or stop the flow of concrete .
the discharge end shall be closed with an approved type of foot valve at each start of work to prevent water entering the tube and all joints shall be sealed so that the concrete may be discharged into the empty tube .
the tremie tube shall be kept full to the bottom of the hopper .
when a batch is dumped into the hopper the flow of concrete shall be induced by slightly raising the discharge end but always keeping it in the mass of deposited concrete .
the flow shall be continuous until the work is completed .
dewatering may not proceed until num days after completion of the pour except when prior permission is granted by the engineer .
all laitance or other unsatisfactory material shall be re moved from the exposed surface by scraping chipping or other means such that the surface of the concrete will not be injured .
g. concrete exposed to sea water .
unless shown otherwise on the plans no construction joints shall be allowed between extreme low tide and extreme high tide .
in the determination of these ranges due consideration shall be given to wave action ice formation and other conditions affecting the extreme limits of possible deterioration and disintegration .
h. cold weather concrete .
concrete operations during cold weather shall conform to the requirements of subsection num cold weather concrete .
i .
hot weather concrete .
concrete operations during hot weather shall conform to the requirements of subsection num hot weather concrete .
num placing concrete by pumping optional method .
a. pumping .
placement of concrete by pumping will be permitted as approved by the engineer .
the equipment shall be arranged that no vibrations result which might damage freshly placed concrete .
where concrete is conveyed and placed by mechanically applied pressure the equipment shall be suitable in kind and adequate in capacity for the work .
the operation of the pump shall be such that a continuous stream of concrete without air pockets is produced .
when pumping is completed the concrete remaining in the pipeline if such is to be used shall be ejected in such manner that there will be no contamination of the concrete or separation of the ingredients .
b .
handling and placing concrete .
concrete shall be placed so as to avoid segregation of materials and displacement of reinforcement .
prior to the actual placement of concrete the engineer may require the contractor to demonstrate the capability of the equipment to both convey the concrete mixture and maintain the specified quality .
no further verification of the num equipments capability will be required unless evidence of nonuniform concrete is observed by the engineer during placement .
concrete shall not come in contact with aluminum during conveying and placing operations .
when concrete pumps are used the lines shall have a minimum diameter of num inches .
the specific pumping equipment which the contractor proposes to use shall be subject to the approval of the engineer .
all chutes troughs and pipes shall be kept clean and free from coatings of hardened concrete by thoroughly flushing with water after each run water used for flushing shall be discarded clear of the concrete already in place .
dropping concrete a distance of more than num feet or depositing a large quantity at any point and running or working it along the forms shall not be permitted .
special care shall be taken to fill each part of the form by depositing concrete directly in the form as near to its final position as possible to work the coarser aggregates back from the face of the concrete and to force the concrete under and around the reinforcement .
after the concrete has taken its initial set care shall be exercised to avoid jarring the forms or placing any strain on the ends of projecting reinforcement .
c. design mix .
the contractor shall have the option to submit for approval by the engineer a pump mix design formula of the concrete mixture to be used with the specific pumping equipment .
the concrete mixture shall meet the specific requirements of subsection num proportioning for air content cement factor and slump for the various classes of concrete specified .
d. placing concrete under water .
concrete placed under water shall be placed continuously from start to finish .
the surface of the concrete shall be kept as nearly horizontal as practicable .
to insure thorough bonding each succeeding layer of seal shall be placed before the preceding layer has taken initial set .
for large pours more than one tremie or pump shall be used to insure compliance with this requirement .
num expansion contraction and construction joints .
a .
concrete joints .
num .
general .
the type and details of joints and joint fillers in concrete shall be as shown on the plans .
joints shall be filled or open .
filled joints may be the poured type or filled with a premoulded filler .
materials for joint fillers and sealants are specified in subsection m.num of these specifications .
num .
flashing and water stops .
metal flashing or flexible water stops shall be furnished and placed as shown on the plans .
they shall be spliced welded or soldered to form continuous watertight joints and shall conform to the requirements of section num water stops and flashing .
num .
construction joints .
in order to reduce the size of pours or for other construction reasons additional joints may be provided at locations approved by the engineer .
num particular care shall be taken with all bonded construction joints to obtain a bond between subsequent pourings .
all laitance and debris shall be carefully chipped and cleaned from the surface of the hardened concrete .
the contact areas shall be cleaned with a wire brush moistened with water and covered with a coating of mortar or neat cement grout .
the new concrete shall be placed before the grout has attained its initial set and shall be carefully spaded into position .
shear keys steel dowels or inclined reinforcement approved by the engineer shall be used where necessary to transmit shear or bond the two sections together .
num .
contraction joints .
where a definite thickness of joint filler is not indicated on the plans bond between adjacent surfaces shall be prevented by coating the surface of the concrete in the section first placed with an approved bond breaking material or a sheet of approved nonstaining fibrous paper or both using the coating material as a cementing medium .
num .
expansion joints .
joints to be sealed shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign matter .
joint fillers shall be applied in accordance with subsection num para .
a below .
num joint fillers and sealants .
a. preformed polyethylene foam joint filler .
num .
preparation .
joints shall be absolutely dry and thoroughly cleaned of all deleterious material prior to placing the joint fillers and sealants .
num .
installation .
the thickness of the joint filler shall be as indicated on the plans .
the preformed joint filler shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturers recommenda tions .
b. mastic joint sealer .
num .
preparation .
joints shall be absolutely dry and thoroughly cleaned in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations prior to placing the joint fillers and sealants .
num .
approval requirements .
prior to its use the contractor shall furnish notarized certification that the material proposed meets all the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
the state will require proof that the proposed mastic system has a proven record of performance as confirmed by actual field tests and successful installations in new england .
those installations cited must be available for inspection by department personnel .
the state may require the contractor to either conduct laboratory tests at its expense or submit current independent laboratory tests to substantiate compliance with the above requirements .
num .
manufacturers representative .
the supplier of mastic joint sealer shall furnish the services of a competent field representative of the approved manufacturer if required to do so by the state .
the field representative shall be present at the work site prior to any use of materials to instruct the contractor the inspector or the engineer on installation and inspection procedures and to inspect the condition of the prepared surfaces .
the manufacturers representative will remain at the job site after work commences until the inspector or engineer num are satisfied that the work crew has successfully mastered the technique of installing the mastic system .
num .
installation .
installation of the mastic joint sealer shall be in accordance with the directions of the manufacturer .
duplicate copies of said directions shall be forwarded to the job site with each shipment of material .
c. polyurethane joint sealant .
num .
preparation .
all joints shall be cleaned of contaminants and impurities to the depth at which the sealant and backer rod if detailed is to be installed .
cleaning shall be by grinding saw cutting blast cleaning sand or water mechanical abrading or a combination of such methods .
this operation will provide a sound clean and frostfree surface for sealant application .
all dust loose particles and other debris shall be blown out with oil free compressed air .
an expanded closed cell polyethylene foam rod backup material shall be installed in joints or an approved bond breaker tape shall be installed if so detailed on the plans .
num .
application .
a primer shall be applied to the concrete surfaces of the joints .
the primer shall be in accordance with the recommendation of the sealant manufacturer and shall not be applied to the backup rod or the bond breaker tape .
the polyurethane joint sealant shall be applied in strict conformance with the manufac turers recommendations and in no case thicker than ½inch .
the approximate width to depth ratio shall be numtonum for working joints .
the joint shall be tooled using a blunt instrument so that it is slightly concave .
a soap solution may be used as a tooling aid .
d. polyurethane elastomeric joint sealant .
num .
preparation .
the preparation requirements for this sealant are identical to those specified above in para .
c.num of this subsection for polyurethane joint sealant .
num .
application .
a primer shall be applied to the concrete surfaces of the joints .
the primer shall be in accordance with the recommendation of the sealant manufacturer and shall not be applied to the backup rod or the bond breaker tape .
the polyurethane elastomeric joint sealant shall be applied in strict conformance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the sealant shall not be applied to joints less than numinch in width .
the approximate width to depth ratio shall be numtonum for working joints .
the application temperature range is numof to numof .
sealant shall not be applied when the temperature exceeds these limits .
the joint shall be tooled using a blunt instrument so that it is slightly concave .
a soap solution may be used as a tooling aid .
any spillage shall be cleaned up immediately in accordance with local regulations and the directions of the engineer .
num num curing concrete .
portland cement concrete shall be cured in accordance with the requirements of subsection num curing except as modified herein .
a .
concrete in massive pours .
for concrete in massive pours a massive pour is defined as any pour in which the concrete dimensions in num directions is num feet or more the contractor shall thermal cure the concrete so as to maintain a temperature differential between the internal hottest and external coolest temperature of the concrete to a numof maximum .
the contractor shall not less than num days prior to pouring any concrete which is considered a massive pour furnish the engineer with heat flow analysis for each concrete mixture in such a pour proposed methods for observing detecting and controlling the thermal differential between the external and internal temperatures and proposed corrective measures for approval by the engineer .
no massive pour shall be placed until the above submittals are made and approved by the engineer .
b. corrective measures .
corrective measures to control the heat may be accomplished through a combination of the following num .
selection of concrete ingredients to minimize the heat generated by hydration of the cement .
num .
cooling component materials to reduce the temperature of the concrete while in its plastic state .
num .
postcooling procedures .
num .
controlling the rate of placing the concrete .
num .
insulating the surface of the concrete to prevent heat loss .
num .
providing supplemental heat at the surface of the concrete to prevent heat loss .
num .
other acceptable methods which may be developed by the contractor and submitted to the engineer for review and approval .
c. minimum requirements .
the contractor shall as a minimum requirement provide the following num .
provide and install within the concrete placed in each massive pour temperature sensing devices of a type approved by and at locations as designated by the engineer .
these devices shall be accurate to within numof within the temperature range of numof to numof .
the temperatures shall be recorded automatically by an approved stripchart recorder furnished by the contractor .
the sensing system shall contain as a minimum num independent sets of sensing devices in order to assure readings if one of the systems fail .
the engineer may approve manual observation and recording temperatures at numhour intervals where conditions warrant .
num .
maintain records of temperature differential .
num num .
immediately apply corrective measures approved by the engineer when the temperature differential nears numof so as to maintain it at numof maximum .
num removal of forms falsework and centering .
in general forms for slabs beams pier caps and other support members shall not be removed until the concrete has reached the specified numday strength as indicated by the compression tests of field cured cylinders .
when it is desirable to facilitate surface finish side forms used on ornamental work railings parapets and exposed vertical surfaces except columns may be removed after num hours .
in warm weather when the average temperature exceeds numof the following periods for the removal of forms and supports may be used as a guide when field operations are not controlled by cylinder tests arch centers after last pour num days centering under beams num days deck slabs over numfoot spans num days deck slabs under numfoot spans num days columns and slender piers depending on height num days in cold weather or when the average temperature is below numof removal of forms and falsework shall be controlled by results of the compression tests on field cured cylinders .
falsework and centering for filled arches shall not be struck until fills behind the abutments have been placed up to the spring line .
falsework supporting the deck of rigid frame structures shall not be removed until fills have been placed back of the vertical legs in accordance with subsection num para .
b pervious fill adjacent to structures .
centers shall be gradually and uniformly lowered in such a manner as to avoid excessive stresses in any part of the structure .
in arch structures of twoormore spans the sequence of striking centers shall be specified by the engineer .
arch centering shall be struck and the arch made selfsupporting before the railing or coping is placed .
num concrete finishes .
a .
general .
all concrete surfaces shall be finished by experienced concrete finishers .
finishes for concrete bridge decks placed by selfpropelled machines shall conform to the requirements of section num of these specifications .
otherwise the finishes to be applied to different types of surfaces shall be as follows num .
float finish .
tops of walls piers abutments parapets safety walks sidewalks and medians .
num .
rubbed finish .
all exposed surfaces visible in elevation to num foot below final ground line and the underside of concrete slabs outside of the fascia beam unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
num num .
bushhammered or sand blasted .
as shown on plans .
b .
float finish .
float finish for horizontal surfaces shall be achieved by placing excess concrete in the forms and striking it off with a template or screed forcing the coarse aggregate below the surface .
the surface shall then be finished by a wooden float to a smooth true plane .
the area under bearing plates shall be finished as nearly as possible to numinch above the final elevation and then dressed to a uniform level bearing with a carborundum brick or power grinder after the concrete has sufficiently set .
c. rubbed finish .
the object of this operation is to obtain a surface that is uniform in texture and appearance and free of all imperfections or depressions due to form marks or other causes .
in general it shall be accomplished in two rubbing the first performed as soon after the removal of forms as the condition of the surface warrants and the second after the completion of the curing period and any subsequent work that might damage the finished appearance .
the entire surface that is to receive a rubbed finish shall be thoroughly moistened with water and rubbed with a wood float or a fairly coarse carborundum stone depending on the set of the concrete to produce a paste on the surface .
this rubbing shall be continued as long as necessary to remove form marks and projections and to produce a smooth dense surface without pits or irregularities but shall not be continued to the extent that it causes noticeable exposure of the coarse aggregate .
no wet rubbing shall be done when atmospheric temperatures of numof or less may normally be expected unless the work is protected by a substantial windproof housing .
d. bushhammered or sandblasted finish .
this type of finish consists of removing a depth of mortar from the surfaces of the walls in order to expose the aggregates and present a rough texture in accordance with and to the limits shown on the plans .
the method employed to achieve the desired results shall be by either sandblasting or bushhammering .
no chemical retardant applied to the forms shall be used .
enough surface mortar shall be removed in order to expose the aggregate particles in slight relief and provide an overall surface with a uniform rough texture .
prior to finishing any concrete the contractor shall cast a test panel approximately num foot by num foot in a vertical position with a joint in the form work near the approximate middle of the panel and demonstrate the proposed method .
this method shall be satisfactory to the engineer who shall be the sole judge of its acceptability .
in the event the first trial panel does not produce satisfactory results one or more trial panels shall be cast until a satisfactory finish is obtained .
the surfaces to be finished shall be carefully cured .
after the forms have been removed all holes shall be patched with an approved mortar and any fins or other protuberances removed to present a roughly even surface .
if bushhammering is to be employed the use of air tools is preferable .
no finishing shall be started until the concrete has attained its numday strength .
particular care shall be taken when finishing bevels or corners so as not to damage the lines .
after the surfaces are finished all dust and loose particles shall be removed by brushing with stiff wire brushes or air blasting .
num num method of measurement .
num structure concrete masonry .
structure concrete masonry of the types described in this section will be measured by the number of cubic yards of such concrete actually provided in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
a .
deductions .
deduction in volume will be allowed for the following elements embedded in concrete num .
the volume of major structural steel with the exception of steel sheet piling .
num .
the volume of timber piles on the basis of num cubic feet per linear foot of pile .
num .
the volume of concrete on combination piles .
no deduction in volume will be allowed for reinforcing steel floor drains weep holes drainage holes expansion joint material and minor structural elements embedded in concrete .
num joint fillers .
joint fillers of the types described in this section will be measured by the number of square feet of those materials actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num joint sealants .
joint sealants of the types described in this section will be measured by the number of cubic inches or the number of linear feet as the case may be actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num concrete finishes .
rubbed finish and bushhammered or sand blasted finish will be measured by the number of square feet actually applied in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
float finish and concrete deck or wearing surface finish will not be measured for payment .
num basis of payment .
num structure concrete masonry .
the accepted quantities of structure concrete masonry will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices per cubic yard as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num joint fillers .
the accepted quantities of joint fillers will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices per square foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num joint sealants .
the accepted quantities of joint sealants will be paid for at the respective unit prices per cubic inch or linear foot as the case may be as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num num concrete finishes .
the accepted quantities of rubbed finish and bushhammered or sand blasted concrete finish will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices per square foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
there shall be no separate payment for float finish and concrete deck or wearing surface finish as they are included in the price of the concrete .
section num precastprestressed structure concrete masonry num description .
the work of this section consists of the provision of precast pre stressed concrete elements both pretensioned and posttensioned at the locations and to the details indicated on the plans all in accordance with these specifications .
num general .
prestressed concrete structural elements shall be manufactured in accordance with the publication of the prestressed concrete institute entitled manual for quality control for plants and production of precast and prestressed concrete products mnl num current edition .
this manual will provide principles and guidelines for the manufacture of prestressed concrete products .
num compensation for outofstate inspection services .
a .
basis of compensation .
in the event that a contractor selects a subcontracting company that is beyond a nummile radius of the departments base of operation deemed to be the state office building the contractor shall compensate the state for the costs of travel for inspection services as outlined in the method of payment for the days of inspection services as defined below .
b .
definition of inspection services .
the department shall conduct inspections of the plant and laboratory witnessing of trial batches fulltime acceptance testing and parttime independent testing as defined in the departments materials section master schedule for all phases of production repair of products loading shipping and any other related operations as deemed necessary by the engineer .
inspection services days or part thereof shall also include weekends holidays and shutdowns due to the contractors inability to produce .
num materials .
num drawings .
a .
contract plans .
plans which accompany the contract proposal documents are designated as contract plans .
these are not intended to be shop drawings .
b .
shop drawings .
the contractor shall submit complete and accurate shop drawings to the engineer for approval in accordance with subsection num plans and shop drawings .
the contractor shall be responsible for modifying the dimensions of prestressed units to num compensate for elastic shortening shrinkage grade corrections and other phenomena that make inprocess fabricating dimensions different from those shown on the plans .
approval of the shop drawings by the engineer shall not relieve the contractor from the responsibility for the correctness of all dimensions shown on these drawings .
these drawings shall be made as soon as possible after the award of contract and they shall be designated as shop drawings .
no fabrication shall take place until after the shop drawings have been approved and the engineer has received prints made from the approved shop drawings .
num .
size and type .
shop drawings shall be neatly drawn and minimum letter size to produce microfilm negatives .
the drawings shall be made in ink on mylar and be of acceptable quality .
shop drawings shall be a standard size num x num in order to conform to the size of the plans .
num .
information required on shop drawings .
the shop drawings shall include but not be limited to the following information a plan layout of structure indicating the piece mark assigned to each prestressed unit .
b a tensioning and detensioning schedule for all products to be fabricated .
c complete details including anticipated camber tensioning force initial and final concrete strength stripping strength for precast transfer strength for prestressed and numday strength for shipping and payment class of concrete and type and location of lifting devices .
d shop drawings shall clearly indicate any deviations from the prestressed unit details shown on the plans .
e for drawings and other relevant documentation for prestressed concrete elements refer to prestressed concrete notes indicated on the plans .
num .
information required with shop drawings .
the following information shall be submitted with the shop drawings .
a the name of the manufacturers of the reinforcing prestressing steels including any alternate source and appropriate certificates of compliance .
b method and outline of procedure for curing of precast units and test cylinders .
c material and manner of sealing the exposed portions of the prestressing steel .
d calculations of strand elongation for each unique casting length griptogrip .
e proposed method of handling and transporting prestressed concrete units to the project site .
f submission for the engineers approval of a detailed plan for curing the required structural elements .
this detail plan shall include but not be limited to the following num curing method .
num providing for enclosures indicating method of holding down enclosure safely in place .
num num heating devices types and location around the structure .
num method of monitoring timetemperature of hardened concrete .
num backup systems as required .
the engineer shall be allowed fortyfive calendar days to review a set of shop drawings .
a set of shop drawings shall be considered to be all drawings received by the engineer from the contractor for a particular contract on any calendar day .
if the shop drawings are detained for examination for a period longer than that stated above such detention will be taken into account when considering application by the contractor for an extension of time for the completion of the contract .
num concrete .
the contractor shall be responsible for designing a concrete mix to produce the strength and other characteristics specified on the plans in accordance with the applicable requirements of sections num m.num portland cement concrete and section num concrete with calcium nitrite based corrosion inhibitor .
trial mixes to verify tolerances and strength requirements shall be performed and approved by the engineer prior to the start of production .
num steel .
except as noted herein reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of section num of these specifications .
all steel used in the fabrication of precast concrete structural elements shall be tested before being placed in any of the products .
a .
other requirements .
steel components shall also conform to the following additional requirements .
num .
bar reinforcement shall meet the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications and shall be of the grade specified on the plans .
num .
wire fabric and spiral wire shall meet the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num .
chairs or other devices necessary to insure the proper placement of steel items shall be galvanized plastic or epoxy coated and must be capable of supporting the loads without deformations all as approved by the engineer .
num .
prestressing steel shall be of the lowlax type and meet the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num .
bearing plates if required shall meet the applicable requirements of section m.num metals of these specifications .
num .
epoxy coated steel .
all reinforcing steel and epoxy coatings shall conform to the applicable requirements of section num of these specifications .
all breaks in the epoxy coating shall be repaired with an approved patching material compatible with the epoxy coating on the steel and used in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations before placement in the form .
epoxy coated tie wires shall be used in conjunction with epoxy coated rebars .
num num .
any additional strands or reinforcing steel wire mesh etc .
shall be subject to approval of the engineer and be provided at no additional cost to the state .
num construction methods .
num equipment checks and calibration .
a calibration certificate indicating the load calibration of each gauge and hydraulic jack combination used for tensioning shall be provided .
the gauge shall have clearly marked divisions of num percent of the final tensioning force that are easily readable at the initial and final tensioning force .
the calibration of each combination gauge and hydraulic jack shall be made every num months .
any repair to the rams such as replacing the seals or changing the length of the hydraulic lines shall require the recalibration of the ram with a load cell .
the contractor shall be required to have a compressive strength testing machine conforming to the aashto tnum specifications .
the contractor shall have the ability to make store and cap the specimens in accordance with aashto specifications .
the compressive strength testing machine shall be calibrated at least once every num months and the calibration certificate submitted to the engineer .
the engineer shall have full access to the compressive testing machine for testing .
num inspection of the plant and facilities .
within num days after award of contract the contractor shall notify the engineer so that the plant and facilities to be used in fabrication of concrete structural elements may be inspected for approval .
fabrication of units shall be monitored and inspected by the engineer .
work performed in the absence of the engineer shall be automatically rejected .
the contractor shall keep the engineer informed of the daytoday scheduling of operations .
the engineer shall have free access throughout the fabrication plant to observe that the work being performed is in conformance with the contract documents .
a .
required notifications .
notification shall be given to the engineer prior to num .
commencement of production num month .
num .
recommencement of work after a suspension of num hours or more a a minimum of num days when the engineer is on site b a minimum of num weeks in the absence of the engineer from the site .
num .
unit shipping a a minimum of num days when the engineer is on site b a minimum of num weeks in the absence of the engineer from the site .
the contractor should be aware that these requirements may have a direct impact on project schedules .
num concrete forms .
a .
general .
forms shall be constructed of steel carefully aligned clean rustfree substantial and firm securely braced and fastened together and sufficiently tight to prevent num leakage of mortar .
all drill holes or uneven surfaces shall be repaired .
all forms shall be strong enough to withstand the action of mechanical vibrators .
all forms for each unit shall be approved by the engineer prior to placing concrete .
all form surfaces that come in contact with the concrete shall be thoroughly treated with a form release coating approved by the engineer and in the manner and rate specified by the manufacturer .
forms so treated shall be protected against damage and dirt prior to placing concrete .
any form release coating material that will stick to or discolor the concrete shall not be used .
b .
critical dimensions .
critical dimensions such as lengths widths cable locations bulkhead locations camber position of weld plates and bearing plates bulkhead locations and dimensions blockout locations post tensioning duct locations keyway dimensions dimensions on skewed or battered ends expansion duct locations insert locations fixed and expansion sleeve locations locations of voids location of drip grooves sizes of voids and critical dimensions indicated on drawings shall conform to the tolerances indicated in the current edition of p.c.i .
manual num. c. voidproducing forms .
voidproducing forms shall be constructed of a waterproof material and have a one inch diameter vent placed at each end of the void or as indicated on approved drawings .
all voids shall be vented upon removing the concrete element from the form .
num reinforcement and prestressing steel .
prior to installation in the units reinforce ment and prestressing steel shall be free of rust frost dirt oil paint mill scale corrosion or any foreign material that may prevent bonding between the steel and the concrete to the satisfaction of the engineer .
prestressing steel that has sustained physical damage at any time shall be rejected .
the development of pitting or other results of corrosion other than rust stain shall be cause for rejection when ordered by the engineer .
prestressing steel exhibiting rust stains shall be examined to determine if pitting exists prior to its use .
any coil that is found to contain broken strands shall be rejected and the coil replaced .
the splicing of prestressed strands inside the casting form is not permitted .
splicing of strands outside the casting form may be allowed only with prior approval of the engineer .
tack welding of bar reinforcement shall not be allowed under any circumstances .
placing and fastening of all steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with subsection num of these specifications .
all prestressing strands shall be tested prior to use .
three numfoot samples shall be taken for each heat number .
the contractor shall have no claims for compensation in the event his work is delayed while waiting approval of the material furnished for testing .
num tensioning of prestressing strands .
the prestressing elements shall be tensioned to provide the required prestress shown on the plans and shall conform to the applicable requirements of the current edition of p.c.i .
manual num .
all the strands of a pretensioned member shall be free from kinks or twists before tensioning operations are started .
any unwinding of the strand in excess of one turn after num tensioning operations are begun shall not be permitted .
all strands shall be tensioned to num percent of final jacking force before elongation readings are started unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
the equipment for producing this initial tensioning load shall provide a means for accurately measuring the force .
when the initial tensioning load is applied by pressure jacks they shall be equipped with a proper gauging system for the initial force .
the predesignated initial force shall be applied to each strand .
this load shall be the starting point for measuring additional tensioning for tension determination by the elongation method .
when comparing theoretical gauge and actual gauge readings and theoretical elongations and actual elongations the requirements of the current edition of p.c.i .
manual num must be observed .
the elongation computation shall take into account strand anchorage slippage horizontal movement of abutments bed shortening and any change in temperature of the prestressing steel between tensioning and time when concrete takes its initial set if this change is expected to exceed numof .
the final pretensioning shall not be done at temperatures below numof .
the strands that are draped shall be stressed no higher than required design stress minus the stress increase in the strand from forcing it into a draped profile .
if the strands are tensioned in their draped position they shall be supported by rollers at each point of change in direction .
the holdup rollers between members and at the ends of the members shall have either bronze bushings or roller bearings that shall be free running and kept well lubricated .
rollers at the holddown points shall be free running and of a type that will produce a minimum amount of friction .
if the load for a draped strand as determined by elongation measurements exceeds num percent less than that indicated by the jack gauges the strand shall be tensioned from both ends of the bed and the load as computed from the sum of elongation at both ends shall agree within num percent of that indicated by jack gauges .
there shall be no more than three beams cast in the same line at the same time .
it is anticipated that there may be a discrepancy in indicated stress between jack gauge pressure and elongation .
in such event the load used shall produce a slight overstress rather than understress .
when a discrepancy between gauge and elongation measurements of more than num percent occurs the entire operation shall be carefully checked and the source of error determined and corrected before proceeding further .
the use of a load cell may be required by the engineer to check the applied load .
the load cell shall be calibrated at least once every num months or whenever it is deemed necessary by the engineer .
prestressing steel strands in pretensioned members if tensioned individually or in groups i.e .
more than one shall be checked by the contractor for loss of prestress not more than num hours prior to placing concrete .
the method and equipment for checking the loss of prestress shall be subject to approval by the engineer .
all strands that show a relaxation loss of prestress in excess of num percent shall be retensioned to the designed final jacking force .
when stressing grouped strands simultaneously each tendon must first be brought to initial tensioning load .
the final tensioning load may be applied to the group using a procedure approved by the engineer .
num during tensioning of any one strand the process shall be so conducted that the applied load and the elongation of the strand may be measured at all times .
any prestressed strand which has been tensioned for over num hours without the placement of concrete must be checked for elongation or loss of stress before placing of concrete .
if losses occur the strands shall be detensioned and then retensioned in accordance with the design loading requirements .
num handling and placing concrete .
no concrete shall be placed without the engineers approval .
concrete shall be handled and placed in accordance with the applicable requirements of sections num and num portland cement concrete and castinplace structure concrete masonry respectively .
suitable means shall be used for conveying and placing concrete without segregation .
the concrete mixture shall not be dropped from a height greater than one foot above the top of the forms .
special care shall be taken to deposit the concrete in its final position in each part of the form .
the fresh concrete shall be consolidated in place by internal vibration and if necessary also by external vibration .
the vibrators shall be of a type and design approved by the engineer and the size of the vibrating head will be governed by the spacing of the prestressing and reinforcement .
handheld vibrators shall be equipped with rubber tipped heads when used to consolidate around epoxycoated reinforcement .
vibrators shall be used only to consolidate the concrete after it has been properly placed and shall not be used for moving concrete along the forms .
the contractor is responsible for the proper vibration and consolidation of concrete .
only properly trained personnel shall be used in the placing and finishing operations .
num finishing .
after all the concrete has been placed and thoroughly compacted as required under subsection num above the tops of units shall be magnesiumfloat finished unless specified otherwise .
to assure production of wellformed concrete elements with an overall pleasing appearance all surfaces of concrete shall be true and even free from rough open or honeycombed areas depressions air pockets or projections .
all exposed surfaces shall be finished by bagging or as otherwise indicated .
in addition special care and effort shall be taken when finishing all fascia portions of concrete elements .
num curing .
a. moist curing system .
precastprestressed concrete elements shall be cured by a moist curing system .
steam curing for precastprestressed elements shall conform to the following provisions num .
after placement of the concrete elements shall be held for a minimum numhour presteaming period .
if the ambient air temperature is below numof steam shall be applied during the presteaming period to hold the air surrounding the element at a temperature between numof and numof .
num .
to prevent moisture loss on exposed surfaces during the presteaming period elements shall be covered as soon as possible after casting or the exposed surfaces shall be kept wet by fog spray or by wet blankets .
num num .
enclosures for steam curing shall allow free circulation of steam about the element and shall be constructed to contain the live steam with a minimum moisture loss .
the use of tarpaulins or similar flexible covers will be permitted provided they are kept in good condition and secured in such a manner to prevent the loss of steam and moisture .
num .
steam at the jets shall be low pressure and in a saturated condition .
steam jets shall not impinge directly on the concrete test cylinders or forms .
during application of the steam the temperature rise within the enclosure shall not exceed numof per hour .
the curing temperature throughout the enclosure shall not exceed numof and shall be maintained at a constant level for a sufficient time necessary to develop the required transfer strength .
control cylinders shall be covered to prevent moisture loss and shall be placed in a location where the temperature is representative of the average temperature of the enclosure .
num .
calibrated temperature recording devices that will provide an accurate continuous permanent record of the curing temperature shall be provided .
a minimum of one temperature recording device per num feet of continuous bed length and not less than two per bed one at each end will be required for checking temperature .
num .
once minimum transfer compressive strength is achieved members in tension shall be detensioned immediately after the termination of steam curing while the concrete and forms are still warm or the temperature under the enclosure shall be maintained above numof until the stress is transferred to the concrete .
num .
initial curing of precast concrete will be considered complete once the minimum specified transfer strength is verified by compressive strength cylinder test results .
num .
radiant heat may be applied by means of pipes circulating steam hot water or oil or by electric heating elements .
radiant heat curing shall be done under a suitable enclosure to contain the heat and moisture and minimize losses by covering all exposed concrete surfaces with plastic sheeting .
b .
other curing methods .
if the contractor proposes to cure the elements by any other special method it must be submitted in detail to the engineer for approval .
num testing .
a .
general .
all materials required for testing shall be furnished by the contractor at his own expense .
samples shall be taken by the engineer except where contractual restrictions are present in which case sampling shall be witnessed by the engineer .
the contractor shall have no claims for compensation in the event his work is delayed while waiting approval of the materials furnished for testing .
b .
process control testing .
process control testing of concrete is a mandatory requirement and shall conform to the following special provisions num .
cylinder specimens for form stripping detensioning and shipping will be cast by the contractor and shall be cured and tested in accordance with procedures outlined in section num portland cement concrete of these specifications .
all test cylinders shall be num inches in diameter by num inches high .
when the nominal size of the coarse aggregate in the mix does not exceed num inch the engineer may direct the use of num x num cylinder specimens for compressive strength verification .
when a num x num cylinder specimen is used .
a num adjustment num factor shall be applied to the compressive strength test result obtained .
this adjusted compressive strength shall be equal to or greater than the minimum compressive strength specified for the standard num x num cylinder specimens .
the contractor shall cast a sufficient number of concrete test cylinders to insure that enough specimens are available to determine the necessary strength test requirements .
the contractor shall be responsible for furnishing the cylinder molds for all compressive test specimens .
steel molds will be required for high temperature curing in excess of numof and plastic molds for all the rest .
num .
process control cylinders shall be cast and tested in the presence of the engineer .
the engineer shall be the sole judge of which cylinders are suitable and shall place his mark and date cast thereon .
num .
all cylinders shall be placed within num feet of each end of the casting bed or as determined by the engineer .
one cylinder from each location shall be tested in immediate succession to verify form stripping precast transfer prestressed and numday strengths shipping .
all cylinders must exceed the minimum strength required for form stripping precast transfer prestressed and numday strengths shipping respectively .
each structure shall not be shipped from the plant to the project site unless it has cured for seven days at the plant and obtained the minimum numday compressive strength .
if the requirement is not met any remaining cylinders representing the deficient location shall be tested .
if the replacement cylinder reaches the minimum required strength that result shall supersede the previous result .
any remaining test cylinders shall be handled and cured according to aashto specifications .
c. acceptance testing .
acceptance testing is defined in subsection num testing of concrete and shall be the methodology for acceptance of all concrete elements .
num transfer of prestress .
transfer of prestress shall be accomplished in the presence of the engineer and in accordance with the approved detensioning schedule and as soon as the transfer strength is achieved and verified .
the detensioning schedule must consist of but not be limited to the following num .
the order of detensioning and num .
each strand must be detensioned at each end andor between each element .
at the end of each prestressed element the concrete surrounding the individual strands will be chipped back to sound material to a depth of between numinch to num inch .
the strands themselves will be cut back to the same depth .
the edges shall be squared off so as not to produce a feathered edge .
cleaning shall be by wire brushing or abrasive sand blasting to remove all dirt and residue that is not firmly bonded to the metal or concrete surfaces .
the ensuing void including the end of the strand shall be filled with an approved nonshrink grout whose surface will be finished flush with that of the plane surface of the product .
num handling .
all products shall be removed from the forms in the presence of the engineer .
adequate notice shall be given to the engineer so that he may witness the removal num operation .
extreme care shall be exercised in handling and moving precastprestressed concrete members .
precast girders and slabs shall be transported in an upright position and the points of support and direction of the reactions with respect to the member shall be approximately the same during transportation and storage as when the member is in its final position .
the location of all dunnage and pickup points shall be as indicated on the shop drawings unless otherwise as directed by the engineer .
care shall be taken during storage hoisting and handling of the precast units to prevent cracking or damage .
units damaged by improper storage or handling shall be replaced or repaired at the contractors expense subject to approval by the engineer .
num rejection of units .
any unit not fabricated in accordance with the contract documents plans or approved shop drawings shall be subject to rejection by the engineer .
the engineer shall make a preliminary determination as to whether spalled cracked honeycombed or otherwise defective concrete shall be repaired or be subject to rejection .
in the event that the unit is to be repaired the contractor must submit a detailed nonconformance report and a detailed repair procedure to the engineer for approval prior to commencement of repair work .
all repair work must be performed at the cost of the contractor in the presence of the engineer .
any repair work not done in the presence of the engineer will not be accepted .
the repaired unit shall then be reinspected for approval by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
precast prestressed concrete elements will be measured as called for in the special provisions for the particular item or items of work contained in the proposal .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of precast prestressed concrete elements of the sizes and types specified will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per item or items of work as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated shall constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
a .
payment for compensation for outofstate inspection services .
the contractor shall pay for such outofstate inspection services by the day per diem for each department engineer andor technician assigned to the plant for inspection of the project .
the rates which shall be established based on the radius in miles from the base of operations shall be as follows distance in radial miles rates per inspectorday numtonum miles num numtonum miles num num or more miles num num there will be a maximum charge of one inspector for precast operations and two inspectors for prestress operations .
the contractor will be credited num percent when a plant is performing operations for two or more department contracts .
the compensation payment for outofstate inspection services shall be paid as a progress payment deduction .
section num reinforcing steel num description .
this work consists of providing reinforcing steel both plain and deformed and coated and uncoated spiral wire and welded wire fabric of the quality type size and at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
this work also includes the drilling and grouting of reinforcing dowels .
num materials .
the following materials shall conform to the applicable requirements of the indicated subsections of part m materials a. subsection m.num bar reinforcement .
b. subsection m.num wire fabric .
c. subsection m.num spiral wire .
d. epoxy coatings .
materials and application of epoxy coatings shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num epoxy coatings for bar reinforcement of these specifications .
num .
prequalified epoxy powders .
the current list of epoxy powders which has been prequalified by the national bureau of standards is presented in the special provisions of the contract .
num .
patching material .
the patching or repair material shall be compatible with the epoxy coating and shall be inert in concrete .
the material shall be supplied by the epoxy resin manufacturer and it must be suitable for repairs made by the installation contractor on areas damaged during fabrication or handling in the field .
num .
basis of acceptance for coated bars .
the coating applicator shall furnish certificates of compliance with each shipment of coated bars .
the certificate of compliance shall state that the coated bars conform to the requirements of this specification and those of relevant astm specifications .
num num construction methods .
num bar schedules and bending diagrams .
the bar schedules and bending diagrams shown on the plans are furnished for informational purposes only and the state does not assume responsibility for their accuracy .
the contractors bar fabricator shall verify the accuracy prior to preparing order lists and bending diagrams .
any expense incurred in revising the states bar schedules and bending diagrams in order that they comply with the design drawings shall be borne by the contractor at no additional cost to the state .
num test bars .
the schedule of bars shown on the plans shall include extra bars for field sampling for supplementary analyses and for weight tensile and bending tests .
in general one bar of a length sufficient for two samples each num inches long shall be furnished for testing for each num tons or less for a given size bar .
if tests results do not reasonably conform to previous reports or do not conform to the minimum requirements of tensile and bending properties those portions of the shipments affected will be rejected .
however the contractor will be entitled to two additional tests of other bars in the same lot for each failed test and if acceptable results are obtained from both the material may be accepted .
any material unsuited for use because of inaccuracies in bending or other properties which render it unfit shall be rejected .
the weight of test specimens shall be primarily used in calculations to determine the effective area for tensile tests .
if the weight of test specimens exceeds the permissible lot variation from theoretical weights as specified in astm anum sufficient material shall be weighed to produce a reliable determination of effective area .
the contractor shall provide for the required handling without extra compensation .
num fabrication and delivery .
a .
bar reinforcement .
bent bar reinforcement shall be cold bent to the shapes shown on the plans .
bars partially embedded in concrete shall not be field bent except as shown on the plans .
bends and details shall be in accordance with the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges and the manual of standard practice of the concrete reinforcing steel institute .
bar reinforcement shall be shipped in standard bundles tagged and marked in accordance with the code of standard practice of the concrete reinforcing steel institute .
the dimensions of hooks and the diameters of bends measured on the inside of the bar shall be as shown on the plans .
when the dimensions of hooks or the diameter of bends are not shown they shall be in accordance with division i article num or aci num building code requirements for reinforced concrete .
bar reinforcement shall be shipped in standard bundles tagged and marked in accordance with the manual of standard practice of the concrete reinforcing steel institute .
b. uncoated bars .
all reinforcement bar wire or fabric when unloaded at the bridge site shall be stored above the ground on sills blocking or other supports and shall be protected as far as practicable from mechanical injury or corrosion causing conditions .
all material must be kept free from harmful rust by proper weather protection until installed .
num rusted areas must be thoroughly wire brushed just prior to installation as directed by the engineer .
c. coated bars .
in addition to the above requirements for uncoated bars the following special conditions will apply for coated bars .
num .
handling and storage of coated bars .
all systems for handling coated bars shall have padded contact areas for the bars wherever possible .
all bundling bands shall be padded and all bundles shall be lifted with a strong back multiple supports or a platform bridge to prevent bar to bar abrasion from sags in the bar bundle .
the bars or bundles shall not be dropped or dragged .
the costs for extra handling precautions are expected to be offset by elimination of major touch up repair by the fabricator the contractor and the shippers .
num placing and fastening .
a. uncoated bars .
num .
general .
all steel reinforcement shall be accurately placed in the positions shown on the plans and firmly held in place during the placing and setting of concrete .
when placed in the work reinforcement shall be free from dirt rust loose mill scale paint oil and other foreign deleterious materials .
num .
spacing .
the clear distance between parallel bars except in columns and between multiple layers of bars in beams shall be not less than the nominal size of the coarse aggregate or num inch whichever is greater .
where reinforcement in beams or girders is placed in two or more layers the clear distance between layers shall be not less than num inch and the bars in the upper layers shall be placed directly above those in the bottom layer .
in spirally reinforced and tied columns the clear distance between longitudinal bars shall be not less than num½ times the bar diameter num½ times the maximum size of the coarse aggregate or num½inches whichever is greater .
the clear distance between bars shall also apply to the clear distance between a contact splice and adjacent splices or bars .
the maximum spacing of bars carrying calculated stress shall be num½ times the thickness of slab or wall .
the maximum spacing of bars for temperature reinforcement shall be num inches .
num .
cover .
all reinforcing bars shall have the following cover num location minimum cover a concrete cast against or num inches permanently exposed to earth footings abutment and wall faces backwalls etc .
b stirrups ties and spirals num½ inches c slabs without wearing surface top num½ inches num num bottom num inch num num with wearing surface top num inches num num bottom num inch num num d all other bars num inches e work exposed to sea water num inches num .
support systems .
all bars shall be maintained the correct distance from the forms by means of blocks hangers chairs or other approved devices .
the use of pieces of stone brick wood or metal pipe will not be permitted .
if required precast concrete blocks placed with the small face down may be used .
num .
fastening .
bars shall be securely tied with wire at all intersections except where spacing is less than num foot in each direction in which case alternate intersections may be tied .
welding of crossbars shall not be permitted unless specifically authorized .
all wire ties and miscellaneous hardware used for placement of epoxy coated reinforcing shall also be either epoxy or plastic coated or have plastic tips protecting the ends which may rest against formwork .
all reinforcement shall be placed and tied inspected and approved by the engineer before placement of concrete commences .
num .
splicing reinforcing steel .
all reinforcement bars shall be furnished in full lengths as indicated on the plans .
splicing of bars and wire fabric reinforcing except where so indicated will not be permitted without the written approval of the engineer .
splices shall be staggered as far as possible .
lapped splices shall not be used for bar sizes larger than num .
unless otherwise shown on the plans all reinforcing shall be lapped according to the following table .
lengths in parentheses are for epoxy coated reinforcement .
class of concrete bar size ae xxae num num num num num num num num num num the laps listed above are for noncritical splices .
all critical splices are detailed on the plans .
in deck slabs top bars shall be spliced at center of spans between girders .
bottom bars shall be spliced over girders .
mechanical devices for splicing bars shall be equivalent in strength to an approved welded splice and must be approved by the engineer .
b. welds .
welds will not be permitted unless indicated on the plans or authorized by the engineer .
where welding is indicated it shall conform to the applicable requirements of aws dnum structural welding code reinforcing steel .
c. wire fabric .
wire fabric of the various sizes shown shall be cut to the required dimensions and placed where indicated on the plans .
sheets of fabric reinforcement shall overlap each other not less than one mesh in length or width plus num inches .
d. coated bars .
in addition to the applicable provisions of para .
a above the following special conditions will apply for coated bars .
num .
referenced specifications .
the provision of epoxycoated bar reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of aashto interim material specification mnum and astm anum or current revisions thereof .
num .
utilization .
a superstructures .
the top and bottom mats of castinplace bridge decks and sidewalks shall be epoxy coated .
also all sidewalk bars and sidewalk dowels placed into the deck pour and all parapet and jersey barrier reinforcement shall be epoxy coated .
b substructures .
reinforcement in abutment backwalls and beam seats end posts and front faces including the reinforcement anchored into the footings shall be epoxy coated .
pier columns and caps shall have epoxy coated bars if they are under an expansion deck joint within num feet from the edge of the adjacent roadway num feet on freeways or have superstructures without parapets to contain roadway salts from above .
abutment wingwalls shall have epoxy coated bars on the front face including the reinforcement anchored into the footings if they are within num feet from the edge of the adjacent roadway num feet on freeways .
num .
field bending .
no field bending will be permitted unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
where field bending is allowed repairs to damaged epoxy coatings shall be made in accordance with applicable subsections of this section .
num .
splices .
splices shall be permitted only where shown on the plans .
splices shall be made by placing the bars in contact and wiring them together for the full length of the splice with plasticcoated tie wire .
num .
placement .
prior to placing epoxy coated reinforcing steel all grease dirt mortar and any other foreign substance must be removed from the bars .
num the reinforcement shall be placed in the position indicated by plastic or plasticcoated wire supports and within the allowable tolerances specified .
before concrete is placed all reinforcement shall be securely fastened and supported with approved plastic or plasticcoated metal chairs or other approved devices .
concrete shall not be placed until the reinforcing steel is inspected and permission for placing concrete is granted by the engineer .
all concrete placed in violation of this provision shall be rejected and removed .
num .
repair of epoxy coating .
coating repair will not be required if damage is less than num percent of the coated area .
where repair is required all damaged areas will be repaired as soon as possible after each span is placed .
repairs shall be made in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and to the prescribed thickness .
num .
test bars .
extra bars for field sampling shall be furnished in accordance with subsection num above .
num drill and grout reinforcing dowels .
provisions for drilling and grouting dowels are set forth in section num of these specifications .
num method of measurement .
num bar reinforcement and spiral wire .
bar reinforcement and spiral wire both plain and deformed and coated and uncoated will be measured by the total number of pounds of each type actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
the weight of plain or deformed bars will be computed using the unit weights indicated in the tables of division ii of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
the weight of clips ties separators chairs mechanical splices or other material used for fastening the reinforcing in place shall not be included for payment .
no allowance will be made for the weight of epoxy coating in computing the weight of epoxy coated bar reinforcement .
epoxy coating for bar reinforcement will not be measured separately for payment .
num wire fabric reinforcement .
welded wire fabric reinforcement coated and uncoated will be measured by the number of square feet actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
epoxy coating for fabric reinforcement will not be measured separately for payment .
num basis of payment .
num bar reinforcement and spiral wire .
the accepted quantities of bar reinforcement and spiral wire will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per pound as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num wire fabric reinforcement .
the accepted quantities of wire fabric reinforcement will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per square foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and num equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num weep holes pavement subdrains and wall drains num description .
this work consists of the provision of weep holes through abutments and walls pavement subdrains through bridge decks and wall drains behind abutments and walls at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num weep holes .
unless otherwise specified weep holes shall be num inches in diameter schedule num polyvinylchloride pvc pipe .
num pavement subdrains .
unless otherwise specified in the special provisions pavement subdrains shall be either numinch diameter pvc pipe or numinch diameter ductile iron pipe .
ductile iron pipe shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num wall drains .
unless otherwise specified in the special provisions wall drains shall be perforated bituminous coated corrugated metal pipe conforming to the requirements of subsection m.num .
num filter stone shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num .
num filter fabric shall be one of those materials included in the departments approved materials list .
num construction methods .
num weep holes .
in order to drain backfill material weep holes shall be placed through abutments and retaining walls at those locations indicated on the plans .
unless connected to wall drains dry wells consisting of a total of numtonum cubic feet of filter stone shall be constructed at the inlet end of all weep holes to act as filter pockets .
filter stone shall be encased in burlap or woven plastic filter fabric .
a filter fabric screen shall be cemented to the back face of the wall prior to placement of the filter stone bags .
the filter fabric screen shall extend past the filter stone bag perimeter by at least num foot .
the outlet end of weep hole pipe shall extend num inch beyond the surface of the concrete to form a drip element .
pipes shall be sloped downward toward the face of the wall or abutment at numinch per foot .
pipes shall be located num inches above finished grade and shall be spaced at numfoot on centers .
num num pavement subdrains .
the subdrains shall be constructed to the dimensions indicated on the plans .
they shall be placed along the face of curbs at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
pavement subdrains shall be installed after the waterproofing membrane has been placed and before the bituminous course is laid down .
the waterproofing membrane shall be cut with a sharp blade so that tabs can be folded into the drain hole .
the drain cap can then be installed in the drain hole .
care shall be exercised to prevent displacement of the drain cap as the bituminous courses are placed .
num wall drains .
the pipe shall be laid to the lines and grades indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
pipe shall be placed on well compacted backfill materials .
the perforated side of the pipe shall be placed down .
filter material shall be placed around the pipe to form a cover of not less than num inches unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
the filter material shall be carefully tamped around the pipe .
num method of measurement .
num weep holes and pavement subdrains .
unless covered by a special provision together with a corresponding proposal item weep holes and pavement subdrains will not be measured separately for payment .
num wall drains .
wall drains will be measured by the number of linear feet actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
num weep holes and pavement subdrains .
unless covered by a specific proposal item materials for the installation of weep holes and pavement subdrains will not be paid for separately but will be included as incidental items in the respective contract unit prices per cubic yard as listed in the proposal for the applicable classes of portland cement concrete .
num wall drains .
the accepted quantity of wall drains will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including fittings and filter stone filter fabric and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num water stops and flashings num description .
this work consists of the provision of water stops and flashings placed in various types of concrete joints at the locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num num materials .
num lead coated copper .
lead coated copper flashings andor waterstops shall be cold rolled hard temper lead coated copper with lead coating both sides conforming to the requirements of astm bnum .
num lead .
sheet lead flashings andor waterstops shall be desilverized pig lead conforming to the requirements of astm bnum .
num rubber waterstops .
rubber waterstops and fittings shall be high quality vulcanized elastomeric neoprene conforming to the requirements of army corps of engineers specification crdcnum .
num polyvinylchloride waterstops .
polyvinylchloride waterstops and fittings shall be manufactured from virgin polyvinylchloride plastic compound and shall not contain any scrap or reclaimed material .
the material shall be produced by an extrusion process and shall be dense homogeneous and free from holes and other imperfections .
num construction methods .
num flashings .
copper or lead flashings fabricated as described shall be installed as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
in general flashing shall be used at expansioncontraction joints and at contraction joints .
unless otherwise specified the fabricated material shall be delivered in lengths convenient for handling and when necessary to splice adjacent sections copper flashing shall be lapped as shingles for about two inches and tightly soldered lead flashing shall be fused together in accordance with the best lead burning practice each to form a complete watertight joint .
bends shall be carefully formed to maintain the continuity of the section .
flashing shall be placed in such a manner as to insure its embedment in the concrete on each side of the joints in the exact positions shown on the plans .
when flashing is used to form caps over expansioncontraction joints and the edges are to be set into grooves in the concrete parallel to the joints these grooves and other voids in the assembly shall be filled with a bituminous compound conforming to the requirements of subsection m.num joint seal .
num waterstops .
adequate waterstops of metal rubber or polyvinylchloride shall be installed at locations indicated on the plans .
where movement at the joint is provided for the waterstop shall be capable of accommodating such movement without injury .
waterstops shall be spliced welded or soldered to form continuous watertight joints .
a .
rubber waterstops .
rubber waterstops shall have a minimum tensile stress of num psi and a type shore a durometer hardness reading between num and num .
the waterstops shall be formed with an integral cross section and shall be manufactured in accordance with the highest industry standards and installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
b. polyvinylchloride waterstops .
a manufacturer requesting approval of a waterstop shall furnish to the engineer a numfoot length of each type of waterstop he intends to supply .
a certificate of analysis from an approved independent testing laboratory shall be furnished with the samples .
the certificate shall state that the material furnished conforms without exception num to all the requirements specified herein and shall also include all qualitative and quantitative test results .
c. installation of waterstops .
the engineer shall require that the contractor demonstrate proven ability and competence in the installation of these products in conformance with the manufacturers printed instructions .
if any part of this work shall be found defective because of improper installation at any time before the final acceptance the contractor shall at his own expense make good such defect to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num .
preparatory work .
all waterstops should be protected from oil dirt concrete spatter and damage and should be left clean to receive concrete forms .
particular care should be taken during installation of waterstops to eliminate all possibilities that may cause leakage .
reinforcing bars and slip dowels shall not interfere with positioning of waterstops during installation .
num .
methods .
different methods may be used to fasten the waterstop in position .
all waterstops should be held rigidly in place by extending through slots in keyways held by split bulkheads tied to reinforcing bars or other adequate methods as are dictated to insure proper support and embedment during the concreting process .
num .
splicing .
pvc waterstops may be buttspliced on the job with an electrical splicing iron .
there is no crimping shaping brazing or vulcanizing necessary .
upon request the manufacturer will illustrate the splicing method for producing a strong watertight butt weld .
elbows tees and crosses can also be produced by this method .
num method of measurement .
unless covered by a special provision together with a corresponding proposal item waterstops and flashings will not be measured separately for payment .
num basis of payment .
unless covered by a specific proposal item waterstops and flashings will not be paid for separately but will be included as incidental items in the respective contract unit prices per cubic yard as listed in the proposal for the applicable classes of portland cement concrete .
section num waterproofing and dampproofing num description .
this work consists of providing dampproofing and waterproofing systems on concrete bridge decks and other surfaces at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num num systems .
a. dampproofing shall consist of mopped applications of approved bituminous materials .
b. waterproofing shall consist of the application of a preformed membrane a rubberized liquid asphalt membrane or a cold applied liquid membrane all as set forth below .
num dampproofing .
this type of dampproofing consists of a prime coat and two mopped applications of an approved bituminous material .
num preformed waterproofing membrane .
this type of waterproofing system consists of applying a preformed bituminous membrane of approved manufacture to concrete surfaces in strict compliance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num rubberized liquid asphalt membrane .
this type of waterproofing system consists of applying a hot liquid asphalt membrane of approved manufacture to concrete surfaces in strict compliance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num cold applied liquid membrane .
this type of waterproofing system consists of applying an acrylic resin based elastomeric membrane of approved manufacture to concrete surfaces in strict compliance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num materials .
num general .
materials for dampproofing and waterproofing systems shall be delivered in original tightly sealed containers or unopened packages clearly labeled with manufacturers name brand name and number and batch number of the material where appropriate .
prior to delivery the manufacturer shall submit to the engineer a notarized certificate attesting that the material conforms to these specifications in every respect .
num dampproofing .
a .
prime coat .
the prime coat shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
b. mop coats .
the mop coats shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num preformed waterproofing membrane .
the primer and sheet membrane materials of this system shall conform to the respective requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num rubberized liquid asphalt membrane .
the surface conditioner membrane and protective sheet materials of this system shall conform to the respective requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num cold applied liquid membrane .
the primer and membrane materials of this system shall conform to the respective requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num num construction methods .
num surface preparation for all types .
new concrete shall have cured a minimum of num days in accordance with acinum .
new or existing surfaces shall be free of oil grease curing compounds algae moss laitance friable matter bituminous products and previous waterproof ing membranes .
if required degreasing shall be performed with detergent washing in accordance with astm dnum .
concrete surfaces shall be abrasively cleaned in accordance with astm dnum and all spalls repaired with concrete patch materials per the engineers and manufacturers recommendations .
voids and blowholes on vertical surfaces shall be repaired in the same manner .
areas of minor surface deterioration or depression of numinch and greater in depth shall be brought to grade with an approved patching mortar .
cracks and joints shall be treated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations as approved or directed by the engineer .
the applicator shall be responsible for the protection of equipment and adjacent areas from overspray or other contamination that may be caused by application of the dampproofing or waterproofing .
num dampproofing .
a .
limitations .
no dampproofing shall be applied in wet weather nor when the temperature is below numof without special authorization from the engineer .
should the surface of the concrete become temporarily damp it shall be covered with a numinch layer of hot sand which shall be allowed to remain in place long enough to produce a warm and dry condition .
the sand shall be swept back uncovering sufficient area for commencing work .
the operation may be repeated as the work progresses .
b .
prime coat .
immediately after the surface is prepared and in order to insure a proper bond between the dampproofing material and the concrete a prime coat shall be applied .
the primer shall be sprayed or brushed on the surface at a rate of approximately num of a gallon per square yard so as to cover it completely and uniformly .
the quality of the primer and the method of application shall be approved by the engineer .
c. application .
concrete or other surfaces which are to be protected by dampproofing shall be mopped or brushed with two coats of an approved bituminous material for absorptive treatment .
the bituminous material shall be heated to a temperature between numof and numof .
the material will be stirred frequently to avoid localized overheating .
the heating kettle shall be equipped with thermometers .
the bituminous material shall be applied with suitable mops or brushes .
each coat shall be mopped over the surface completely covering same with a continuous heavy film .
when any breaks or thin spots show in the dampproofed surface after drying they shall be retouched to secure an even impervious coating .
the interval between successive applications shall not be less than num hours .
num the completed dampproofing shall be protected by the contractor from damage by subsequent construction operations .
num preformed waterproofing membrane .
concrete surfaces that are to receive this type of waterproofing shall have a wood float or trowelled finish .
a .
manufacturers representative .
the contractor shall furnish the services of a competent field representative of the approved manufacturer to be present at the work site prior to any use of materials .
the representative shall instruct the contractor and the engineer on installation and inspection procedures and to inspect the condition of the prepared surfaces .
the representative will remain on the job site until the completion of the work .
b .
application .
the prime coat is to be applied only to areas that will be covered with membrane within the following num hours .
any areas not covered within num hours must be re primed .
the primer material and rate of coverage shall meet the specifications of the manufacturer .
the primer shall be allowed to dry one hour or until tack free before placing the membrane .
the membrane shall not be applied at temperatures below numof .
all corners such as at curbs shall be double covered by using an initial strip of numinch minimum width placed along the axis of the corner .
inside corners should be finished with a fillet and outside corners should be rounded .
areas around drains or other protrusions should be double covered with the membrane for a minimum of num inches in each direction then liberally coated with an approved mastic .
the membrane should be laid from the low point to the high point with the membrane overlapped a minimum of num inches .
misaligned or inadequately lapped seams must be repaired .
the wearing surface should be placed as soon as possible after application of the membrane .
a careful inspection must be made before covering the membrane and any tears or holes must be repaired with necessary patches .
num rubberized liquid asphalt membrane .
a .
manufacturers representative .
the requirements for the manufacturers representative are the same as set forth above in para .
a of subsection num. b .
sample area .
at the option of the engineer the contractor shall apply the liquid membrane on a sample area not less than num square feet in size .
when approved the sample area shall serve as a standard of acceptance for all membrane work .
c. mixing .
all mixing and application of the liquid membrane system shall be done in strict accordance with the printed instructions of the approved manufacturer and as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall submit to the engineer when requested evidence indicating that the proposed membrane applicator subcontractor is fully qualified to perform the work and any proposed subcontractor found not qualified shall at the written request of the engineer be removed forthwith by the contractor .
d. application .
the surface conditioner shall be applied evenly using a low pressure sprayer to all surfaces at a rate not exceeding one gallon per num square feet or not less than one gallon per num square feet depending on the concrete surface .
the conditioner shall be allowed to dry before application of the membrane .
num cakes of membrane shall be melted in an approved double shell melter under continuous agitation until the material can be drawn freeflowing and lumpfree at a temperature not exceeding numof .
membrane shall be applied evenly at the rate of one pound per square foot to provide a continuous coating not less than numinch thick and averaging numinch thick .
the areas to be waterproofed shall be inspected during application of the liquid membrane system by the engineer to insure that the membrane thickness is in accordance with the paragraph directly above .
any deficiencies shall be repaired at the expense of the contractor .
e. protection .
immediately following application of the membrane and before it cools and before vehicular or foot traffic is allowed on the membrane the entire waterproofed bridge deck shall be covered with rolled asphalt sheets .
protective sheets shall be laid parallel to the center line of the bridge roadway unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
the protective sheets should not be allowed to overlap at either the longitudinal or transverse joints .
the joint should be a tight butt type .
the maximum allowable space between sheets is numinch .
the entire application of protective sheets shall be free of wrinkles bubbles fishmouths or other defects .
following placement of the protective sheet a bead of hot membrane shall be placed along the joint where the sheet terminates at the face of the curb .
the bead shall be continuous to prevent water from entering between the protective sheet and membrane .
f. testing .
during the waterproofing work field samples of the membrane material may be taken for evaluation by the engineer .
tests shall include penetration flow low temperature flexibility and adhesion and elasticity all as specified herein .
num cold applied liquid membrane .
a .
manufacturers representative .
the requirements for the manufacturers representative are the same as set forth above in para .
a of subsection num. b .
surface preparation .
in addition to the requirements of subsection num all steel surfaces shall be prepared to a near white metal finish per sspcnum and overcoated with primer within num hours .
c. testing .
random tests for adequate tensile bond strength shall be conducted on the substrate by the applicator on site using an elcometer adhesion tester model num or similar at a minimum frequency of three tests per num square feet .
smaller areas shall receive a minimum of three tests .
should the tensile bond strengths be lower than num psi on concrete or failure within the concrete or num psi on steel the engineer may request further surface preparation .
d. application .
application can proceed while air and substrate temperature are between numof and numof providing the substrate is above the dew point .
outside these temperatures the manufacturer shall be consulted .
all components of the system shall be measured and mixed strictly in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
mixing shall be done with either an air driven high speed paddle or an explosion proof mixer .
prior to the application of any num materials the surface must be clean and free from loose debris moisture oil grease or other contaminates .
num .
primer .
a single coat of spray roller or brush applied primer is required for all steel and concrete surfaces .
this primer shall cure tack free before application of the waterproofing membrane .
num .
membrane .
the waterproofing membrane shall be spray applied with suitable equipment approved by the manufacturer in two color differentiated coats each with a wet film thickness of num mils per coat providing a finished minimum thickness of num mils on any peak .
checks for wet film thickness shall be carried out typically every num square feet .
the membrane shall cure between coats and before application of the tack coat .
num .
tack coat .
a tack coat supplied by the same manufacturer shall be applied directly to the waterproofing membrane prior to surfacing .
e. repairs .
num .
patching .
if an area is left untreated or the membrane becomes damaged a patch repair shall be carried out to restore the integrity of the system .
the damaged area shall be cut back to sound material and wiped with solvent e.g .
acetone up to a width of at least num inches on the periphery removing tack coat and any contaminants .
the substrate shall be primed if necessary followed by the application of membrane .
a continuous layer shall be obtained over the substrate with a numinch overlap onto the existing membrane .
num .
overlapping .
where the membrane is to be joined to existing cured material and at day joints the new application shall overlap the existing one by at least num inches .
no preparation shall be necessary unless the existing materials are contaminated with tack coat or dirt in which case the repairoverlap area shall first be wiped with solvent e.g .
acetone .
f. protection .
during all stages of application the membrane shall be protected by the contractor from damage by construction operations .
g. final review .
the engineer and the applicator shall jointly review the deck areas in which the completed system has been installed prior to surfacing .
any irregularities or other items which do not meet the requirements of the engineer shall be addressed at this time .
num method of measurement .
dampproofing preformed waterproofing membrane rubberized liquid asphalt membrane and cold applied liquid membrane all will be measured by the number of square yards of each system actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of dampproofing preformed waterproofing membrane rubberized liquid asphalt membrane and cold applied liquid membrane will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num section num placement of concrete bridge decks num description .
this work consists of the placement of concrete bridge decks by using selfpropelled finishing machines all as indicated on the plans and in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
materials for all portland cement concrete mixes shall conform to the requirements of section m.num portland cement concrete of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num general .
all equipment tools and requirements pertaining to the classification proportioning and testing for the specified class of concrete including batching mixing handling placing curing and finishing shall conform to the applicable requirements of sections num num and num respectively of these specifications and as modified in this section .
num contractors plan .
at least num calendar days prior to the proposed start of placing the concrete bridge deck the contractor shall submit to the engineer for approval a submission herein called the placement and curing plan specifying the method of concrete conveyance placement type and number of finishing machines rate of pour estimated time of completion screed and rail erection plan sequence of concrete pours and the concrete curing procedure .
the placement and curing plan shall take into consideration weather conditions .
it shall also include details and a complete description of equipment to be used in the handling placement finishing and curing the concrete including the number and type of personnel who will be engaged in the operation .
the personnel shall consist exclusively of persons with the experience and skill appropriate to their working assignment .
approval of this plan will not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for the satisfactory performance of his methods and equipment .
all other approval requirements shall be as set forth in this section .
a .
other arrangements .
elevations for setting forms and screed supports shall be based on an accurate set of computations run by the contractor and shall be located no more than num feet apart .
before placing the concrete the contractor shall make all necessary arrangements and have all materials on hand for curing and protecting the concrete deck .
concrete placement shall not proceed until the engineer is satisfied that all necessary steps have been taken to insure adequate compliance with these specifications and that completion of the operation can be accomplished within the required scheduled time .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to allow sufficient time to permit such an inspection by the engineer .
num limitation of mixing .
a .
temperature and weather conditions .
all weather and concrete temperature requirements shall meet the requirements of subsection num except as modified herein .
num no bridge deck concrete shall be placed when the relative humidity is below num percent .
when placing concrete the contractor must provide suitable equipment and take appropriate actions as approved by the engineer to limit the evaporation rate of the exposed concrete surface to less than num lbftnumhr .
the evaporation rate shall be determined in accordance with table num of this specification .
to maintain the evaporation rate below the specified limit the contractor shall take one or more of the following actions num .
misting the surface of the concrete with a triple head nozzle immediately behind the finishing machine and until the curing cover is applied .
the nozzle shall be rated at one gallon per minute or less and shall produce a fine fog mist which will maintain a sheen of moisture on the concrete surface without ponding .
num .
construct windbreaks or enclosures to effectively reduce the wind velocity throughout the area of placement .
num .
reduce the temperature of the concrete .
b .
hot weather concrete .
during hot weather conditions the concrete temperature at time of placement shall conform to the requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
c. cold weather concrete .
during cold weather conditions the concrete temperature at the time of placement shall conform to the requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
d. inclement weather .
when rain or snow is imminent all new concrete shall be adequately protected to prevent damage which may result in surface imperfection of the deck .
sufficient polyethylene coverings conforming to the requirements of subsection m.num shall be available at the site of the work for possible immediate use .
num handling .
a .
general .
prior to concrete placement all forms must be clean free of rust excessive oils and any foreign debris .
all concrete forms and materials such as shear connectors dams ductwork spacers rebars and any other materials as required in the contract drawings must be inspected and approved by the engineer before concreting operations commence .
in no case shall welding of forming attachments or other construction aids to tension flanges be permitted .
tension areas shall be as specified on the contract drawings .
concrete shall be placed continuously without interruption between planned construction or expansion joints .
num concrete placement sequence .
a .
simple spans .
concrete bridge deck placement shall progress continuously over the entire width and for the full length of the bridge .
deck placement shall begin at the expansion end of the span and terminate at the fixed end .
transverse construction joints are not permitted unless otherwise shown on the contract drawings or with the approval of the engineer .
num b .
continuous spans where transverse construction joints are not specified .
the deck placement sequence and direction of pour shall be as shown on the contract drawings .
in general deck placement shall begin at the outside supports and at the midpoint between interior supports and shall progress towards the interior supports .
deck placement shall be uniform and continuous over the full width of the superstructure .
c. continuous spans where transverse construction joints are specified .
the number and location of transverse construction joints shall be as specified on the contract drawings and as approved on the proposed placement plan .
all concrete between consecutive joints shall be placed in a continuous operation as shown on the contract drawings .
the first pour shall include the positive moment area in all spans .
the second pour shall include the negative moment area and shall not be placed until a minimum of num hours have elapsed from the start of the first pour .
the limits of the positive and negative moment areas are as defined and shown on the contract drawings .
num placement .
except as modified herein concrete placement shall conform to the requirements of subsections num and num placing concrete conventional and placing concrete by pumping respectively of these specifications .
it shall be the responsibili ty of the contractor to attain a rate of placement such that the concrete is finished before the beginning of initial set .
a minimum rate of placement of num cyhr shall be maintained at each finishing machine .
concrete placement shall take place during daylight and shall not begin unless the contractor is certain that the placement can be completed and finished to the satisfaction of the engineer during daylight hours .
the engineer may waive this requirement if adequate and approved lighting facilities are provided by the contractor prior to the start of the deck placement .
before concrete placing operations begin substantial bulkheads or headers shall be shaped to the required deck surface crosssection .
in the event of unforeseen circumstances should the concrete placement be forced to cease sufficient bulkheads shall be installed at locations determined by the engineer and placing of concrete shall be discontinued .
all concrete in place beyond the bulkhead shall be removed .
concrete placement will recommence only with the approval of the engineer .
unless otherwise specified the concrete shall be placed as a monolithic unit in a continuous operation between joints .
a .
consolidation .
the concrete shall be consolidated by means of an approved high frequency internal vibrator which shall be applied in a manner to secure maximum consolidation of the concrete .
consolidation shall leave the concrete free from voids and insure a dense surface texture but not be continued so long as to cause segregation or bleeding .
a small uniform quantity of concrete shall be maintained ahead of the screed on each pass .
at no time shall the quantity of concrete carried ahead of the screed be so great as to cause slipping or lifting .
in the case where the vibratory action of the finishing machine does not provide consolida tion in accordance with the rate of placement the contractor shall have in reserve at all times sufficient vibration equipment to guard against shutdown of the work .
the contractor shall take preventive measures to insure that the epoxy coated reinforcement is not susceptible to damage by the vibrators .
num finishing .
methods procedures and equipment shall be used which will insure a uniform riding surface without overvibration or segregation of the components of the concrete .
num the leading edge of freshly placed concrete shall at all times be maintained approximately parallel to the finishing machine .
selfpropelled finishing machines will be required unless specifically noted otherwise on the plans or in the special provisions .
a. finishing machine .
an approved selfpropelled finishing machines will be required for consolidating striking off and finishing the concrete deck surface .
the finishing machines shall be of sufficient width to finish the full width of the deck .
the weight of the finishing machines shall not cause unaccounted for deflection of the bridge members or falsework .
the machine shall travel on steel rails pipe or other approved grade control which shall be supported by vertical supports securely fastened in place at a maximum spacing of num feet to prevent any appreciable deflection between rail supports .
prior to placing the concrete screed rails shall be completely in place and accurately set to insure finishing of the concrete deck surface to the elevations shown on the plans .
the supports for the rails if embedded in the deck concrete shall be of the type which can be removed without disturbing the concrete .
screed rails shall not be treated with parting compound to facilitate their removal .
rails for finishing machines shall extend beyond both ends of the scheduled length for concrete placement .
the extended length shall be of sufficient distance to allow finishing machines to clear the concrete to be placed .
the finishing machine shall be capable of propelling itself both forward and backward to enable repeated passes to be made in order to correct surface irregularities and to produce a surface which conforms to the required profile grade crosssection and surface smoothness .
a maximum of two passes of the machine will be allowed over any given deck area .
the finishing machines shall be operated over the full length of the bridge segment to be finished prior to beginning of concreting operations .
the test run shall be made with screed adjusted to its finishing position .
during the test run checks shall be made of the deflection due to the finishing machine adjustment of guide rails and required covers for slab reinforcement .
the required concrete cover over the top bars shall be checked by riding the screed over the bars and measuring the cover over the slab reinforcement .
discrepancies so found which are in excess of the tolerances given on the plans shall be rectified to secure the required concrete cover .
all necessary corrections shall be made before concreting is begun .
concrete placement and initial strikeoff shall be coordinated so that initial strikeoff is never more than num feet behind the concrete placement .
sufficient depth checks shall be made behind the machines and along the full length of the span to insure achievement of the required section and reinforcement cover .
the direction of placing the concrete shall be as specified on the plans .
on skewed bridge decks the placement of the concrete and the operation of the finishing machine should parallel the skew angle .
improper adjustment or operation of the finishing machine which results in inadequate reinforcement cover or smoothness shall be corrected immediately .
unsatisfactory performance particularly with respect to the surface smoothness attained may be cause for rejection of the equipment .
num b .
work bridge .
an adequate number of work bridges shall be provided by the contractor in order to permit access to the surface of the deck for the purpose of finishing straightedging making corrections and setting curing materials .
workmen will not be permitted to walk in the fresh concrete after it has been screeded .
all finishing work including application of the fog spray and placement of curing mats shall be performed from bridges supported above the deck surface .
c. tolerances .
verification of the completed surface of the deck in accordance with the grades and cross slope specified on the contract drawings shall be made during placement and again after the deck has been cured .
when the concrete is still plastic the deck surface shall be tested with a tenfoot straightedge and any variance in excess of numinch in num feet shall be corrected immediately .
in the event that this tolerance is not met when tested after the concrete has hardened variance in excess of numinch in num feet shall be corrected at the contractors expense in a manner satisfactory to the engineer .
num curing .
in the placement and curing plan the contractor shall include the curing details for achieving the curing of the concrete as required by these specifications .
a .
detailed plan .
the detailed plan shall include but not be limited to the following num .
curing method .
num .
provisions for enclosures indicating method of holding down enclosure safely in place .
num .
heat devices types and location around structure .
num .
method of monitoring temperature of hardened concrete .
num .
backup systems as required .
b. curing operations .
immediately following the finishing operation the application of a water fog spray shall begin and shall be applied continuously rather than intermittently until such time as moist covers are placed on the concrete surface .
fog spraying shall continue as required to provide a continuous supply of moisture to maintain a thoroughly moist concrete surface .
as soon as concrete finishing operations are completed the contractor shall promptly cover the newly placed concrete surface with a single layer of clean heavy duty water saturated burlap conforming to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
burlap shall be free from cuts tears uneven weaving and contaminants .
the burlap shall be placed such that the edges are lapped a minimum of num inches .
a num mil clear or white polyethylene sheet conforming to subsection m.num shall be placed over the saturated burlap cover .
white plastic coated fiber blankets conforming to the requirements of subsection m.num may be used .
placement requirements must conform with the burlap edge lapping specification .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer the application of curing compounds in lieu of fog spray and moist cure process shall not be allowed when membranes or overlays are specified .
num all concrete shall be kept continuously moist and protected against any drying for a minimum period of num consecutive days after placement of concrete .
the burlap covers shall be kept moist for the entire numday curing period and under no circumstances shall the concrete be allowed to be exposed to an alternating wet and dry condition .
if at any time during the curing period the surface of the concrete deck is judged to be losing excessive moisture so as to adversely effect the curing process the engineer may require that the polyethylene sheets be removed and the coverings be saturated .
the contractor shall then recover the saturated coverings with polyethylene sheets .
in the event that forms or sections of forms have been loosened andor removed in advance of the curing period the exposed concrete surface shall be immediately covered with saturated curing covers and kept saturated for the remainder of the curing period .
c. falling temperatures .
when the air temperature is expected to fall below numof the contractor shall provide suitable measures to maintain the concrete surface temperature between numof and numof which shall be monitored by a continuously recording thermometer .
the minimum numof temperature requirement shall be continuously maintained around the forms and deposited concrete for the entire curing period of the first num days .
if the concrete surface temperature falls below numof during the first num days of the curing period the structure shall be enclosed and external heat shall be provided as directed by the engineer .
if external heat is required the following shall apply num .
the time required for tenting shall not be counted as curing time .
num .
external heat shall be maintained on the structure for the entire sevenday curing period and then reduced gradually such that the uniform change in temperature does not exceed numof in one hour or numof in any numhour period .
removal of forms shall be as specified in subsection num of these specifications .
if at any time during the curing period the concrete surface temperature falls below numof the concrete may be considered as being unsatisfactory and rejected .
adequate precautions shall be taken to protect the concrete deck from any damages resulting from severe weather conditions during the curing process .
a. curing of acceptance and process control test cylinders .
all test cylinders will be field cured with the concrete deck under identical curing conditions .
num grooving .
unless otherwise shown on the plans the final finish required shall be as follows a. bridge decks with exposed concrete surfaces .
the final concrete surface shall be textured by transverse grooving .
transverse grooving shall not begin until the concrete has adequately met the curing and strength requirements listed under application of external loads .
grooving shall be done utilizing diamond blades mounted on a multiblade arbor on a selfpropelled machine which has been built for grooving of pavements .
the groover shall have a depth control device which will detect variations in the pavement surface and adjust the cutting num head height to maintain the depth of the groove specified .
the grooving machine will be provided with devices to control alignment .
flailing type grooving which is uncontrolled and erratic will not be permitted .
the contractor shall provide an experienced technician to supervise the location alignment layout dimension and grooving of the pavement .
grooves shall be transverse perpendicular to the pavement centerline .
continuous non interrupted transverse grooving shall begin and end num feet from the curb lines .
grooves shall be numinch deep with a tolerance of plus or minus numinch .
the width of grooves shall be numinch .
the spacing of grooves shall be num½inches with a tolerance of plus or minus numinch .
grooves shall not be cut closer than num foot from any device cast or embedded into the deck surface such as scupper castings and deck joint materials or hardware .
at the beginning of each work shift all machines shall be equipped with a full complement of grooving blades that are capable of cutting grooves of the specified width depth and spacing .
the removal of all slurry or residue resulting from the grooving operation shall be continuous .
pavement must be immediately left in a washed clean condition free of all slipperiness from the slurry etc .
residue from grooving operations should not be permitted to flow into gutters or other drainage facilities .
solid residue resulting from grooving operations should be removed from the pavement surfaces before such residue becomes airborne by the wind .
b. bridge decks with a modified structural concrete overlay .
the initial concrete surface shall be screeded to the true cross section and left without any projections andor the depressions that could retain water .
mixing handling placement finishing and curing of the modified structural concrete shall conform to the applicable requirements of section num latex modified concrete for bridge deck overlays and section num concrete bridge deck overlays of these specifications .
however pouring may not begin until the concrete bridge deck has obtained the required curing and strength gain set forth below in subsection num application of external loads .
transverse grooving is required and it shall conform to the requirements listed under subsection num para .
a above .
c. bridge decks with bituminous overlay and bridge deck waterproofing .
bituminous paving shall not begin until the concrete has adequately cured and attained the required strength as listed under application of external loads .
the surface of the concrete bridge deck shall be left without any projections that might puncture or depressions that could retain water .
the surface shall be as smooth as practical in accordance with the recommenda tions of the manufacturer of the waterproofing membrane .
requirements of waterproofing the bridge deck shall conform with the requirements set forth in section num waterproofing and dampproofing of these specifications .
num application of external loads .
no construction work including placement of sidewalk curbing railing bituminous pavement concrete overlays grooving etc .
shall be allowed on the newly placed bridge deck until concrete has cured for a minimum of num days and has attained the minimum required numday compressive strength .
no heavy equipment or traffic of any description will be permitted on the concrete deck until authorized by the engineer .
num num method of measurement .
this work will not be measured separately for payment .
num basis of payment .
no separate payment will be made for this work .
rather payment will be included with the payment and at the contract unit price per cubic yard as listed in the proposal for concrete superstructure class hpae bridge deck .
section num latex modified concrete for bridge overlays num description .
this work consists of the placing of a wearing course of latex modified portland cement concrete on prepared surfaces of either existing or new bridge decks at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
all material components of this modified concrete shall conform to the applicable requirements of section num portland cement concrete and section m.num portland cement concrete of these specifications except as modified herein .
num aggregates .
a. coarse aggregate .
the coarse aggregate shall be clean sound crushed stone or crushed gravel meeting the general requirements of aashto mnum .
grading shall be in accordance with aashto mnum size no .
num for overlay thicknesses up to num½inches and aashto mnum size no .
num for overlay thicknesses greater than num½inches .
b. stockpiling aggregates .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer fine and coarse aggregate shall be stockpiled at the job site .
stockpiles shall be completely covered and no additions to approved stockpiles shall be permitted without the approval of the engineer .
the free moisture content of each aggregate type at the time of batching shall not exceed num percent of the saturatedsurface dry weight of the fine or coarse aggregate or num percent total for both aggregates .
num cement .
portland cement shall be nonair entraining type ii cement .
num latex emulsion admixture .
latex emulsion admixture shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
the latex admixture shall be agitated as necessary to prevent separation of the emulsion .
it shall be maintained in storage within the temperature range numof to numof .
latex emulsion admixture exposed to temperatures outside the foregoing limits shall be removed and replaced at no cost to the state .
the manufacturer of latex emulsion admixture must submit written certification that the material supplied is identical in composition to that prequalified in accordance num with procedural directives of fhwa rd num styrenebutadiene latex modifiers for bridge deck overlay concrete .
a certificate of compliance will be provided for every tanker supplied to the project .
this certification shall also list particle size surface tension and infrared fingerprint information for the lot supplied .
field samples will be taken from every tanker of material used on the project and from each mixer truck if deemed necessary by the engineer .
num construction methods .
num latex modified mixture design .
the design of the latex modified concrete shall conform to the requirements of para .
b of subsection num of these specifications .
the design shall be signed and stamped by a registered professional engineer and submitted for approval to the engineer .
the latex modified concrete shall also meet the following requirements material or property value cement content min .
lbs.cu.yd .
num latex emulsion admixture gal.cu.yd .
num watercement ratio num air content of plastic mix num num slump inches num to num strength num day min .
compressive strength psi num notes the net water added shall be adjusted to control the slump within the prescribed limits and should produce a maximum net watercement ratio of num by weight including water in latex and aggregate .
concrete for the slump test shall be deposited in a clean nonabsorbent container and allowed to stand covered without disturbance for num minutes prior to performing the test .
care shall be exercised that traffic vibrations do not affect the measurement .
slump and air content tests will be performed for each calibration and during production at the discretion of the engineer in order to insure that acceptable material is being produced .
num surface preparation .
all surfaces shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
except in cases where sawing and sealing of the latex overlay is specified on the plans existing expansion joints and dams shall be formed vertically through the overlayment .
num batching and mixing .
all equipment for the deck preparation mixing placing and finishing of latex modified cement concrete shall be approved by the engineer prior to the start of any work .
a. proportioning and mixing equipment shall be self contained mobile and capable of continuous mixing subject to the following num num .
the mixer shall be selfpropelled and be capable of carrying sufficient unmixed dry bulk cement sand coarse aggregate latex modifier and water to produce on the site not less than num cubic yards of concrete .
num .
the mixer shall be capable of positive measurement of cement being introduced into the mix .
a recording meter visible at all times and equipped with a ticket printout shall indicate this quantity .
num .
each mixer shall be inspected and approved by the engineer .
any mixer not functioning in a manner the engineer considers acceptable shall be repaired .
if repair is impractical the mixer shall be replaced .
conditions which will automatically designate a mixer unacceptable are list not intended to be all inclusive hydrated cement deposits broken bent lose or scalloped mixing paddles mixing paddles worn num percent in any dimension mixing paddles heavily caked with mortar and latex or water delivery system out of tolerance .
num .
mixers shall be calibrated at the beginning of placement operations whenever a mixer leaves and returns to a project and whenever yield tests indicate that batch tolerances are not being maintained .
the calibration shall be done in accordance with the departments latex modified concrete calibration sheet in the presence of the engineer to accurately proportion the materials within the following tolerances by weight material percent by weight coarse aggregate num fine aggregate num coarse and fine aggregate combined num cement num water num latex admixture num the yield of the specified mix shall be true within a tolerance of num percent according to the following test with the cement meter set on zero and all controls set for the desired mix activate the mixer and discharge mixed material into a one quarter cubic yard container num x num x num .
when the container is levelstruck full with a provision for settling the material into all corners the cement meter must show a discharge of num pounds of cement for latex modified portland cement concrete num poundscubic yard .
this yield shall be performed at least once per mixer per placement or whenever the engineer deems it necessary to insure proper mixture is being supplied .
num .
the mixer shall provide positive control of the flow of water and latex emulsion into the mixing chamber .
water flow shall be indicated by flow meter and be readily adjustable to provide for minor variations in aggregate moisture to maintain the slump within the tolerances stated in this specification .
num .
the mixer shall be capable of being calibrated to automatically proportion and blend all components of the indicated composition on a continuous or intermittent basis as required by the finishing operation and it shall discharge mixed material through a conventional chute directly in front of the finishing machine .
num num .
mixers shall be clean and the ingredients accurately proportioned .
num .
modified portland cement concrete materials shall be mixed at the site in accordance with the specified requirements for the equipment used .
the modified concrete as discharged from the mixer shall be uniform in composition and consistency .
mixing capability shall be such that finishing operations can proceed at a steady pace with final finishing completed before the formation of the plastic surface film .
num limitations of operations .
all weather and concrete temperature requirements shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
num placing and finishing .
placement and finishing of latex modified concrete shall conform to the requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
num curing concrete .
the curing of latex modified concrete shall conform to the requirements of subsections num of these specifications except as modified below .
no vehicular traffic shall be permitted on the latex modified concrete surface until num days after placement and until num psi compression strength is achieved .
compression strength cylinders shall be cured at the job site and under the same conditions as the overlay .
num grooving .
the final latex modified concrete deck overlay shall be textured by transverse grooving .
such grooving shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
num defective or damaged latex modified concrete .
all defective or damaged latex modified concrete which occurs prior to the final acceptance of the work shall be repaired or replaced at the contractors expense .
the defects shall include but not be limited to insufficient thickness cracking tearing openness and damage or other imperfections caused by the contractors operations .
repair methods shall be proposed by the contractor for approval by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
latex modified concrete for bridge deck overlays will be measured by the number of cubic feet of modified concrete actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
material wasted rejected or used for testing will not be measured for payment .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of latex modified concrete for bridge deck overlays will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials equipment surface preparation bonding grout grooving and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num section num concrete bridge deck overlays num description .
this work consists of placing a portland cement concrete overlay on a prepared surface of bridge decks precast concrete butted box beams deck slabs deck planks or other specified concrete substrate at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
portland cement concrete shall be class hpae and shall conform to all applicable requirements of section num portland cement concrete of these specifications except as modified herein .
num construction methods .
num existing bridge decks .
a .
surface scarification .
the surfaces of existing bridge decks upon which a concrete overlay is to be placed shall be scarified in an approved manner .
the scarification method and depth of removal shall be as specified on the plans .
b .
surface preparation .
the blastcleaning of an area of the deck shall be performed before the numhour water soak period preceding placement of the overlay on the area .
the blast cleaning shall be performed by a method approved by the engineer .
the blastcleaning method used shall be performed in conformance with all applicable air and water pollution regulations and applicable safety and health regulations .
all debris including dirty water resulting from the blast cleaning operations shall be immediately and thoroughly cleaned from the blastcleaned surfaces and from other areas where debris may have accumulated .
all dust and other debris shall be removed by flushing with water vacuuming or blowing with oilfree compressed air .
the blast cleaned areas shall be protected as necessary against contamination prior to the numhour presoaking .
contaminated areas and areas exposed more than num hours after cleaning shall be blastcleaned again as directed by the engineer and at no additional expense to the state .
the prepared surface shall then be soaked with clean water for not less than num hours prior to the placement of the class hpae concrete overlay .
the surface shall be maintained in a clean saturated condition by using polyethylene film or other suitable water impermeable clear covers until ready to receive the overlay .
before the overlay is applied all standing water shall be blown off with oilfree compressed air .
num precast concrete butted box beams deck slabs or deck beams .
the surfaces of precast concrete butted box beams deck slabs or deck planks upon which an overlay is to be applied shall be finished with a roughened surface with amplitude of num minimum by a method noted on the plans or as approved by the engineer .
after the placement and curing of the shear key grout and successful post tensioning of the structural elements is complete and prior to placing the overlay the entire area of the deck shall be blastcleaned in accordance with the requirements set forth in subsection num num para .
b. epoxy coated steel and any other appurtenances cast into the surface of the precast elements shall be protected from the effect of the blast medium so that damage to the epoxy coating does not occur .
any damage resulting from the contractors failure to adequately protect the steel shall be repaired by the contractor at no additional cost to the state .
num bonding grout .
when specified in the plans a bonding grout shall be applied as follows after the surface has been cleaned and wetted and immediately before placing concrete a thin approximately num inch coating of bonding grout shall be vigorously and thoroughly broomed brushed or sprayed onto the saturated bridge deck .
bonding grout shall consist of equal parts by volume of approved portland cement microsilica solids part and mortar sand with sufficient water to form a slurry .
the waterto cementitious ratio by weight of the bonding grout slurry shall not exceed num .
the consistency of the slurry shall be such that it can be applied with a stiff synthetic bristle broom or sprayed onto the prepared concrete surface in a thin even coating that will not run or puddle .
bonding grout that has dried or become unworkable as determined by the engineer shall not be incorporated in the work .
no retempering will be permitted .
bonding grout shall be broomed with push brooms .
at all joints and concrete surfaces around or below reinforcing steel brooming shall be done with straight brooms .
care shall be exercised to insure that all prepared surface areas receive a thoroughly even coating and that no excess bonding grout be permitted to collect in pockets .
this shall be done to insure the bonding grout is evenly absorbed into the surface .
all surfaces to be in contact with new concrete including the slab curb longitudinal and transverse joints shall be coated with bonding grout .
the rate of bonding grout application shall be limited to that surface area which can be covered with new concrete before the bonding grout begins to dry out .
the application of the bonding grout shall not be more than num feet from the leading edge of the overlay .
the contractor shall take measures to insure that no drying out of the bonding grout occurs by having sufficient workmen available .
in the event drying does occur as evidenced by a light gray color the contractor shall remove the bonding grout by sandblasting or other means approved by the engineer .
wetting or spraying the wet or dry bonding grout shall not be allowed .
num limitations of mixing .
a .
temperature and weather conditions .
all weather and concrete temperature requirements shall meet the applicable requirements of subsection num of these specifications except as modified below .
b .
cold weather concrete .
no class hpae concrete mixtures shall be placed when ambient temperatures are below numof .
however the class hpae concrete may be placed at numof when rising temperatures are forecast and if the forecast indicates temperatures over numof for a minimum period of num hours after the placement has been completed .
num if the air temperatures are such that the minimum temperature will not be met the contractor may place concrete if the structure is enclosed and external heat is provided in order to meet specified ambient temperature requirement for placement .
at temperatures above numof the engineer may require placements to be made at night or early morning hours if in his opinion a satisfactory surface finish is not being achieved .
c. inclement weather .
for structures that are not enclosed all placing operations shall cease when it starts to rain or snow .
num placing and finishing .
class hpae concrete overlay shall conform to the placement requirements of subsection num of these specifications except as modified herein .
concrete placement shall not proceed until the engineer is satisfied that all necessary steps have been taken to insure adequate compliance with the specifications and that completion of the operation can be accomplished within the required scheduled time .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to allow sufficient time to permit such an inspection by the engineer .
a. finishing machine .
the finishing machine shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num of these specifications except as modified in this section .
the finishing machine shall have one or more rotating rollers and augers .
prior to placing the concrete screed rails shall be accurately set to insure finishing of the concrete surface to the elevations shown on the plans .
provisions shall be made for raising the screed to clear the screeded surface for traveling in reverse .
the bottom face of the screed shall be a metal surface num inches wide .
the screeds shall be provided with positive control of the vertical position .
during the dry test run the finishing machines screed rails are to be set as close to the final grade as possible to eliminate the need for adjusting the finishing machine by hand at any time during the operation .
bulkheads shall be formed to the required grade and profile prior to placing the modified concrete overlay .
b .
placement and consolidation .
concrete placement and initial strikeoff shall be coordinated so that initial strikeoff is never more than num feet behind the concrete placement .
the direction of placing the concrete shall be as specified on the plans .
the concrete shall be consolidated by means of an approved high frequency num to num vpm vibratory pan which shall be applied in a manner to secure maximum consolidation of the concrete .
spud vibration will be required in deep pockets edges and adjacent to joint bulkheads and overlays greater than num inches thick .
handheld vibrators shall be equipped with rubbertipped heads when used to consolidate around epoxycoated reinforcement .
a construction dam or bulkhead shall be installed in case of a delay in the placement operations exceeding num minutes duration .
during delays of num minutes or less the placement num shall be protected with presoaked wet burlap .
if the concrete placement is stopped or delayed for num minutes or more further placement shall be discontinued .
the thickness of the mixture shall be verified by probes in the fresh concrete .
sufficient depth checks shall be made at regular intervals behind the machines prior to commencement of the curing operation along the full width of the span to insure conformity to the overlay thickness specified on the plans .
screed rails andor construction bulkheads shall be separated from the newly placed material by passing a pointed trowel along their inside face .
metal expansion dams shall not be separated from the overlayment .
care shall be exercised to insure that this trowel cut is made for the entire depth and length of rails after the mixture has sufficiently stiffened .
unsatisfactory performance particularly with respect to the surface smoothness and profile attained may be cause for rejection of the equipment .
c. finishing .
the finished surface before texturing shall be uniformly smooth dense and even .
variations in pavement surface in excess of numinch above or below the proper finished elevation or surface irregularities of more than numinch in num feet will not be accepted .
the concrete surface shall be checked in accordance with the requirements of para .
c of subsection num of these specifications .
hand finishing with a float may be required along the edge of the pour or on small areas or repair .
edge tooling is required at joints except next to metal expansion dams curbs and previously placed lanes .
num testing .
testing shall be in accordance with the ridot master schedule for the preparation of a project schedule for sampling testing and certification of materials .
all compressive strength cylinders shall be field cured at the job site and under the same conditions as the class hpae concrete overlay .
num curing concrete .
the curing of class hpae concrete overlay shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsections num and num contractors plan and curing respectively of these specifications except as modified below .
no vehicular traffic shall be permitted on the class hpae concrete surface for a minimum period of fourteen days or until the minimum specified numday design compressive strength is achieved .
num grooving .
the final class hpae concrete deck overlay shall be textured by transverse grooving .
such grooving shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
num defective or damaged class hpae concrete .
all defective or damaged hpae concrete identified prior to the final acceptance of the work shall be repaired or replaced at the contractors expense .
defects shall include but not necessarily be limited to insufficient thickness cracking tearing honeycombing and damage or other imperfections caused by the contractors operations .
repair methods shall be proposed by the contractor for approval by the engineer .
num num method of measurement .
concrete bridge deck overlays will be measured by the number of cubic feet or cubic yards of the concrete actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of concrete bridge deck overlays will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic foot or cubic yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials equipment surface preparation bonding grout grooving and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num repairs to structure concrete masonry num description .
this work consists of making repairs to structure concrete masonry by removing and disposing deteriorated concrete preparing bonding surfaces of concrete and reinforcing steel and replacing the deteriorated concrete with approved mortar to the lines and grades specified and at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num pneumatically applied mortar shotcrete .
materials for shotcrete shall conform to the applicable requirements of section num section num and section m.num respectively of these specifications except as modified herein .
shotcrete shall be produced by either the wet mix process or the dry mix process and conform to the following requirements unless otherwise listed on the plans material or property value compressive strength at num days fc psi num maximum watercementitious ratio num minimum cement factor lbs.cy .
num air content percent num slump inches num to num a .
mixture proportions .
the contractor shall submit for acceptance the recommended mix proportion strength results watercement ratio and source of material .
the contractor shall select mix proportions on the basis of compressive strength tests of specimens continuously moist cured until tested at num days or different test age if so specified in accordance with aashto tnum .
the specimens shall be cut from shotcreted test panels not earlier than num days num after shotcreting .
for mixture acceptance purposes average core compressive strength must equal to fc for cores with lengthtodiameter ld ratios of num .
for cores with ld between num and num use correction factors given in aashto tnum .
for cube specimens average compressive strength shall be at least equal to numfc .
combined aggregate gradation fine and coarse shall meet either gradation num num or num of table num of aci num as specified on the plans .
premixed and prepackaged concrete products specifically manufactured as a shotcrete product may be provided for the dry mix shotcrete process only as approved by the engineer .
the packages shall contain cement and aggregates conforming to the materials requirement of this specification and the product must be listed on the departments approved materials list .
num patching mortar .
patching mortar shall conform to the requirements of astm cnum rapid hardening or very rapid hardening mortar as listed on the plans and be listed on the departments approved materials list .
the mortar shall be nonshrink nonsag and shall contain no ferrous additives .
repair mortars not previously approved must be submitted for approval to the engineer num days before intended use .
all materials shall be used in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
num reinforcement .
bar reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
wire reinforcement shall be num x num wnum x wnum minimum galvanized welded wire fabric shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num epoxy bonding agent .
epoxy bonding agent shall be an allpurpose highstrength moistureinsensitive numpart rigid epoxy adhesive conforming to the requirements of astm cnum type v and it shall meet the approval of the engineer including contact time fluidity and application temperature .
the bonding agent shall also be one of those listed on the departments approved materials list .
num portland cement slurry .
portland cement slurry shall consist of equal parts by volume of approved portland cement and concrete or mortar sand with sufficient water to form a slurry .
num construction methods .
num surface preparation all repair methods .
all deteriorated soft or honeycombed concrete shall be removed from the areas to be repaired by means of suitable power and hand tools to a uniform depth sufficient to expose a bonding surface of sound material .
power tools that cause overbreakage of concrete will not be allowed .
chipping hammers shall weigh less than num pounds .
in areas where reinforcing steel is found to be surrounded by deteriorated concrete or where at least onehalf of the rebar surface area is exposed the depth of concrete removal shall be such as to include all deteriorated concrete but not less than that depth necessary to allow for one inch minimum annular clearance around the reinforcing bars .
all corroded reinforcing bars shall be thoroughly cleaned to remove all rust .
those bars that have lost num or more of their original diameter shall be supplemented by new bars spliced in place .
new bars considered main reinforcement shall be lapped sufficiently num diameters on both sides of the effected areas to develop the full strength of the bar .
if necessary additional chipping will be required to provide this lap .
dual bars of equivalent or greater section may be used .
num the boundaries of areas to be repaired shall be square cut or slightly undercut to a depth of not less than one inch .
thin or feathered edges will not be permitted .
all chipped areas corroded rebars and masonry surfaces to be repaired shall be thoroughly cleaned by means of compressed air sandblasting air and waterblasting steam wire brushing or by other methods approved by the engineer .
the contractor may use one or all of the various means of cleaning chipped areas as approved or as ordered by the engineer .
care shall be taken during the removal of the designated portions of the structure to avoid damaging the portions that are to remain in place .
any damage caused by the contractor to the existing structure that is designated to remain in place shall be repaired or replaced by the contractor at its own expense to the satisfaction of the engineer .
the surface against which mortar is to be placed shall be kept wet for at least one hour and then allowed to dry to a saturated surface dry condition just prior to application of the mortar .
num placement of reinforcing .
repairs less than num½inches thick will not require wire mesh reinforcement unless otherwise specified by the engineer .
in cases where the thickness of the repair mortar exceeds num½inches and existing bar reinforcement is available galvanized wire mesh shall be attached to the bars with tie wire .
if existing rebar is not available wire mesh shall be installed by means of mechanical concrete anchors in accordance with the requirements of table num .
for areas where the repair exceeds num inches a single layer of wire mesh shall be used to reinforce each numinch thickness of patch material .
table num size and spacing of anchors thickness overhead vertical top horizontal of surfaces surfaces surfaces placement dia.in .
dia .
in .
dia .
in .
in .
spacing in .
spacing in .
spacing in .
num½ to num num at num num at num num at num num to num num at num num at num num at num num to num num at num num at num num at num over num num at num num at num num at num mechanical concrete anchors shall be a hooked type expansion bolt to be approved by the engineer .
the exposed end of each anchor shall have at a minimum a right angle bend for engaging reinforcement .
at least three anchors shall be used in each individual patch area .
if any reinforcement is damaged by the contractor during the repair procedure the bars shall be replaced as required by the engineer at the contractors expense .
num application of pneumatically applied mortar shotcrete .
a. submittals .
submittal shall include shop drawings details material and mill test certificates mix designs staff qualifications construction procedures detailed construction sequencing plans and shop drawings for temporary debris shields .
shop drawing shall be num submitted a minimum of num calendar days prior to the commencement of the work .
the contractor shall submit documentation showing that project personnel have appropriate qualifications .
inadequate proof of personnel qualifications shall be cause for withholding construction approval .
changes to previously approved personnel must be approved in writing .
shotcreting nozzle operators shall have at least one year of experience in the application of shotcrete on projects of comparable nature or work under the immediate supervision of foreman or instructor with at least two years of such experience .
the engineer shall approve or reject the contractors working drawings design submission and staff qualifications within ten working days after receipt of the submission .
work shall not begin until the contractors qualifications are approved .
the engineer may suspend the work if the contractor substitutes unqualified personnel for approved personnel during construction .
if work is suspended due to the substitution of unqualified personnel the contractor shall be fully liable for additional costs resulting from the suspension of the work and no adjustments in contract time resulting from the suspension will be allowed .
b. batching and mixing .
aggregate and cement may be batched by weight or by volume .
mixing equipment shall be capable of thoroughly mixing the materials in sufficient quantity to maintain placing continuity .
ready mix shotcrete shall comply with the applicable requirements of subsections num and num respectively of these specifications .
c. delivery equipment .
the mortar shall be applied by pneumatic equipment that sprays the mix onto the prepared surface at a high velocity as needed to produce a compacted dense homogeneous mass .
the air compressor and delivery hose lines shall be of adequate capacity and size to provide a minimum pressure of num psi at the nozzle for oneinch nozzles and proportionally greater for larger nozzles .
the compressor shall be of adequate capacity to maintain a sufficient constant nozzle velocity for all parts of the work while simultaneously operating a blow pipe for cleaning away rebound .
the air hose shall be equipped with a filter to prevent any oil or grease from contaminating the shotcrete .
the velocity of the material as it leaves the nozzle must be maintained uniform at a rate determined for the given job conditions to produce minimum rebound .
num .
dry mix process .
the delivery equipment shall be capable of delivering a continuous smooth uniformly mixed material to the nozzle .
the nozzle shall be equipped with a water ring and valve to permit adjustment of the water .
the water added to the dry mix at the nozzle shall be maintained at a pressure at least num psi greater than the air pressure .
the nozzle shall be capable of delivering a conical discharge stream .
num .
wet mix process .
only pneumaticfeed type delivery equipment will be allowed .
d. preconstruction testing .
test panels shall be made by each application crew using the equipment materials mixture proportions and procedures proposed for the job prior to the commencement of the work .
a test panel at least num x num shall be made for each mixture being considered and for each shooting position to be encountered in the job .
the test panels shall be fabricated to the same thickness as in the structure but not less than num inches .
take at least five numinch diameter cores from each panel for testing in accordance with aashto tnum .
samples for testing shall be obtained by the contractor in the presence of the engineer and tested by the engineer .
field cure the samples in the same manner as the work except that the test specimens shall be soaked in water for a minimum of num hours prior to testing .
when the length num of the core is less than twice the diameter apply the correction factors given in aashto tnum to obtain the compressive strength of individual cores .
the average compressive strength of three cores taken from the test panel shall equal or exceed numfc with no individual core less than numfc .
the average of three cubes taken from a panel of shotcrete must equal or exceed fc with no individual cube less than numfc .
e. placement of mortar .
shotcrete shall be applied with the same equipment and the same technique as used to construct the approved test panels .
nozzle operators constructing the test panels are to be the same operators used in placing shotcrete in the work .
the mortar shall be applied as dry as practicable to prevent shrinkage cracking and preclude sagging or sloughing off .
shooting guide strips or wires shall be employed to insure square corners straight lines and a plane surface of mortar except as otherwise specified on the plans or approved by the engineer .
they shall be so placed as to keep the trapping of rebound at a minimum .
the reuse of rebounded materials will not be permitted .
in shooting all surfaces the stream of flowing material from the nozzle shall impinge as nearly as possible at right angles to the surface being covered and the nozzle shall be held from num to num feet from the working surface .
thickness measuring pins shall be installed on numfoot centers in each direction .
the pins shall be non corrosive .
other methods to establish if the required minimum thickness of shotcrete is being applied may be approved if the contractor can satisfactorily demonstrate the reliability of these other methods .
a sufficient number of mortar coats shall be applied to obtain the required thickness .
on vertical and overhead surfaces the thickness of each coat shall not be greater than num inch except as approved by the engineer and shall be so placed that it will neither sag nor decrease the bond of the preceding coat .
the time interval between successive layers in sloping vertical or overhanging work shall be sufficient to allow initial set but not final set to develop .
at the time initial set is developing the surface shall be cleaned to remove the thin film of laitance in order to provide for a bond with succeeding applications .
rebound or accumulated loose sand shall be removed from the surface by brooming or scraping to be covered prior to placing of the original or succeeding layers of mortar and shall not be embedded in the work .
all laitance which has been allowed to take final set must be removed by sandblasting and thoroughly cleaning the surfaces .
care shall be taken to thoroughly wash down all previously hardened concrete with water and compressed air before shooting new material .
the wire fabric shall be positioned to prevent vibration while the shotcrete is being applied .
lap mesh one and a half squares in both directions .
tie wires shall be bent flat in the plane of the mesh and not form large knots .
a minimum cover of num inches of shotcrete shall be required .
the shotcrete shall be applied from the bottom up to prevent accumulation of rebound on the surface still to be covered .
shotcrete shall emerge from the nozzle in a steady uninterrupted flow .
horizontal and vertical corners and any area where rebound can not escape or be blown free shall be filled first .
nozzle shall be held at such distance and angle to place material behind reinforcement before material is allowed to accumulate on its face .
do not place shotcrete through more than one layer of reinforcing steel rods or mesh in one application .
unless suitable num means to screen the nozzle is provided discontinue shotcreting if wind or air currents will cause separation of the stream during placement .
check for hollow areas by hammer sounding .
an approved method shall be used to correct deficient areas .
deficient areas shall be corrected at the contractors expense .
surface defects shall be repaired as soon as possible after initial placement of the shotcrete .
all shotcrete which lacks uniformity exhibits segregation honeycombing or lamination or which contains any dry patches slugs voids or sand pockets shall be removed and replaced with fresh shotcrete at the contractors expense .
f. construction testing .
contractor shall prepare one test panel for every num cubic yards of shotcrete placed or one panel per shift .
test panel shall have minimum dimensions of num x num x num gunned in the same position as the work represented .
panels shall be gunned during the course of the work by the contractors regular nozzleman .
the contractors shall cure the panels and obtain a minimum of three cores as described under preconstruction testing .
cut cores shall be tested by the engineer in accordance with the requirements listed under preconstruction testing .
g. limitation of mixing .
shotcrete shall be placed in accordance with the temperature and weather conditions listed under subsection num of these specifications .
h. finish .
all exposed surfaces shall be finished straight and true approximating the original contour as close as practicable .
the final finish shall have a steel trowel wood float or other finish approximating the existing adjacent concrete finish .
i. curing .
should the placing operations be suspended overnight the contractor shall maintain the exposed shotcrete surfaces continuously moist until operations are resumed .
surfaces shall be kept moist by either continuously sprinkling or absorptive matfabric kept continuously wet .
immediately upon completion of final shotcreting operations .
the contractor shall continue moist curing as specified above for a period of num days after shotcreting .
contractor may use an approved curing compound in accordance with the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
curing compounds shall not be used on any surfaces against which additional shotcrete or other cementitious finishing materials are to be bonded .
num application of patching mortar .
a .
limitation of mixing .
concrete patching mortar shall be mixed and applied in strict accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
b .
placing and consolidation .
prior to placing the patching mortar an epoxy bonding agent or a portland cement slurry as specified on the plans shall be applied to all exposed reinforcing and mating concrete surfaces .
the contractor shall follow the manufacturers recommendations for curing the epoxy bonding agent prior to placing the patching mortar .
the patching mortar shall not be placed if the epoxy bonding agent has exceeded the manufacturers recommended contact time .
if the epoxy bonding agent has exceeded its contact time the contractor shall follow the manufacturers num recommendations for reapplication .
an epoxy bonding agent with an extended contact time should be used if required by the timing of concrete placement andor weather conditions .
the patching mortar shall not be placed if the portland cement slurry has dried out .
should the portland cement slurry dry out prior to placing the patching mortar the contractor shall remove the slurry by sandblasting or other means as approved by the engineer .
wetting or spraying the wet or dry slurry shall not be allowed .
the patching mortar shall be placed in accordance with the manufacturers recommenda tions otherwise it shall be placed in numinch lift layers maximum within numtonum minutes after mixing water is added to avoid the rapid setup of the material .
if more than one lift layer is required to perform the repair the previously placed lift layer shall not be allowed to dry .
its surface shall be roughened prior to placing the next layer .
c. curing and protection .
curing of the patching mortar shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
d. final finish .
repaired surfaces shall be finished to closely match the color and original contour of surfaces adjoining the repair areas .
if in the opinion of the engineer the repaired surface does not closely match the adjacent unrepaired surface the repair shall be removed and the repair process repeated or modified as approved by the engineer .
where bulges offsets and other irregularities exceed the specified tolerances the protrusions shall be reduced so that the surfaces are within the specified limits .
no extra compensation will be furnished to the contractor for any repeated repairs .
num method of measurement .
repairs to structure concrete masonry pneumati cally applied mortar and repairs to structure concrete masonry patching mortar will be measured by the number of cubic feet of the respective mortars actually applied in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of repairs to structure concrete masonry pneumatically applied mortar and repairs to structure concrete masonry patching mortar will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices per cubic foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices so stated shall constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials equipment and scaffolding and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num portland cement concrete bridge deck repair num description .
this work consists of removing deteriorated concrete from reinforced concrete bridge deck surfaces erecting the necessary formwork for supporting new concrete and placing new portland cement concrete all in accordance with these specifications .
num a .
partial depth removal .
the limits of partial depth concrete removal shall be those areas for which deteriorated concrete extends less than num percent of the depth of the original deck as indicated on the plans .
b .
full depth removal .
the limits of full depth concrete removal shall be those areas for which deteriorated concrete extends more than num percent of the depth of the original deck as indicated on the plans .
num materials .
materials shall conform to the following requirements num concrete shall conform to the requirements for class xxae material as set forth in subsections num and num classification and proportioning respectively with the following modifications .
coarse aggregate percent passing gradation min .
max .
num inch sieve num ½ inch sieve num num num inch sieve num num num sieve num num num sieve num num field conditions may necessitate that the engineer direct the contractor to substitute rapid setting concrete for the abovespecified concrete .
the rapid setting concrete shall meet the approval of the engineer .
num epoxy adhesive shall be an allpurpose highstrength moistureinsensitive rigid epoxy adhesive .
such adhesive shall meet the approval of the engineer .
num construction methods .
num removal of deteriorated concrete .
removal of concrete shall be performed in a workmanlike manner to prevent damage to the bridge deck that is to remain .
if any damage to that portion of the bridge deck to remain or to the structural girders does develop due to the contractors operations it shall be repaired or replaced by the contractor to the satisfaction of the engineer at its sole expense .
all loose deteriorated or unsound concrete shall be removed from those portions of the bridge deck surfaces designated by the engineer .
a saw cut to a maximum depth of numinch shall be made along all boundaries of the repair patches except those patches bounded by the bridge curbing .
particular care shall be taken not to cut into the top mat of bridge deck reinforcing steel .
care shall be taken not to damage the freshly saw cut edge and the bridge deck reinforcing during the concrete removal operations .
num the concrete shall be removed to a depth of not less than num inch by a method approved by the engineer .
jackhammers heavier than nominal numpound class shall not be used .
chipping hammers heavier than a nominal numpound class shall not be used to remove concrete from beneath any reinforcing bar .
hand tools such as hammers and chisels shall be provided for removal of final particles of unsound concrete or to achieve the required depth .
in no case shall pneumatic tools be placed in direct contact with reinforcing steel so as to damage its bond to the surrounding concrete .
in areas where reinforcing steel is found to be surrounded by deteriorated concrete or where at least onehalf of its surface area is exposed the depth of concrete removal shall be such to include all deteriorated concrete but not less than that depth necessary to allow for num inch clearance below the reinforcing bars .
those reinforcing bars that have lost num or more of their original diameter shall be supplemented by new bars spliced in place .
in splicing new bars they shall be lapped sufficiently num diameters on both sides of the effected areas to develop the full strength of the bar and if necessary additional chipping will be required to provide this lap .
dual bars of equivalent or greater section may be used .
a. deck removal by hydrodemolition .
for deck removal by hydrodemolition methods see section num of these specifications .
num preparation of sound concrete and reinforcing .
all exposed reinforcing bars and newly exposed concrete shall be thoroughly cleaned by sandblasting or other mechanical abrasion methods approved by the engineer .
the exposed concrete and reinforcing steel surfaces shall be free of rust oil solvent grease dirt dust bitumen loose particles and other foreign matter just prior to the application of the epoxy adhesive .
a large sized vacuum cleaner andor an air jet shall be used to remove dust and other particles just prior to placing the epoxy adhesive .
num forms for full depth removal .
forms used for the patching work shall be capable of supporting the quantity of fresh concrete needed to install the patch and shall otherwise conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
num epoxy adhesive shall be applied to the substrate with a stiffbristled broom to a thickness of approximately num mils or in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer of the material .
the contractor shall also follow the manufacturers recommendations for curing the epoxy adhesive prior to placing the concrete .
num placing and finishing concrete .
the new concrete shall be hand manipulated and struck off slightly above the final grade .
it shall then be mechanically consolidated and screeded to a final grade .
hand finishing with a wood float may be required to produce a tight and uniform surface .
as soon as finishing has been completed all vertical joints with adjacent concrete shall be sealed by painting with thinned grout .
num white pigmented liquid curing compound shall be applied immediately after the joint application is completed .
the rate of application shall be num square yards per gallon .
a second application may be required for positive protection and uniformity .
if the curing compound is not applied within num minutes after the final screeding the finished concrete surfaces shall be immediately covered with wet burlap until the application of curing compound can be made .
failure to apply either curing compound within num minutes or burlap within num minutes after the concrete is deposited on the floor shall be cause for rejecting the work so effected .
repaired concrete in the rejected areas shall be removed and the rerepair shall be implemented at no additional cost to the state .
a minimum of four days shall be required for curing the new concrete prior to the placement of the wearing surface .
traffic shall not be allowed on the repaired deck surfaces until the concrete has reached a minimum of num percent of its numday compressive design strength .
num method of measurement .
portland cement concrete deck repair partial deck removal and portland cement concrete deck repair full deck removal will be measured by the number square feet of such repairs actually made in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of portland cement deck repair partial deck removal and portland cement concrete deck repair full deck removal will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices per square foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor tools materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
a .
rapid setting concrete .
in the event that the engineer directs the use of rapid setting concrete the contractor will only be compensated additionally for the difference in material cost of the concrete in place .
section num drill and grout reinforcing dowels num description .
this work consists of the setting of reinforcing bar dowels in existing concrete or granite at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num reinforcing dowels .
reinforcing dowels shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num bar reinforcement of these specifications .
num num high strength nonshrink grout .
high strength nonshrink grout shall be suitable for outdoor use and it shall have a minimum compression strength of num psi after num days as determined by testing under astm cnum .
it shall not exhibit any measurable decrease in volume after curing .
all grout materials shall be listed on the departments approved materials list .
num construction methods .
holes for the dowels shall be drilled at the designated locations .
the diameter of the holes and the embedment lengths shall be as indicated in the following table size of bar min .
hole dia .
in .
min .
embedment length in .
num num¼ num num numd num num num½ num num method of measurement .
drill and grout dowels will be measured by the number of dowels actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of drill and grout dowels will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials equipment tools and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
the cost for furnishing the dowels shall be included in the appropriate reinforcing steel item as listed in the proposal .
section num concrete surface treatment protective coating num description .
this work consists of providing two or more applications of a uniform coating to those concrete surfaces indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
concrete protective sealers shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num num construction methods .
a .
surface preparation .
num .
concrete to be coated shall be thoroughly clean and free of any efflorescence laitance frost grease curing compounds form release oil etc .
or foreign substances .
surface preparation shall be performed in strict accordance with the manufacturers recommendations for the selected product .
in the absence of such recommendations surface preparation shall be as follows clean surfaces by high pressure water washing with sand to remove loose cementitious material and any sheen on smooth concrete .
this cleaning must be completed no more than num hours prior to coating the concrete .
num .
concrete surface shall not be coated earlier than num days after concrete has been placed and finished .
num .
all adjacent surfaces not specified to be coated shall be properly masked to protect from potential overspray or spillage .
num .
areas adjacent to the surface to be coated shall be cleaned by high pressure water washing prior to commencing work .
b .
application .
num .
the protective coating shall be applied evenly in a continuous operation over all surfaces to be treated in order to obtain a uniform coat .
the work shall be scheduled so that the stopping point each day falls at an opening column or corner .
num .
further application procedure shall follow the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
protective concrete surface treatment shall not be applied at temperatures below numof or when the relative humidity is above num percent .
the coating shall not be applied in the rain at the imminent approach of rain or when it is windy so that it adversely affect the application procedure .
the time interval between coats shall be as recommended by the manufacturer .
num .
for twocomponent products the part a to part b mixing ratio num percent tolerance shall remain in the ratio specified by the manufacturer throughout the application .
failure to so maintain this ratio shall be a basis of rejection .
num .
the protective coating shall be applied by airless spray equipment .
the spray equipment shall be capable of providing a uniform consistent protective coat without splatter holidays or other defects .
the spray equipment must be approved by the engineer prior to the start of application .
additionally when the spray equipment has to apply a coating consisting of two or more parts then the spray equipment shall be capable of automatically shutting down if the mixing ratio can not be maintained with the tolerance specified .
a suggested spray equipment graco airless spray gun num tip num pump num equipped with an accessory to monitor the fluid pressure which shuts off automatically if outside the pressure setting ratio num .
num compressor minimum numhp flow fluid ozs.min num .
note other models of equipment are available to suit operational needs .
num .
the contractor shall start at the top of the structure holding the spray gun at a num degree angle to the substrate num inches to num inches from the surface spraying in a back and forth motion and at all times shall overlap each pass by approximately num percent .
application to each new section shall be made by holding the spray fan evenly centered on the line where treatment of the previous section was terminated taking care not to deposit excess material .
the procedure shall be repeated on spots which absorbed erratically or too quickly .
runs or sags shall be brushed out immediately .
num .
coverage shall be applied at both the rate and the number of coats as recommended by the manufacturer of the selected product .
num .
the applicator should be qualified and experienced in the proper application procedure for the concrete sealer .
num .
the operation may commence or proceed only when a department inspector is present .
num method of measurement .
concrete surface treatment protective coating will be measured by the number of square feet of concrete surface actually coated in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of concrete surface treatment protective coating will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including surface preparation and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num sawing and sealing joints in bituminous concrete pavements num description .
this work consists of making two saw cuts one within the other in the finished bituminous concrete pavement directly over the transverse joints and edge of deck and filling the cuts with a hot poured asphalt rubber compound at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
poured joint seal material shall be an asphalt rubber compound of the hot poured type conforming to aashto mnum and approved by the engineer .
num num construction methods .
the intent of the work under this provision is to establish a weakened plane joint to control reflectance cracking in the newly installed bituminous concrete pavement at the piers and abutments .
the cuts shall be made directly over the transverse joints at the piers and the edge of deck at the abutments .
after the cuts have been satisfactorily completed they shall be sealed with the hot asphalt rubber joint sealer .
num sawing joints .
the bituminous concrete shall have aged sufficiently to allow clean cuts to be made and to withstand the eroding effects of the saw or other cutting device .
the saw cutting of the joint shall be made with an approved power driven saw .
the initial saw cut shall be numinch wide by ½inch deep .
the second saw cut numinch wide and num inch deep shall be made within the initial saw cut and shall be as nearly as practical centered on the initial saw cut .
the saw cuts shall be made with an abrasive blade and sawn dry .
the completed cuts shall extend in a straight line across the pavement from curb to curb .
each joint to be sawed will be referenced by the contractor .
it shall be the responsibility of the contractor to insure that the saw cuts are constructed directly over the deck joints at the piers and the edge of deck at the abutments .
num sealing joints .
the sawed joints shall be sealed immediately after the second saw cut has been made .
traffic shall not be allowed to knead together or damage the sawed joint .
each joint shall be thoroughly cleaned and dried prior to placement of the sealing compound .
any cleaning required shall be performed by blowing out all dirt dust or deleterious matter that may have accumulated in the sawed joints .
sufficient air pressure shall be provided to insure thorough cleaning .
a combined melter and pressure application shall be used .
the melter shall be either oil or gasfired and shall be of the double walled oil bath type with a powerdriven mechanical agitator and circulating pump .
it shall be equipped with a thermostat to maintain the sealing compound within the range of temperatures specified by the manufacturer and with a suitably mounted thermometer to indicate the temperature of the sealing compound in the melter .
the joint seal shall be applied with a mobile carriage and rubber shoe and the system shall have a flow control valve which allows all cracks to be filled to refusal so as to eliminate all voids or entrapped air and not leave unnecessary surplus crack sealer on the pavement surface .
the hot seal shall completely fill the joint such that after cooling the level of the sealer will not be greater than numinch below the pavement surface .
any depression in the seal greater than numinch shall be brought up to the specified limit by the further addition of hot seal .
care shall be taken in the sealing of the joints so that the final appearance will present a neat fine line .
overfilling of joints will not be allowed and spillage of the sealer shall be avoided .
all workmanship shall be of the highest quality and all excess or spilled sealer shall be removed from the pavement by approved methods and discarded .
the melting temperature of the sealer will be furnished by the manufacturer and the actual temperature of the material in the melter shall not exceed the melting temperature by more than numof .
num num method of measurement .
sawing and sealing joints in bituminous concrete pavement will be measured by the number of linear feet actually sawed and sealed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of sawing and sealing joints in bituminous concrete pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor tools materials equipment and other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num silicone highway joint seal num description .
this work consists of providing silicone joint sealant in highway and bridge expansion and contraction joints at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
the silicone joint sealant shall be a onepart silicone material that readily extrudes over a wide temperature range and cures to produce a durable flexible low modulus silicone rubber seal .
the material shall have an extension recovery of num percent and a compression recovery of num percent of the original joint width .
the silicone sealant shall conform to the requirements of federal specifications ttsnum a class a onepart silicone sealants and ttsnum c class a one component sealants .
num construction methods .
all joints shall be cleaned of contaminants and impurities to the depth at which the sealant and backer rod if detailed is to be installed .
cleaning shall be by grinding saw cutting blast cleaning sand or water mechanical abrading or a combination of these methods .
this will provide a sound clean and frostfree surface for sealant application .
all dust loose particles and other debris shall be blown out with oil free compressed air .
an expanded closed cell polyethylene foam rod backup material shall be installed in joints or an approved bond breaker tape shall be installed if so detailed on the plans .
a primer shall be applied to the surfaces of steel expansion joints .
the primer shall be as per the recommendation of the sealant manufacturer .
silicone highway joint sealant shall be applied in a continuous operation to properly fill and seal the joint width .
it shall be applied not thicker than ½inch and no thinner than numinch with an approximate width to depth ratio of numtonum .
num for maximum performance the sealant should be applied above numof .
the sealant shall be pumped directly from the original drum or pail into the joint by use of an air powered pump pushing the sealant ahead to form a uniform bead .
the sealant shall fill the joint from the bottom to slightly below the pavement surface .
the joint shall be tooled using a blunt instrument so that it is slightly concave and approximately numinch below the adjacent surface .
tooling should be done within num minutes of application before a skin forms .
no soap or oil shall be used as a tooling aid .
traffic shall be kept off the sealed lane for at least num minutes after sealant application .
num limitations .
silicone sealant is not intended for continuous water immersion and it should not be applied in totally confined spaces where the sealant is not exposed to atmospheric moisture .
the sealant should never be applied to wet or damp surfaces nor should it be installed during inclement weather .
num method of measurement .
silicone highway joint sealant will be measured by the number of linear feet of each type of joint actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of silicone highway joint sealant of the various types will be paid at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all silicone sealant backer rods bond breaker tape primer surface preparation other materials labor tools equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num roadway joints expansion and fixed num description .
this work consists of the provision of various types of roadway joints both expansion and fixed between bridge decks and abutments or between sections of bridge decks at intermediate piers .
deck joints specified in this provision include compression type neoprene joints strip seal joints and asphaltic bridge deck joints .
other types of roadway joints if required will be specified in the special provisions .
deck joints shall be fabricated and installed in accordance with the details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num compression type neoprene deck joints .
this type of joint consists of structural steel components anchored to the deck slab or abutment with preformed neoprene sealer placed between these structural elements .
the neoprene sealer is approximately num¼inches wide for fixed joints and approximately num inches wide for expansion joints .
num strip seal expansion joints .
this type of joint consists of specially designed rolled steel sections that are anchored to the deck slab or abutment .
the steel section contains a num groove into which is inserted a premoulded neoprene strip seal .
this deck joint system is a commercial product and must be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
manufacturers of this joint system are included in the departments approved materials list .
num asphaltic expansion joint system .
this type of joint consists of the placement of a numinch nominal width or as otherwise indicated on the plans of a special asphalt material with unique elastic properties over concrete deck joints in the space usually occupied by the bituminous wearing surface .
this deck joint system is a commercial product and must be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
manufacturers of this joint system are included in the departments approved materials list .
num materials .
num compression type neoprene deck joints .
a .
structural steel .
structural steel bars and plates shall conform to aashto mnum grade num hotdipped galvanized .
stud anchors shall conform to astm anum .
b. sealer and adhesive .
the neoprene sealer shall be a preformed extruded type .
the sealer and adhesive shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
c. aluminum sheet metal .
the aluminum sheet metal shall conform to aashto mnum .
d. all metal materials shall be hotdipped galvanized or metalized except those that are in contact with concrete .
num strip seal expansion joints .
the materials for the strip seal joint are the same as those set forth above in subsection num .
num asphaltic expansion joint system .
a .
backer rod .
the backer rod material shall be an expanded closed cell polyethylene foam capable of withstanding the temperature of the hot binder material shall have a diameter num percent the width of the joint opening and shall have the following properties density num lbs.cu.ft .
min .
astm dnum tensile strength num psi min .
astm dnum water absorption num percent of weight max .
astm cnum b. binder material .
the binder material shall be a hot applied polymer modified bituminous material conforming to all specifications as detailed in astm dnum and manufac tured under strict quality control procedures as approved by the engineer and conforming to the following softening point astm dnum numef min .
num c. aggregate .
the aggregate shall be of the basalt gabbro or granite groups meeting the manufacturers size and gradation requirements .
all stones shall be doublewashed dried and delivered to the site preweighed in labeled packs .
when tested in accordance with aashto tnum the material passing the num sieve will be no more than num percent by weight of the stone .
the broadcast stone for the surface of the joint system will be basalt and shall be sized to pass the num sieve and be retained on the num sieve .
d. steel backing plate .
the backing plate shall conform to requirements of aashto mnum grade num steel minimum numinch thick and shall be galvanized in accordance with aashto mnum .
holes for locating pins shall be approximately num foot centertocenter along the centerline of the plate unless indicated otherwise on the plans .
e. locating pins .
locating pins shall be numd common nails or larger and shall be hot dipped galvanized in accordance with astm anum .
f. asphaltic joint system .
the materials for the joint system both aggregate and binder shall be provided by one of the manufacturers included in the departments approved materials list .
num construction methods .
num compression type neoprene deck joints .
a .
fabrication .
the steel frame shall be fabricated as detailed on the plans .
it shall be constructed to conform to roadway grade and cross slope .
b .
installation .
the entire structural steel frame shall be assembled erected and set to grade prior to placing deck or abutment concrete .
allowance shall be made for temperature conditions at the time of final setting .
the joint assembly shall be clean and free of foreign material immediately prior to installation of the seal .
the neoprene sealer shall be installed in the field by suitable hand or machine tools and thoroughly secured in place with the approved lubricantadhesive .
the adhesive shall cover both sides of the sealer over the full contact area with the sides of the metal joint .
the adhesive may be applied to the metal or the sealer or both .
the sealer shall be installed in a compressed condition in the position shown on the plans within seconds after the application of the adhesive .
the sealer shall be in one piece for the full width of transverse joints .
no field splicing of the seal will be permitted in transverse joints .
in longitudinal joints the sealer shall be in practical lengths .
any joints in the sealer material shall be adequately sealed with additional adhesive .
c. compliance .
all sealer and adhesive to be employed in the work shall conform with the material that has been approved as the basis of test results .
each such shipment shall be identified with the manufacturers name address and trademark and shall be accompanied by four copies of the manufacturers standard test results and an affidavit attesting to full compliance with these specifications .
num num strip seal expansion joint .
a .
fabrication .
the steel frame shall be fabricated as detailed on the plans .
it shall be constructed to conform to roadway grade and cross slope .
b .
installation .
the entire strip seal frame shall be assembled erected and set to grade prior to placing deck or abutment concrete .
allowance shall be made for temperature conditions at the time of final setting .
the joint assembly shall be clean and free of foreign material immediately prior to the installation of the seal .
the neoprene strip seal shall be installed in the field by suitable hand or machine tools .
the seal shall be thoroughly secured in place with the approved adhesive in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the strip seal shall be in one piece for the full width of the transverse joints .
no field splicing of the seal will be permitted .
c. compliance .
compliance requirements for strip seal joints are the same as those set forth above in para .
c of subsection num .
num asphaltic expansion joint system .
a. excavation .
bituminous concrete wearing surface shall be excavated from those areas where asphaltic joint material is to be placed .
the joint shall be excavated by the use of saws and pneumatic hand tools .
saws shall be set to cut the full depth of the bituminous concrete and any membrane present .
variations in the thickness of the bituminous concrete across the road should be considered to insure where possible that the deck is not damaged .
b .
joint preparation .
num .
cleaning .
the entire joint must be thoroughly cleaned and dried using a hot compressed air lance immediately prior to tanking .
all loose debris shall be removed from the gap .
care must be taken to insure that the sawcut surfaces have been thoroughly cleaned of any dust or wet paste from the cutting operation .
num .
caulking .
the joint gap shall be caulked with a backer rod as shown on the plans .
it shall be placed in such a manner as to allow for the appropriate placement of the required binder material .
num .
tanking .
immediately after cleaningcaulking the bottom of the blockout area shall be coated with a layer of hot binder that has been heated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
if any delay greater than one num hour occurs between cleaning and tanking the joint shall be recleaned using a hot compressed air lance as described above .
num .
plating .
the gap shall be bridged with threetofour foot long steel backing plates .
steel plates shall be located with pins along the centerline .
the plates shall be butted to each other and shall not be overlapped .
immediately coat the walls of the blockout area and the bridging plates with binder making sure that the plate is entirely encapsulated by the binder .
c. asphaltic joint material preparation .
num .
aggregate .
the aggregate must be dried cleaned and heated in a drum mixer by hot compressed air .
the stone shall be heated to a temperature between numof numoc and the num maximum safe binder temperature as specified by the manufacturer .
the temperature shall be monitored with a calibrated infrared thermometer .
under no circumstances shall the binder be mixed with the aggregate if its temperature is above the maximum .
all tangible signs of dust must be removed prior to mixing of the binder with the aggregate .
num .
binder .
the binder shall be heated to the manufacturers recommended placement temperature in excess of numof numoc .
at no time shall the manufacturers recommended safe heating temperature be exceeded .
d. material installation .
the method used shall be according the manufacturers recommended procedure .
variations from the manufacturers procedure or from this specifi cation must be approved by the engineer prior to commencement of work .
num .
placement of the aggregatebinder mix into the blockout area .
binder material shall be added to the mixer just sufficient to thoroughly coat the aggregate .
the coated aggregate shall be placed into the blockout in layers as recommended by the joint material manufacturer .
the blockouts shall be overfilled with coated aggregate as required to compensate for compaction .
equipment for compaction shall be capable of sufficient compaction force as recommended by the joint manufacturer .
additional binder material shall be screeded over the compacted joint to fill any surface voids .
num .
surface layer .
accurately measured quantities of hot aggregate shall be mixed with the binder in an unvented rotating drum mixer .
the binder should be at the approved temperature to insure complete coating of all the stone .
this mix shall be transferred to the joint and leveled to be slightly higher than the adjacent road surface .
num .
compaction .
compaction should take place after the joint has cooled to approxi mately numof numoc using a vibratory plate or roller and the joint surface made flush with the existing road surface .
num .
screeding .
prior to the final screeding the surface of the joint and surrounding road shall if necessary be dried and cleaned with a hot compressed air lance .
immediately thereafter a single screed of hot binder shall be applied to fill all surface voids .
num .
joint sealing .
the interface between the joint and the pavement shall be sealed with a numinch wide band of the binder centered on the interface for the entire length of the joint on both the leading and trailing edges relative to traffic .
the surface adjacent to the interface shall be heated with a hot compressed air lance to promote adhesion of the binder .
immediately after the application while the binder is still hot basalt stone shall be broadcast onto the band .
it shall cover num percent of the surface of the band .
num .
opening to traffic .
the joint shall not be opened to traffic before the surface reaches a temperature of numof or num minutes has elapsed from placing the basalt stone .
e. equipment .
the following equipment is required for the proper installation of asphaltic bridge deck joints .
num .
a manually propelled high speed water cooled saw with diamond tipped blades capable of cutting to the full depth required in one pass .
num num .
a pneumatic compressor of num cfm capacity to power drills and breakers of various sizes with suitable size bits .
num .
two hot compressed air lances hca lances each capable of delivering a flame retarded air stream with a temperature of numof numoc at a speed of num feet per second .
the use of a torch rather than a hot air lance to heat the block out surfaces is not allowed .
num .
a numgallon airjacketed trailermounted melter with two flame baffled l.p. ribbon type burners rated a minimum output of num btu which shall apply indirect heat to the melting chamber .
the unit shall have automatic temperature controls which can accurately maintain the material temperatures between numof and numof numoc and numoc .
a temperature gauge calibrated to numof of actual must be provided and mounted such that the temperature is clearly visible to the operator and the engineer .
the burner system shall have a safety pilot capable of shutting off the base supply in the event of a flameout .
the melter shall be equipped with a horizontally mounted doublepaddle full sweep reversible agitation system which runs the length of the melting chamber and is driven hydraulically by a dedicated engine and compressor .
material delivery shall be by an angled num inch discharge port .
the electrically braked trailer shall be rated at a minimum of num pounds and shall meet all icc regulations with regards to running lights brake lights and stop lights .
num .
storage tanks capable of holding a minimum of num pounds propane num pounds oxygen and num pounds acetylene .
num .
a dedicated drum mixer with compressed hot air apparatus sufficient to heat the aggregate and aggregatebinder mix in the drum to the specified temperature range .
num .
acetylene cutting torches .
num .
an arc welder powered by a suitable generator .
num .
numgallon capacity water tank fitted with suitable spigots .
num .
a handheld infrared thermometer calibrated to numof .
num .
a vibratory plate compactor .
num .
a powered roller sufficient to span the width of the joint system in a single pass .
num .
in the event of equipment failure during installation backup equipment must be available or in the case of a major breakdown replacement equipment should be on site within num hours .
num num method of measurement .
num compression type neoprene deck joints .
compression type neoprene deck joints will be measured by the number of linear feet of such joints actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num strip seal expansion joints .
strip seal expansion joints will be measured by the number of linear feet of such joints actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num asphaltic expansion joint system .
asphaltic expansion joint system will be measured by the number of linear feel of such joints actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
a .
curbs .
in each of the above three statements the measured length will include the vertical rise at curbs .
num basis of payment .
num compression type neoprene deck joints .
the accepted quantities of compres sion type neoprene deck joints of various widths will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num strip seal expansion joints .
the accepted quantities of strip seal expansion joints of various widths will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num asphaltic expansion joint system .
the accepted quantities of asphaltic expansion joint system of various widths will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num structural steel construction num description .
this work consists of furnishing fabricating and erecting all structural steel at the locations and to the details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
structural steel includes but is not limited to carbon special alloy steels steel forgings steel and iron castings and weldments .
num surface preparation for weathering steel .
this work also includes the cleaning and protection of weathering structural steel during both fabrication and after erection .
num num applicable specifications .
in addition to this specification all structural steel work shall conform to the applicable requirements of the respective current editions of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges and the aws dnum bridge welding code .
num related items of work covered elsewhere .
related items of work covered in other sections of these specifications include the following a .
section num painting structural steel b .
section num thermal sprayed zinc coating for new structural steel num shear connectors .
this work shall consist of the provision of stud shear connectors welded to the flanges of steel beams or girders at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
a .
general requirements .
shear connector studs shall be of a design suitable for end welding to steel beams and girders with automatically timed stud welding equipment .
the type size or diameter and length of stud shall be as shown specified or ordered .
finished studs shall be of uniform quality and condition free from injurious laps fins seams cracks twists bends or other injurious defects .
finish shall be as produced by cold drawing cold rolling or machining .
before placing orders for studs the contractor shall submit to the engineer for approval the following information on the studs to be purchased .
num .
the name of the manufacturer .
num .
a detailed description of the stud and arc shield to be furnished .
num .
a certification from the manufacturer that the stud to be furnished is qualified in accordance with the latest aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
num .
if requested by the engineer a copy of the qualification test report as certified by the testing laboratory .
num materials .
num structural steels shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num steel bars and forgings shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num structural tubing shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num num bolts shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num weld metal shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num shear connectors shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num low alloy nickel copper steel pipe shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num steel forging and shafting shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num steel and iron castings shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num shop drawings .
the contractor shall prepare all shop drawings erection diagrams camber diagrams and list of field rivets and bolts from plans furnished by the state .
shop drawings and erection diagrams shall be submitted by the contractor and reviewed by the engineer in accordance with the requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
num inspection and testing .
a .
mill .
the state shall be furnished complete copies of mill orders in quadruplicate .
no material shall be rolled or work done before the engineer has been notified where the orders have been placed so that he may arrange for the inspection .
the manufacturer shall furnish all facilities for inspecting and testing the weight and quality of all material at the mill where it is manufactured .
suitable testing equipment properly calibrated shall be furnished .
the pieces shall be prepared for the testing machine at no cost to the state .
where no mill inspection is made the contractor shall furnish the engineer with four copies of the mill report of chemical and physical tests prior to starting work .
no markings shall be cut off until the inspector has established the heat and designation and determined the method of continued identity .
inspection and testing shall conform the section num control of material of these specifications .
b .
shop .
the engineer shall be notified well in advance of the start of the work in the shop in order that an inspector shall be on hand to inspect material and workmanship .
the fabricator shall furnish all facilities for inspecting and testing the weight and quality of workmanship at the shop where the material is fabricated .
suitable testing equipment properly calibrated shall be provided .
num when an inspector is furnished by the state to inspect materials at the mills or at the shops full access shall be provided at all times and to all parts of the mills or shops where the material is being manufactured or fabricated .
the inspector shall have the authority to reject any material or work which does not meet the requirements of these specifications .
in case of dispute the contractor may appeal to the engineer whose decision shall be final .
the acceptance of any material or finished members by the inspectors shall not be a bar to their subsequent rejection if subsequently found defective .
rejected material and workmanship shall be replaced promptly and made good by the contractor .
c. site .
the engineer may waive shop inspection and may make inspection of all fabricated material when the same is delivered at the site of the work .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer with a minimum of four copies of shipping statements .
the weights of the individual members shall be shown on the statement .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer with a certificate of identification as defined in subsection num of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges numth edition .
d. delegation of authority .
the state may delegate inspection and testing to an independent laboratory or testing company .
this agency shall have all the prerogatives as previously mentioned for the engineer except that in the event of a disagreement of substance the contractor may appeal a decision to the engineer whose decision shall be final .
num fabrication .
a .
quality of workmanship .
workmanship and finish shall be equal to the best general practice of modern bridge shops .
b .
shop storage of materials .
structural material either plain or fabricated shall be stored at the bridge shop above the ground upon platforms skids or other supports .
it shall be kept free from dirt grease and other foreign matter and shall be protected as far as practicable from corrosion .
c. holes for highstrength bolts and unfinished bolts .
num .
general .
all holes for bolts shall be either punched or drilled .
material forming parts of a member composed of not more than five thicknesses of metal may be punched numinch larger than the nominal diameter of the bolts whenever the thickness of the material is not greater than numinch for structural steel numinch for highstrength steel of ½inch for quenched and tempered alloy steel .
when there are more than five thicknesses or when any of the main material is thicker than numinch for structural steel numinch for highstrength steel or ½inch for quenched and tempered alloy steel all holes shall either be subdrilled and reamed or drilled full size .
num when required all holes shall be either subpunched or subdrilled subdrilled if thickness limitation governs numinch smaller and after assembling reamed numinch larger or drilled full size to numinch larger than the nominal diameter of the bolts .
when shown on the plans enlarged or slotted holes are allowed with highstrength bolts .
num .
punched holes .
the diameter of the die shall not exceed the diameter of the punch by more than numinch .
if any holes must be enlarged to admit the bolts such holes shall be reamed .
holes must be clean cut without torn or ragged edges .
num .
reamed or drilled holes .
reamed or drilled holes shall be cylindrical perpendicular to the member and shall comply with the requirements of para .
c.num above as to size .
where practical reamers shall be directed by mechanical means .
burrs on the outside surfaces shall be removed .
reaming and drilling shall be done with twist drills twist reamers or rotobroach cutters .
connecting parts requiring reamed or drilled holes shall be assembled and securely held while being reamed or drilled and shall be match marked before disassembling .
num .
accuracy of holes .
holes not more than numinch larger in diameter than the true decimal equivalent of the nominal diameter that may result from a drill or reamer of the nominal diameter are considered acceptable the slightly conical hole that naturally results from punching operations is considered acceptable .
the width of slotted holes which are produced by flame cutting or a combination of drilling or punching and flame cutting shall generally be not more than numinch greater than the nominal width .
the flame cut surface shall be ground smooth .
d. accuracy of hole group .
num .
accuracy before reaming .
all holes punched full size subpunched or subdrilled shall be so accurately punched that after assembling before any reaming is done a cylindrical pin numinch smaller in diameter than the nominal size of the punched hole may be entered perpendicular to the face of the member without drifting in at least num percent of the contiguous holes in the same plane .
if the requirement is not fulfilled the badly punched pieces will be rejected .
if any hole will not pass a pin numinch smaller in diameter than the nominal size of the punched hole this will be cause for rejection .
num .
accuracy after reaming .
when holes are reamed or drilled num percent of the holes in any contiguous group shall after reaming or drilling show no offset greater than numinch between adjacent thicknesses of metal .
all steel templates shall have hardened steel bushings in holes accurately dimensioned from the centerlines of the connection as inscribed on the template .
the centerlines shall be used in locating accurately the template from the milled or scribed ends of the members .
e. holes for ribbed bolts turned bolts or other approved bearingtype bolts .
all holes for ribbed bolts turned bolts or other approved bearingtype bolts shall be subpunched or subdrilled numinch smaller than the nominal diameter of the bolt and reamed when assembled or drilled to a steel template or after assembling drilled from the solid at the option of the fabricator .
in any case the finished holes shall provide a driving fit as specified on the plans or in the special provisions .
num f. preparation of field connections .
holes in all field connections and field splices of main members of trusses arches continuous bean spans bents towers each face plate girders and rigid frames shall be subpunched or subdrilled and subsequently reamed while assembled or drilled full size to a steel template .
holes for field splices of rolled beam stringers continuous over floor beams or cross frames may be drilled full size unassembled to a steel template .
all holes for floor beams or cross frames may be drilled full size unassembled to a steel template .
all holes for floor beam and stringer field end connections shall be subpunched and reamed while assembled or drilled full size to a steel template .
reaming or drilling full size of field connection holes through a steel template shall be done after the template has been located with utmost care as to position and angle and firmly bolted in place .
templates used for reaming matching members or the opposite faces of a single member shall be exact duplicates .
templates used for connections on like parts or members shall be so accurately located that the parts or members are duplicates and require no matchmarking .
for any connection in lieu of subpunching and reaming or subdrilling and reaming the fabricator may at his option drill holes full size with all thicknesses or material assembled in proper position .
num bolts and bolted connections using unfinished turned and ribbed bolts .
a .
general .
bolts shall be unfinished turned or an approved form of ribbed bolts as designed .
bolts shall have hexagonal heads and nuts and shall be of such length that they will extend entirely thorough the nut but not more than numinch beyond .
beveled washers shall be used where bearing faces have a slope of more than num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis .
bolts shall have single selflocking nuts or double nuts .
b .
unfinished bolts .
bolts in shear shall have not more than one thread within the grip .
the diameter of the unfinished bolt shall be not more than numinch smaller than the diameter of the hole .
c. turned bolts .
holes for turned bolts shall be carefully reamed and the bolts turned to a light driving fit with threads entirely outside of holes and a washer shall be used .
one quarter inch nut locks shall be used on all turned bolts unless otherwise specified on the plans .
d. ribbed bolts .
special types of ribbed bolts with drive fit may be used if approved by the engineer in writing for special purposes or for field rivets in locations where in the opinion of the engineer it is impractical to drive rivets .
in the event that the bolt twists before drawing tight it shall be removed the hole rereamed and an oversize bolt used in replacement .
num connections using high strength bolts .
a .
general .
this subsection covers the assembly of structural joints using astm anum high strength carbon steel bolts or equivalent fasteners tightened to a high tension .
the bolts are used in holes conforming to the requirements of subsection num of this section .
b. bolts nuts and washers .
bolts nuts and washers shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num fasteners of these specifications .
num c. bolted parts .
the slope of surfaces of bolted parts in contact with the bolt head and nut shall not exceed num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis .
bolted parts shall fit solidly together when assembled and shall not be separated by gaskets or any other interposed compressible material .
when assembled all joint surfaces including those adjacent to the bolt heads nuts or washers shall be free of scale except tight mill scale and shall also be free of dirt loose scale burrs other foreign material and other defects that would prevent solid seating of the parts .
contact surfaces within frictiontype joints shall be free of oil paint lacquer rust inhibitor or galvanizing .
d. installation .
each fastener shall be tightened to provide when all fasteners in the joint are tight at least the minimum bolt tension shown on the bolt tension table in para .
g of this subsection .
threaded bolts shall be tightened with properly calibrated wrenches or by the turnofthe nut method .
if required because of bolt entering and wrench operation clearances tightening by either procedure may be done by turning the bolt while the nut is prevented from rotating .
impact wrenches if used shall be of adequate capacity and sufficiently supplied with air minimum num psi at tool for numinch bolts to perform the required tightening of each bolt in approximately ten seconds .
e. washers .
all fasteners shall have a hardened washer under the element nut or bolt head turned in tightening .
where an outer face of the bolted parts has a slope of more than num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis a smooth beveled washer shall be used to compensate for the lack of parallelism .
on diaphragm connections using oversized holes a washer must be used over every oversized hole regardless of part turned in tightening .
f. calibrated wrench tightening .
calibrated wrench tightening may be used only when installation procedures are calibrated on a daily basis and when a hardened washer is used under the element turned in tightening .
standard torques determined from tables or from formulas which are assumed to relate torque to tension are not acceptable .
when calibrated wrenches are used for installation they shall be set to provide a tension not less than num percent in excess of the minimum tension specified in the bolt tension table in para .
g of this subsection .
the installation procedures shall be calibrated by verification testing at least once each working day for each bolt diameter length and grade using fastener assemblies that are being installed in the work .
this verification testing shall be accomplished in a device capable of indicating actual bolt tension by tightening three typical bolts of each diameter length and grade from the bolts being installed and with a hardened washer from the washers being used in the work under the element turned in tightening .
wrenches shall be recalibrated when significant difference is noted in the surface condition of the bolts threads nuts or washers .
it shall be verified during actual installation in the assembled steel work that the wrench adjustment selected by the calibration does not produce a nut or bolt head rotation from num snug tight greater than that permitted in the nut rotation table in para .
g of this section .
if manual torque wrenches are used nuts shall be turned in the tightening direction when torque is measured .
when calibrated wrenches are used to install and tension bolts in a connection bolts shall be installed with hardened washers under the element turned in tightening bolts in all holes of the connection and brought to a snug tight condition .
following this initial tightening operation the connection shall be tightened using the calibrated wrench .
tightening shall progress systematically from the most rigid part of the joint to its free edges .
the wrench shall be returned to touch up previously tightened bolts which may have been relaxed as a result of the subsequent tightening of adjacent bolts until all bolts are tightened to the prescribed amount .
g. turnofnut tightening .
verification testing using a representative sample of not less than three bolt and nut assemblies of each diameter length and grade to be used in the work shall be performed at the start of work in a device capable of indicating bolt tension .
this verification test shall demonstrate that the method for estimating the snug tight condition and controlling the turns from snug tight to be used by the bolting crew develops a tension not less than num percent greater than the tension required by the bolt tension table .
periodic retesting shall be performed when ordered by the engineer .
after snug tightening fasteners and fully compacting the connection all bolts in the connection shall be tightened further by the applicable amount of rotation specified in the nut rotation table .
during the tightening operation there shall be no rotation of the part not turned by the wrench .
tightening shall progress systematically from the most rigid part of the joint to its free edges .
bolt tension table minimum bolt tension in pounds bolt size in inches anum bolts ½ num num num num num num num num num numc num num¼ num numd num num½ num equal to num percent of specified minimum tensile strength of bolts as specified in astm specifications for tests of fullsize anum bolts with unc threads loaded in axial tension rounded to the nearest kip .
num nut rotation table nut rotation from the snugtight condition ab geometry of outer faces of bolted parts one face normal to both faces bolt axis sloped not and other more than bolt length face sloped num from measured from not more normal to underside of both faces than num. bolt axis .
head to end normal to bevel washer bevel washers of bolt .
bolt axis .
not used .
not used .
up to and including num diameters num turn ½ turn num turn over num diameters but not exceeding num diameters ½ turn num turn num turn over num diameters but not exceeding num diameters c num turn num turn num turn notes a nut rotation is relative to bolt regardless of the element nut or bolt being turned .
for bolts installed by ½ turn and less the tolerance should be plus or minus num degrees for bolts installed by num turn and more the tolerance should be plus or minus num degrees .
b applicable only to connections in which all material within grip of the bolt is steel .
c no research work has been performed by the research council riveted and bolted structural joints to establish the turnofnut procedure when bolt lengths exceed num diameters .
therefore the required rotation must be determined by actual tests in a suitable tension device simulating the actual conditions .
h. inspection .
the engineer will determine that all requirements of this specification are satisfied .
the engineer will approve the procedure for calibration of wrenches and installation of bolts and will further observe the field installation to determine that these procedures are followed .
spot checks will be made with a manual torque wrench that has been calibrated as previously specified .
i .
load indicator devices .
load indicating devices may be used in conjunction with bolts nuts and washers specified in subsection m.num .
load indicating devices shall conform to the requirements of astm specification for compressiblewasher type direct num tension indicators for use with structural fasteners astm fnum except as provided in the following paragraph .
subject to the approval of the engineer alternate design direct tension indicating devices may be used provided they satisfy the requirements detailed in specifications provided by the manufacturer .
num welding .
a .
general .
unless specified otherwise herein all welding welder qualifications prequalification of weld details and inspection of welds shall conform to the requirements of the current ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
brackets clips shipping devices or other material not required by the plans or special provisions shall not be welded or tacked to any member unless shown on the shop drawings and approved by the engineer .
b. qualification of welders .
all work shall be in accordance with the best modern practice using qualified welding operators .
the same type of equipment as required for the execution of the actual construction work shall be used in qualifying welders and welding operators .
if the contractor prequalifies his metalarc welding operators according to the standard qualification procedure of the american welding society and certifies to the engineer that an operator working on the structure has been prequalified previously the engineer may consider such operator qualified .
this certificate shall state that such operator has been doing satisfactory welding of the required type within the nummonth period previous to the subject work .
a certification shall be submitted for each operator and for each project stating the name of the operator the name and title of the person who conducted the examination the kind of specimens the positions of welds the results of the test the date of the examination and the identifying steel stamp symbol assigned .
such a certification of prequalification may also be accepted as proof that an operator of field welding is qualified if the contractor who submits it is properly staffed and equipped to conduct such an examination or if the examining and testing is done by a recognized agency which is staffed and equipped for such purpose .
the qualification of a welder shall not prohibit his subsequent removal from the job for poor workmanship in execution of welds .
the welder shall place his identification stamp near the welds that he has made .
shop welding shall be done in areas sheltered from wind and weather with an ambient minimum temperature of numof unless otherwise permitted by the engineer .
c. qualification of welding procedure .
the contractor shall submit a complete welding procedure specification for welding all primary members and other members on which welds are subject to calculated stress prior to proceeding with fabrication .
d. procedures for manual shielded metalarc welding .
the work shall be positioned for flat position welding whenever practicable .
num num inspection of welds .
a .
general .
all welding both shop and field shall be subject to inspection by the engineer in accordance with ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code as amended herein .
the principal method of inspection shall be nondestructive testing which may be carried out by radiographic magnetic particle dye penetrant or ultrasonic methods or any other methods designated by the engineer .
a minimum routine inspection program is outlined in table num .
however inspection shall in no way be construed to be limited to the program described .
a routine inspection program shall be established to which all welding shall be subject .
this program shall involve two types of inspection .
b .
visual inspection of welds and welding operations .
the engineer shall have unlimited access to the site of welding operations and shall be free to observe the procedure and techniques used by the contractor on all welds .
the program of visual inspection will be adapted to job conditions .
the cost of visual inspection shall be borne by the state .
c. nondestructive testing .
a routine program of nondestructive testing will be carried out on all welds shop and field carrying calculated stress as indicated in table num of this subsection .
all nondestructive testing will be performed by the state except that the contractor shall at his own expense radiograph and furnish the state one set of films of shop butt welds above specified and shall furnish all equipment and an operator at his own expense for the making of magnetic particle tests of shop fillet welds as above specified .
all other costs of nondestructive inspection shall be borne by the state except that the contractor shall furnish all labor and equipment required to move and position the various members for inspection .
no additional compensation shall be granted to the contractor for moving handling rehandling or positioning the members to facilitate testing .
table num nondestructive testing program percentage number quantity type of weld of welds to be tested inspection remarks flange to flange butt num radiographic weldstension flange to flange butt num selected at random by the radiographic if any radiographed joint is rejected weldscompression engineer all compression grooved welds of this member shall be radiographed num .
web to web butt welds onethird of depth closest to radiographic if quality of the portion radiographed tension flange of each weld is unsatisfactory entire weld shall be radiographed .
flange plate to cover num each end of each weld and approved quantity of weld to be inspected shall plate fillet weld other locations to be selected magnetic be increased if quality of initially at random by the engineer particle inspected weld proves unsatisfactory .
see aws d.num .
as amended by circu lar memo .
flange to web fillet welds num each end of each weld and approved quantity of weld to be inspected shall other locations to be selected magnetic be increased if quality of initially at random by the engineer particle inspected weld proves unsatisfactory .
see aws d.num as amended by circu lar memo .
repair of flame cut edge num radiographic radiographing and laboratory report at with greater than num expense of fabricator .
gouge .
num num num machining .
a .
edge planing .
sheared edges of plates more than numinch in thickness and carrying calculated stress shall be planed to a depth of numinch .
reentrant cuts shall be filleted before cutting .
b .
oxygen cutting .
steel and weld metal may be oxygen cut provided a smooth and regular surface free from cracks and notches is secured and provided that an accurate profile is secured by the use of a mechanical guide .
hand cutting shall be done only where approved by the engineer .
mill scale and extraneous material shall be removed from the torch side of anumanum steel plates along the lines to be flame cut when necessary to obviate excessive notches .
all oxygen cutting shall be in accordance with aws d.num except that occasional notches or gouges in edges of anumanum steel shall not be repaired by welding except under the following conditions num .
cutting defects not more than numinch deep in plate edges which will form the faces of a groove weld joint and which will subsequently be completely fused with the weld may be repaired by welding .
nonmetallic stringers or pipes opening to these edges shall be removed to a depth of numinch below the surface by grinding or chipping and the gouge repaired by welding .
laminations opening to these edges shall be removed to a depth of ½inch below the surface by grinding and chipping and the gouge repaired by welding .
num .
cutting defects not more than numinch deep in plate edges which will form a fillet welded corner joint shall be repaired by welding only on the part of the edge which will become the facing surface for the joint and the fusion zone of the fillet weld .
the part of the defect outside the toe of the completed fillet weld shall be removed by machining or grinding and faired with the surface of the cut on a bevel of num to num or less .
num .
all welding for these repairs shall be made by suitably preparing the defect welding with low hydrogen electrodes not exceeding numinch in diameter and grinding the completed weld smooth and flush with the adjacent surface to produce a workmanlike finish .
oxygen cut edges of astm anum steel and ½inch or greater in thicknessnum shall be removed to a depth of at least numinch by machining or grinding except that machine flame cut edges may be used without such removal if the edges are softened after cutting a by heating the cut edge uniformly and progressively to a red heat visible in ordinary shop light num to numof to a depth of at least numinch or b by means of a post heating torch attached to and following the cutting torch with the tips gas pressure speed or travel and the distance of the post heating torch from the kerf regulated to the thickness of the steel .
bend test specimens num½ inches wide and of the full thickness of the material or with thickness reduced to numinch in accordance with para .
num of astm anum and having edges flame cut and flame softened in accordance with this article shall meet the bend test requirements specified in astm anum for the thickness of material under consideration .
oxygen cut surfaces of members carrying calculated stress shall have their corners rounded to numinch radius by grinding after cutting .
num note num astm anum steel not approved for welded construction requires this treatment of oxygen cut edges in all thicknesses and with bend tests as applicable conforming to astm anum for the thickness of material under consideration .
c. facing of bearing surfaces .
the top and bottom surfaces of steel slabs and base plates and cap plates of columns and pedestals shall be straight and true to provide full bearing between contact areas .
sole plates of beams and girders shall have full contact with the flanges .
cast pedestals shall be machined on surfaces to be in contact with steel and shall be rough finished on surfaces to be in contact with masonry .
surfaces of bronze bearing plates intended for sliding contact shall be finished .
the surface of expansion bearings shall be machined in the direction of the major expansion .
the surface finish of bearing and base plates and other bearing surfaces that are to come in contact with each other or with concrete shall meet the ansi surface roughness requirements as defined in ansi bnum surface roughness waviness and lay part i bearing surfaces roughness requirements steel slabs ansi num heavy plates in contact in shoes to be welded ansi num milled ends of compression members milled or ground ends of stiffeners and fillers ansi num bridge rollers and rockers ansi num pins and pin holes ansi num sliding bearings ansi num d. abutting joints .
abutting joints in compression members and girder flanges and in tension members where so specified on the drawings shall be faced and brought to an even bearing .
where joints are not faced the opening shall not exceed numinch .
e. end connection angles .
floor beams stringers and girders having end connection angles shall be built to exact length back to back of connection angles .
if end connections are faced the finished thickness of the angles shall not be less than that shown on the detail drawings .
f. pins and rollers .
pins and rollers shall be accurately turned to the dimensions shown on the drawings and shall be straight smooth and free from flaws .
the final surface shall be produced by a fine finishing cut as specified .
pin holes shall be bored true to the specified diameter smooth and straight at right angles with the axis of the completed member .
the distance outside to outside of holes in tension members and inside to inside of holes in compression members shall not vary from that specified more than numinch .
boring of holes in builtup members shall be done after the riveting and welding is completed .
the diameter of the pin hole shall not exceed that of the pin by more than numinch for pins num inches or less in diameter or numinch for pins of larger size .
threads for all bolts and pins for structural steel construction shall conform to the american national coarse thread series class num free fit except that the pin ends having a diameter of numdinches or more shall be threaded six threads to the inch .
num finished members shall be true to line and free from twists bends and open joints .
shearing and chipping shall be done carefully and accurately .
g. fit of stiffeners .
end stiffeners stiffeners over intermediate supports of girders and stiffener angles intended as supports for concentrated loads shall be milled or ground to secure an even bearing against the flange .
intermediate stiffeners shall fit sufficiently tight to exclude water after being painted .
fillers under stiffeners shall fit within numinch at each end .
h. annealing and stress relieving .
structural members which are indicated in the contract to be annealed or normalized shall have finished machining boring and straightening done subsequent to heat treatment .
normalizing and annealing full annealing shall be as specified in astm enum .
the temperatures shall be maintained uniformly throughout the furnace during the heating and cooling so that the temperature at no two points on the member will differ by more than numof at any one time .
members of aashto mnum astm anum grades numw or grade numw steels shall not be annealed or normalized and shall be stress relieved only with the approval of the engineer .
a record of each furnace charge shall identify the pieces in the charge and show the temperatures and schedule actually used .
proper instruments including recording pyrometers shall be provided for determining at any time the temperatures of members in the furnace .
the records of the treatment operation shall be available to and meet the approval of the engineer .
the holding temperature for stress relieving grades numw and grade numw steels shall not exceed numof and numof respectively .
members such as bridge shoes pedestals or other parts which are built up by the welding sections of plate together shall be stressrelieved in accordance with the procedure of the american welding society section num of the current ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code when required by the plans or specifications .
num marking shipping delivering and handling .
each member shall be painted or marked with an erection mark for identification and an erection diagram showing these marks shall be furnished to the engineer .
the contractor shall furnish to the engineer as many copies of material orders shipping statements and erection diagrams as the engineer may direct .
the weights of the individual members shall be shown on the statements .
members weighing more than num tons shall have the weights marked thereon .
structural members shall be loaded on trucks or cars in such a manner that they may be transported and unloaded at their destination without being excessively stressed deformed or otherwise damaged .
bolts nuts and washers where required from each rotationalcapacity lot shall be shipped in the same container .
if there is only one production lot number for each size of nut and washer the nuts and washers may be shipped in separate containers .
pins small parts and packages of bolts washers and nuts shall be shipped in boxes crates kegs or barrels but the gross weight of any package shall not exceed num pounds .
a list and description of the contained materials shall be plainly marked on the outside of each shipping container .
num the loading and delivery of the structural material shall be conducted so that the metal will be kept clean and free from injury .
girders and beams shall be kept upright and shored .
long members shall be supported on skids spaced to prevent injury from deflection .
num erection .
a .
general .
the contractor shall provide the falsework and all tools machinery and appliances including drift pins and fitting bolts necessary for the expeditious handling of the work .
before starting work the contractor shall inform the engineer fully as to the method of erection he proposes to follow and the amount and character of equipment he proposes to use all of which shall be subject to the approval of the engineer .
the approval of the engineer shall not be considered as relieving the contractor of the responsibility for the safety of his method or equipment or from carrying out the work in full accordance with the plans and these specifica tions .
b .
transportation of materials .
the contractor shall make the necessary arrangements for the unloading and the transporting and bear all charges for such unloading and hauling of the steel from the designated place of delivery to the point of placement .
the contractor shall unload promptly upon delivery any material delivered on railroad cars which he is required to unload and shall be responsible for demurrage charges .
c. storage of materials at site .
material to be stored shall be placed on skids above the ground .
it shall be kept clean and properly drained .
girders and beams shall be placed upright and shored .
long members such as columns and chords shall be supported on skids placed near enough together to prevent injury from deflection .
if the contract is for erection only the contractor shall check the material turned over to him against the shipping lists and report promptly in writing any shortage or injury discovered .
the contractor shall be responsible for the loss of any material while in his care or for any damage caused to it after being received by him .
d. falsework .
the falsework shall be properly designed and substantially constructed and maintained for the loads which will come upon it .
the contractor shall prepare and submit to the engineer for approval plans for falsework or for changes in an existing structure necessary for maintaining traffic .
approval of the contractors plans shall not be considered as relieving the contractor of his primary responsibility for the adequacy of the design .
e. straightening bent material field .
the straightening of plates angles other shapes and builtup members when permitted by the engineer shall be done by methods that will not produce fracture or other injury to the metal .
distorted members shall be straightened by mechanical means or if approved by the engineer by carefully planned procedures and supervised application of a limited amount of localized heat except that heat straightening of aashto mnum astm anum grades numw num and numw steel members shall be done only under rigidly controlled procedures with each application subject to the approval of the engineer .
in no case shall the maximum temperature exceed values in the following table .
grade max .
temp .
grade numw num from weld numof grade numw num from weld numof grade num or numw num from weld numof grade num or numw num from weld numof num in all other steels the temperature of the heated area shall not exceed numof as controlled by temperature indicating crayons liquids or bimetal thermometers .
heating in excess of the limits shown shall be cause for rejection unless the engineer allows testing to verify material integrity .
parts to be heat straightened shall be substantially free of stress and from external forces except stresses resulting from mechanical means used in conjunction with the application of heat .
evidence of fracture following straightening of a bend or buckle will be cause for rejection of the damaged piece .
f. assembling steel .
the parts shall be accurately assembled as shown on the plans and any matchmarks shall be followed .
the materials shall be carefully handled so that no parts will be bent broken or otherwise damaged .
hammering which will injure or distort the members shall not be done .
bearing surfaces and surfaces to be in permanent contact shall be cleaned before the members are assembled .
splices and field connections shall have onehalf of the holes filled with bolts and cylindrical pins half bolts and half pins before riveting .
fittingup bolts shall be of the same nominal diameter as the rivets and cylindrical erection pins shall be numinch larger .
g. bolted connections .
surfaces of metal in contact shall be cleaned before assembling .
the parts of a member shall be assembled well pinned and firmly drawn together before drilling reaming or bolting is commenced .
assembled pieces shall be taken apart if necessary for the removal of burrs and shavings produced by the operation .
the member shall be free from twists bends and other deformation .
the drifting done during assembling shall be only such as to bring the parts into position and not sufficient to enlarge the holes or distort the metal .
for highstrength bolted connections see subsection num of this section .
h. field welding .
when field welding is specified it shall be performed by the electric arc process and shall conform to the same requirements as noted under subsection num with the following modifications unless approved by the engineer welding shall not be undertaken when the ambient temperature is lower than numof when surfaces are wet or exposed to rain snow or high wind nor when the welders would be exposed to inclement conditions .
i. misfits .
the correction of minor misfits involving nonharmful amounts of reaming cutting and chipping will be considered a legitimate part of the erection .
however any error in the shop fabrication or deformation resulting from handling and transportation which prevents the proper assembling and fitting up of parts by the moderate use of drift pins or by a moderate amount of reaming and slight chipping or cutting shall be reported immediately to the inspector and his approval of the method of correction obtained .
the correction shall be made in his presence .
the contractor shall be responsible for all misfits errors and injuries and shall make all the necessary corrections and replacements .
num j .
removal of falsework .
upon completion of the erection and before final acceptance the contractor shall remove all falsework excavated or useless materials rubbish and temporary buildings and restore in an acceptable manner all property both public and private which may have been damaged during the prosecution of this work and shall leave the bridge site and adjacent highway in a neat and presentable condition satisfactory to the engineer .
num surface preparation for weathering steel .
a .
cleaning after fabrication .
after completion of fabrication operations all steel surfaces shall be blast cleaned in accordance with the requirements of steel structures painting council surface preparation specification no .
num commercial blast cleaning sspcsp num .
particular attention shall be given to all exposed surfaces including the outside face and bottom side of fascia girders and all exposed fascia welds .
b .
handling .
all cleaned steel is to be handled carefully to keep it clean .
the steel is to be treated with the care and concern that is required for any finished architectural product .
exposed steel shall be kept free and clean of all foreign material such as grease oil concrete spatter chalk marks crayon marks dirt etc .
natural oxidation of the steel shall not be considered foreign matter .
c. final cleaning .
after the deck is in place and all formwork has been removed the steel surfaces shall be inspected for stains discoloration and any other deleterious materials which may affect the weathering of the steel in a uniform manner .
all steel surfaces in particular exposed steel surfaces as described above shall be returned to the sp num commercial blast cleaned finish .
the contractor shall use whatever steel structures painting council surface cleaning methods are necessary and appropriate to accomplish that goal .
once the final cleaning is accomplished no further use of the structural steel for attachment or support will be allowed .
num shear connectors .
a. welding .
stud shear connectors shall be endwelded to steel beams or girders on axes parallel to the transverse reinforcement with automatically timed stud welding equipment connected to a suitable power source .
if two or more stud welding guns are to be operated from the same power source they shall be interlocked so that only one gun can operate at a time and so that the power source has fully recovered from making one weld before another weld is started .
at the time of welding the studs and beams shall be free from moisture rust rust pits scale oil or other deleterious matter which would adversely affect the welding operation .
welding shall not be done when the ambient temperature is below numof or when the surface is wet or exposed to rain or snow .
while in operation the welding gun shall be held in position without movement until the weld metal has solidified .
longitudinal and lateral spacings of studs with respect to each other and to edges of beam or girder flanges shall not vary more than onehalf inch from the dimensions shown on the plans except that a diagonal variation of num inch will be permitted where required to avoid obstruction num with other attachments on the beam or where a new stud is being welded to replace a defective one .
the minimum distance from the edge of a stud to the edge of a beam shall be num inch but preferably not less than num½inches .
the first two studs welded on each beam or girder after being allowed to cool shall be bent numo by striking the stud with a hammer .
if failure occurs in the weld of either stud the procedure shall be corrected and two successive studs successfully welded and tested before any more studs are welded to the beam or girder .
the engineer shall be promptly informed of any changes in the welding procedure at any time during construction .
if the reduction in the height of studs as they are welded becomes less than normal welding shall be stopped immediately and not resumed until the cause has been corrected .
before welding a new stud where a defective one has been removed the area shall be ground smooth and flush or in the case of a pullout of metal the pocket shall be filled with weld metal using the shielded metalarc process with lowhydrogen welding electrodes and then ground flush .
in compression areas of flanges a new stud may be welded adjacent to the defective area in lieu of repair and replacement on the existing weld area .
b .
inspection .
if visual inspection reveals any stud which does not show a full num degree weld any stud which has been repaired by welding or any stud in which the reduction in height due to welding is less than normal such stud shall be struck with a hammer and bent num degrees off the vertical .
for studs showing less than numdegree weld the direction of bending shall be opposite to the lack of weld .
studs that crack either in the weld or the shank shall be replaced .
the engineer may select additional studs to be subjected to the bend test specified above .
the studs tested that show no sign of failure may be left in the bent position .
if during the progress of the work inspection and testing indicate in the judgment of the engineer that the shear connectors being obtained are not satisfactory the contractor will be required at his expense to make such changes in welding procedure welding equipment and type of shear connector as necessary to secure satisfactory results .
at the option of the engineer the manufacturer of the studs may be required at any time to submit requalification test data in accordance with the procedure as set forth in aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
num method of measurement .
num general .
structural steel of the various types and configurations described in this section will be measured by the number of pounds of each such type and configuration actually provided in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
for the purpose of measurement such items as castings forgings wrought iron special alloy steels weld metal and special shapes for expansion joints shear connectors drainage fixtures or railing shall unless otherwise covered by special provisions be considered as structural steel even when made of other materials .
num num unit weights .
the weight of metal shall be computed on the basis of the following unit weights expressed in pounds per cubic foot metal unit weights aluminum cast or rolled num bronze or copper alloy num copper sheet num iron cast num iron wrought num iron malleable num lead sheet num steel cast or rolled including alloys copper bearing and stainless num zinc num a .
estimated overrun .
the weights of steel shapes and plates shall be computed on the basis of their nominal weights and dimensions as shown on the approved shop drawings and after deducting for open holes .
to the nominal theoretical weight of all universal mill and sheared plates and slabs there shall be added an estimated overrun computed as onehalf the permissible variation in thickness and weight as tabulated in astm anum .
b .
high strength bolts .
the weight of high strength bolt heads and nuts shall be included on the basis of the following weights diameter of bolt weight per num bolts in inches in pounds ½ num num num num num num num num num numc num num¼ num numd num num½ num c. weld metal .
the weight of weld metal to the net length called for on the drawings shall be included based on the following table num size of fillet weight in pounds in inches per foot of weld num .num num .num num .num num .num ½ .num num .num num num num num num num if the contract does not include erection by the fabricator field welds shall not be included .
the weight of temporary erection bolts shop and field paint galvanizing and material used for shipping and erection shall not be included .
d. castings .
the weight of castings shall be computed from the dimensions shown on the approved shop drawings deducting for open holes .
to the weight will be added a num percent allowance for fillets and overrun .
scale weights may be substituted for computed weights in the case of castings or of small complex parts for which accurate computation of weights would be difficult .
num surface preparation for weathering steel .
this work will not be measured separately for payment .
num shear connectors .
welded stud shear connectors will be measured by the number of each such piece actually welded to steel flanges in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
num structural steel furnish fabricate and erect .
the accepted quantity of structural steel furnish fabricate and erect will be paid for at the contract unit price per pound as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including fabricating delivering erecting shop and field painting unless specified otherwise and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num structural steel furnish and fabricate .
the accepted quantity of structural steel furnish and fabricate will be paid for at the contract unit price per pound as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including fabricating delivering and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num structural steel erect .
the accepted quantity of structural steel erect will be paid for at the contract unit price per pound as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including num erection and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num surface preparation for weathering steel .
no separate payment will be made for this work .
rather payment will be included with the payment and at the contract unit price per pound as listed in the proposal for structural steel weathering .
num shear connectors .
the accepted quantity of welded stud shear connectors will be paid for at the contract unit price as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
section num painting structural steel num description .
this work consists of painting or repainting structural steel its components or other steel materials .
the work includes the elements of cleaning surface preparation the selection of an appropriate paint system and the actual painting all of which are subsequently defined herein .
painting work shall be performed at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num toxic caveat .
the contractor is hereby notified that existing paint systems on the states bridges may contain toxic substances such as lead or chromium and that these substances are considered to be hazardous to personnel the environment and the public approximate to the project .
num personnel and environmental protection .
the provision for protection of personnel the environment and the public covers the requirements for removal and containment of paint andor corrosion products from any steel bridge or otherwise specified appurtenances during cleaning and painting operations .
requirements to assure that the public the environment the contractors and the states personnel are adequately protected and equipped from the harmful effects of lead blast media dust and fumes resulting from the contractors operations are set forth in section num of these specifications and in the special provisions of the contract documents .
num certifications .
all painting contractors painting subcontractors or other individuals engaged in work covered by this specification shall be duly certified under the steel structures painting councils painting contractor certification program .
the contractorsubcontractor shall be certified to sspcqpi standard procedure for evaluating qualifications of painting contractors .
the contractor shall provide hard copy proof of such certification and the current status of said certification to the engineer prior to the initiation of any work related to this item .
num definitions .
a .
cleaning .
cleaning under this section shall be defined as adequate treatment of steel surfaces so that they can be properly prepared and subsequently painted .
num b .
surface preparation .
surface preparation under this section shall be defined as the preparation of steel surfaces by scraping grinding or abrasive blast methods so as to prepare the surfaces to properly receive the specified paintcoating system .
c. paint systems .
a paint system consists of a specific combination of primer intermediate and top coatings each of which shall conform to a set of minimum acceptance criteria .
d. painting .
painting under this section shall be defined as the shop application in the case of new steel and field application in the case of existing steel of the prime coat of the specified paintcoating system .
also the definition includes the field application of any intermediate andor finish coats whether new or existing steel of the specified paintcoating system .
also included is the touch up and repair of the primer which may have been damaged during shipping handling or erection .
num materials .
paint materials shall conform to both the applicable provisions of section m.num paint of these specifications to the special provisions included in the contract documents and any manufacturers recommendations contained herein .
in case of conflict manufacturers recommendations shall govern .
all materials shall meet the requirements for the system specified .
num paint manufacturers .
the materials for all coatings shall be furnished from the same paint producer andor manufacturer to insure compatibility of components and coats .
num containers .
all paint components shall be supplied in new strong airtight containers .
the containers shall be clearly marked with the manufacturers name and address quantity in each container date of manufacture lot or batch number color where appropriate and other such pertinent information that will permit ready identification of the paint or its component materials .
num engineers access .
the engineer shall have free access afforded himher for sampling of the components of the paint system and for the weighing of component materials going into the paint mixture prior to application of the paint .
samples of paint components may be subject to chemical analysis and if found to be of unsatisfactory quality shall be cause for rejection of the materials they represent .
samples of paint components for acceptance shall be furnished from the paint manufacturer or supplier for laboratory testing and to establish quality standards for comparison evaluation of subsequent onsite field samples .
num literature .
product data sheets pds shall be supplied in accordance with subsection m.num of these specifications .
num color .
the top coat shall be green semigloss to match federal standard num color num unless specifically noted otherwise on the plans or elsewhere in the special provisions .
primers and intermediate coats are not required to have specific colors provided they contrast with each other and the top coat .
num num epa compliance .
all materials utilized under this specification shall be in compliance with the latest volatile organic compound voc emission requirements of the environmental protection agencys clean air act of num or any revision thereto .
num paint systems .
approved paint systems are set forth in special provision code num .
the contractor may select a paint system for the work of this contract from those contained in code num provided that each component of such system conforms to the minimum criteria stated therein .
num construction methods .
num new steel structures .
work under this paragraph shall include only those structures being built new or structures whose superstructure is being replaced in its entirety .
new steel utilized in partial replacement or rehabilitation shall be addressed in the special provisions found in the contract documents .
a .
cleaning .
where oil andor grease are present they shall be removed by solvent cleaning methods as described in the steel structures painting council surface preparation specification no .
num solvent cleaning sspcspnum .
this cleaning shall be performed prior to blast cleaning .
if contamination remains after blast cleaning the surfaces shall be recleaned with the sspcspnum procedures .
b .
surface preparation .
surface preparation shall be in accordance with the steel structures painting council specifications and any additional requirements contained in the special provisions found in the contract documents .
all steel shall be blast cleaned to a near white condition using the cleaning methods described in the steel structures painting council surface preparation specification no .
num near white blast cleaning sspcspnum .
the surface area of the steel to be blast cleaned shall be no greater than the surface area of steel that can be prime coated in the same day .
the maximum time lapse between surface preparation and application of the prime coat shall not be greater than num hours .
should any rust back occur prior to the application of the prime coat the surfaces shall be recleaned to the near white condition .
the blast cleaning shall leave a num to num mil deep anchor profile in a dense uniform pattern of depressions and ridges .
flame cut edges shall be ground before or after blast cleaning to assist in attaining the required anchor profile .
all fins tears slivers and burred or sharp edges present before or after blast cleaning shall be removed by grinding or reblasting to attain the required anchor profile .
all reamed or drilled holes in the steel shall have their edges cleaned and softened by grinding prior to blast cleaning .
the near white blast condition may be determined andor verified by the use of a nace no .
num visual standard t.m.num when shot blast is used or sspc pictorial standard guide visnum if sand or grit is used .
the surface profile depth shall be measured andor verified by the use of an elcometer surface profile gauge or equal or testex replica tape .
compressed air supply lines shall be equipped with oil traps and moisture separators .
the traps and separators shall be cleaned andor changed on a regular basis .
num all abrasive and deleterious material residues shall be removed from steel surfaces with a commercial grade vacuum cleaner equipped with a brush type cleaning tool or by double blowing with clean compressed air .
air cleaning shall be followed up by vacuum cleaning of the top surfaces of all flanges stiffeners splice plates hangers etc .
the steel shall then be kept dust free until the coating is applied .
care shall be taken to protect freshly coated surfaces from subsequent blast cleaning operations .
previously primed surfaces damaged by subsequent blasting operations shall be returned to the near white condition by reblasting or wire brush cleaning .
the surfaces shall then be vacuumed and reprimed .
the contractorfabricator shall provide access to any location where cleaning and painting may be in progress for servicemen manufacturers representatives department representatives or other duly authorized persons .
the engineers approval of the preparation of all surfaces to be painted is required before any paint is applied .
c. painting .
num .
mixing .
the coatings shall be mixed in their original containers .
all paints shall be mixed with a high shear mixer to a smooth lump free consistency .
paddle mixers or paint shakers shall not be used .
the mixing shall continue until all of the metallic powders or pigments are in suspension taking care that all solids that may have settled to the bottom of the container are thoroughly dispersed .
all paints shall be strained through a num mesh screen to remove large particles .
paint containers for spray applications shall be equipped with a mechanical agitator so the mixture is in motion throughout the application period .
in general coatings are supplied for use without thinning .
thinning will only be allowed for application of mist coats or for special circumstances .
any thinning that is deemed necessary shall be done in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and only with prior approval of the engineer .
num .
conditions for painting .
paint shall be applied on clean and dry surfaces only .
paint for the prime intermediate and top coats shall not be applied when the temperature of the air paint or steel is below numof or when the temperature is expected to fall below numof before the paint is cured .
the paint for all coatings shall not be applied when the wind velocity is in excess of num mph when the air is misty or when in the opinion of the engineer conditions are unsatisfactory for the work .
paint shall not be applied onto damp or frost covered surfaces or when the metal is hot enough to cause the paint to blister become porous or cause the vehicle to separate from the pigment .
paint shall not be applied when the steel surface temperature is lower than numof above the dew point .
the dew point shall be determined by the use of a psychrometer wet bulb thermometer and appropriate tables .
the coating shall not be applied when the relative humidity is greater than num percent nor when a combination of temperature and humidity conditions are such that moisture condenses on the surfaces to be coated .
daily logs of air and surface temperatures dew point and relative humidity in the shop paint booth external painting area or field shall be maintained .
before application of the primer touch up intermediate or finish coat in the field all zinc salts oil dust dirt and other contaminants shall be removed from the steel or previously painted num surfaces to be painted .
primed surfaces shall be cleaned by a high pressure water washing num psi min .. num .
paint application .
the coating system shall be capable of application by brush roller or spray airless or conventional methods .
the method of application of each particular coat shall be the method most highly recommended by the coating manufacturer .
the prime coat shall be applied immediately after inspection and acceptance of the surface .
the primer shall be applied the same day the metal is cleaned within num hours .
if the surfaces remain unpainted overnight they shall be reblasted again prior to priming .
succeeding coats shall not be applied until each coat is approved by the engineer .
the minimum time between coats shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
depending on site conditions additional time may be needed between coats to assure proper curing .
it is the applicators responsibility to determine if the coating has cured sufficiently for proper application of succeeding coats .
should the maximum time interval between coats be exceeded surface preparation requirements shall be in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
prior to application of the full prime coat a prime coating striping shall be applied to all edges of plates shapes corners crevices welds rivet heads and exposed parts of bolts .
the full prime coat shall not be applied until the striping has set to the touch .
the coating of paint shall be smoothly and uniformly spread so that every part of the surface will be covered with at least the minimum specified thickness and so that no excess paint will collect at any point .
a dense and uniform appearance is required after each coating has cured .
if the paint coating is too thin or if portions of the surface are not completely coated such portions of the work shall be repainted .
if the application of the coating at the required thickness in one coat produces runs bubbles or sags the coating shall be applied in multiple passes of the spray gun .
where excessive coating thickness produces surface defects such as mud cracking such coating shall be removed back to soundly bonded coating and the area recoated to the required thickness .
in areas of deficient primer thickness the areas shall be thoroughly cleaned with power washing equipment as necessary to remove all dirt .
the areas shall then be wire brushed vacuumed and recoated .
all dry spray shall be removed by sanding if necessary prior to the application of the succeeding coat .
surfaces of steel which will be in contact or embedded in concrete andor contact surfaces at field bolted connections shall be given a prime coat of paint only .
these surfaces shall be masked during subsequent coating operations when applicable .
surfaces within two inches of field welds except for stud shear connectors shall not be painted but receive a light coat of rust prohibitive coating and be masked during coating operations .
all bolted shop connections shall be removed prior to the blasting and coating of girders and beams .
the parts shall be blasted and coated separately and then reassembled .
all bolts nuts and washers used in final field splices and connections shall be field blasted once the splice is complete to sspcspnum condition and primed in the same manner as all other structural steel components .
num the coatings shall be applied using brushes rollers spray equipment or any combination of equipment that will attain satisfactory results and the film thickness specified .
num .
spray painting .
spray nozzles and pressures shall be in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
when painting operations are interrupted paint remaining in the hose shall be expelled from the hose .
spray equipment which is used for application of paints shall be thoroughly cleaned at the end of each workday .
compressed air lines shall be provided with oil traps and moisture separators .
the traps and separators shall be changed on a regular basis .
compressed air shall be in accordance with the blotter test as described in astm dnum .
num .
brush painting .
brushes shall preferably be round or oval in shape but if flat brushes are used they shall not exceed num inches in width .
all brushes shall have sufficient body and length of bristle to spread the paint in a uniform coat .
the paint shall be manipulated under the brush to produce a uniform even coat in contact with the metal or with previously applied paint and shall be worked into all corners and crevices .
in general the primary movement of the brush shall describe small circles to fill the irregularities in the surfaces after which the coating shall be brushed out and smoothed by a series of parallel strokes until the paint film has an even thickness .
num .
roller painting .
rollers when used shall be of the type that do not leave a stippled texture in the paint film .
rollers may be used only on flat even surfaces .
the rollers shall be manipulated in a manner to produce a paint film of even thickness with no skips runs sags or thin areas .
the roller operation should be followed closely by a bristle brush to level off any air bubbles .
num .
film thickness .
the coatings shall be applied so as to attain the film thicknesses specified by the manufacturer .
surfaces to be coated with primer include the faying contact surfaces of bolted field splices .
the dry film thickness of the primer coat on the faying surfaces of main members and splice plates and on the top of top flanges where stud shear connectors are to be welded shall be num to num mils maximum .
the dry film thickness of all other areas of steel to be primed shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the dry film thickness of the prime coat to bolts nuts and washers shall be between num and num mils maximum .
the dry film thickness of the intermediate and top coats shall be strictly in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer .
for spray applications the manufacturers recommendations for build up of the coating shall be followed implicitly .
the dry film thickness for each coat will be determined by the use of a magnetic dry film thickness gauge .
the gauge shall be calibrated and used in accordance with sspcpanum .
measurement of the dry film thickness of the prime coat shall take into account the surface profile of the steel surfaces as measured in accordance with astm dnum method c. correction of the dry film thickness shall be accomplished by subtracting the dry film thickness to the imaginary plane of profile from the surface profile measurement .
num a tooke film thickness gauge shall be used in accordance with astm dnum to verify the coating thickness when requested by the engineer .
if the tooke gauge shows that the prime coat is not within the specified thickness range the coat will be rejected and appropriate corrective measures shall be taken to assure an adequate coating thickness .
in addition to any equipment recommended by the coating manufacturer the contractor shall provide for the exclusive use of the engineer the following supplemental equipment to permit the inspection of the coating system .
the equipment must be in good and acceptable working condition and be properly calibrated as necessary .
the equipment shall remain the property of the contractor after the work is accepted .
equipment nace visual standards sspc publications vol .
num and num and visual guide wet and dry film thickness gauges tooke and magnetic gauge surface temperature thermometer psychrometer battery operated for dew point testex adhesion tape or elcometer adhesion tester elcometer surface profile gauge nbs calibration standards and plastic shims filter masks or respirators as recommended by the coating manufacturer paint inspection mirror miscellaneous equipment as necessary .
num .
stenciling .
the following information will be stenciled on the inside web of both fascia beams at both ends of the bridge the structure number for example br .
num the month and year of completion paint system identification for example zincepoxyurethane .
num .
sampling .
sampling of paint shall be in accordance with the requirements specified in the department of transportation master schedule for sampling testing and certification of materials or as directed by the engineer .
the markings shall provide uniform numinch high c series letters andor numerals with the paint being the same as the finish coat except that the color shall contrast i.e .
light on dark or dark on light .
the markings shall be located not less than num inches above the bottom flange and not more than three feet from the centers of bearing .
num d. unsatisfactory performance .
the paint performance shall be considered unsatisfactory if rusting occurs the paint lifts blisters wrinkles has excessive runs or sags or shows evidence of application under unfavorable conditions the workmanship is poor impure or unauthorized paint has been used or any other obvious reasons as noted by the engineer .
the unsatisfactory paint shall be removed the metal recleaned and repainted as specified above .
e. handling storage and erection .
the paint shall be allowed to cure before loading and shipping of the steel .
extreme care shall be exercised in handling the steel in the shop during shipping erection storage and subsequent construction operations .
the steel shall be insulated from binding chains by softening devices approved by the engineer .
hooks and slings used to hoist steel shall be padded .
diaphragms and similar pieces shall be separated during shipping so as to prevent damage to the coatings .
the steel shall be stored at the job site in such a manner that it does not rest on dirt that water does not accumulate on pieces and that the members do not fall or rest on each other .
temporary supports or attachments for scaffolding or forms shall not damage the coating system .
in particular sufficient support pads shall be utilized for bracing on fascias .
unpainted surfaces and field welded areas shall be cleaned when the work is completed in accordance with the above requirements and the complete coating system applied expeditiously .
damaged and contaminated coatings shall be repaired as directed by the engineer and the steel recleaned and recoated as specified above .
scaffolding or other satisfactory means of access shall be erected by the contractor for the engineer for the purpose of inspecting the completed work .
rubber rollers or other protective devices shall be utilized to prevent damage to the finished coatings .
f. technical supervision .
the resource of the paint manufacturers representative will be required for shop and field applications .
this representative shall be present to give the contractor such aid and instructions in the application of the paint system as is required to obtain a satisfactory result that meets the approval of all parties .
as a minimum the services of this representative will be required at the start up of all shop and field operations .
in addition the services may be required on an as needed basis until painting is satisfactorily completed .
the contractorfabricator is responsible for securing the services of the technical representative .
num existing steel .
work under this paragraph shall include all steel not included under subsection num new steel structures .
in particular this work includes new steel that is utilized in bridge rehabilitation existing steel that is repaired repainting of existing steel maintenance painting and any other miscellaneous painting not covered as noted above .
a .
cleaning surface preparation and painting .
except as noted in these specifi cations cleaning surface preparation and painting shall be performed in accordance with the special provisions included with the contract documents .
num .
cleaning .
cleaning is performed to prepare the steel surfaces for the surface preparation work and the subsequent painting of the steel surfaces .
prior to any surface preparation being performed the contractor shall at a minimum clean the tops of girder bottom num flanges by scraping them with a garden hoe or other appropriate device to remove all accumulated dirt dung and debris .
other required cleaning shall be performed in accordance with the special provisions .
num .
surface preparation .
surface preparation as required by the special provisions shall be performed in accordance with the steel structures painting council standard specifications for surface preparation .
the level of surface preparation shall be as noted in the special provisions .
blast cleaning where specified shall be performed by the abrasive blast cleaning method only and shall be performed with shot grit or dry sand .
all blast cleaning materials used shall pass through a standard nummesh screen .
metallic abrasives shall have a rockwell hardness coefficient ranging from num rc to num rc and the work mix shall be capable of producing a num to num mil surface profile .
nonmetallic abrasives shall have a mohr hardness scale number ranging from num to num shall be angular shaped and shall preferably provide a lowmedium degree of dusting .
nonmetallic abrasives shall also be capable of producing a num to num mil surface profile .
surface preparation operations shall be performed in such a manner that no damage is done to partially or entirely completed portions of the work .
following the cleaning operation it is required that all blast abrasives and cleaning and paint residue shall be removed with a commercial vacuum cleaner or by doubleblowing with clean compressed air followed by vacuuming of horizontal surfaces .
all areas in which bare metal is exposed shall be covered with the prime coat within num hours after cleaning .
if any rust forms after the final cleaning is approved the surfaces shall be recleaned to the condition previously approved by whichever of the above methods is appropriate .
no paint shall be applied to any surface until the engineer or his representative has approved the cleanliness of the surfaces to be painted .
num .
painting .
unless otherwise noted in the special provisions included in the contract documents the painting of existing steel shall be performed in accordance with the applicable requirements of para .
c of subsection num of these specifications .
num method of measurement .
num painting structural steel .
painting structural steel i.e .
new steel will be measured by the number of square feet of steel actually painted in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
cleaning surface preparation and paint systems shall be considered as incidental to the painting work and therefore shall not be measured separately .
num painting existing structural steel .
painting existing structural steel will be measured by the number of square feet of steel actually painted in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
a .
surface preparation .
surface preparation will be measured by the number of square feet of steel surface actually prepared in accordance with the plans andor as directed by num the engineer .
separate levels of surface preparation necessary to accomplish the final specified surface preparation shall not be measured separately for payment but shall be considered included in the single square foot measurement .
num lump sum alternative .
in certain cases any or all of the above items of work may be paid on a lump sum basis .
in such cases no measurement will be required .
num personnel and environmental protection .
personnel and environmental protection shall be measured in accordance with the appropriate paragraphs in section num of these specifications .
num basis of payment .
num painting structural steel .
the accepted quantity of painting structural steel will be paid for at either the contract unit price per square foot or the contract lump sum price as the case may be as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including cleaning surface preparation selection of paint system painting and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num painting existing structural steel .
the accepted quantity of painting existing structural steel will be paid for at either the contract unit price per square foot or the contract lump sum price as the case may be as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials equipment selection of paint system and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
a .
surface preparation .
the accepted quantity of surface preparation will be paid for at either the contract unit price per square foot or the contract lump sum price as the case may be for the final level of surface preparation as listed in the proposal .
separate levels of surface preparation necessary to accomplish the final specified surface preparation shall not be paid for separately but shall be considered included in the single square foot or lump sum for payment .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials equipment and other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num personnel and environmental protection num description .
this work consists of providing protection for both persons and the environment during the blast cleaning of existing structural steel prior to the repainting of said steel all in accordance with these specifications .
specifically this provision covers the requirements for removal and containment of paint andor corrosion products from any steel bridge or specified appurtenances during blast cleaning operations .
also covered by this specification are the requirements to assure that both contractor and department employees are adequately equipped and protected from the harmful effects of lead blast media dust and fumes from the blasting operations .
num this provision is associated with and applies to section num painting structural steel of these specifications .
num toxic caveat .
the contractor is hereby notified that existing paint systems on the states bridges may contain toxic substances such as lead or chromium and that these substances may be considered hazardous wastes when removed .
num legal responsibilities .
the contractor is directed to section num legal relations and responsibility to the public of these specifications .
this section requires the contractor to assume responsible charge of the worksite and to conform with all federal state and municipal laws relating to the work .
by definition the department is the generator of the waste and is therefore directly responsible for complying with the applicable laws and regulations .
the contractor shall be liable to the department for any fines penalties or remediation costs incurred by the department as a result of the contractors failure to comply with either the applicable laws and regulations or these specifications .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction methods .
num general .
the contractor shall be responsible for providing adequate protection for pedestrian vehicular and other traffic upon and underneath structures in accordance with both section num of these specifications and any additional provisions of this section .
provisions for protection shall provide for a barrier that protects vehicles vessels or pedestrians from direct or indirect exposure to the blasting operations and prevents abrasive materials or debris from falling onto traveled portions of the roadway into waterways or any other place where a traffic hazard may be created .
whenever the intended purpose of the protective devices is not being accomplished work shall be suspended until corrections are made .
any and all portions of the structure and its appurtenances that could be damaged by the blast cleaning operations shall be protected by covering or shielding .
num containment .
total containment of all debris or spent materials is required during the blast cleaning operations or subsequent air blowing or vacuuming of the work area .
a .
containment collection storage and disposal of debris and spent materials shall be performed in accordance with the special provisions contained in the contract documents .
additionally all containment collection storage and disposal of debris and spent materials resulting from the cleaning operations shall comply with the latest rules regulations requirements standards andor procedures of the following agencies which shall include but not necessarily be limited to the following num .
the environmental protection agency num cfr part num lead requirements for lead based paint activities .
num num .
rhode island department of environmental management division of air and hazardous materials a air pollution control regulation no .
num fugitive dust .
b air pollution control regulation no .
num removal of lead based paint from exterior surfaces .
c rules and regulations for hazardous waste generation transportation treatment storage and disposal .
d rules and regulations for solid waste management facilities .
num personnel protection .
a. painting and cleaning operations .
during painting and cleaning operations the contractor must assure that the workers engaged in the removal of lead based paints and blast cleaning operations both those of the contractor and the state are adequately trained protected equipped and monitored against the harmful effects of lead and blast media during all phases of the painting operations .
personnel protection and all of its related activities and requirements shall be performed in accordance with the special provisions contained in the contract documents .
additionally all monitoring respiratory protection protective clothing housekeeping and hygiene medical surveillance medical protection training signs and record keeping shall comply with the latest rules regulations requirements standards andor procedures of the following agencies which shall include but not necessarily be limited to the following num .
the occupational safety and health administration num cfr part num as well as and more specifically part num as well as and more specifically part num .num osha standard for lead in the construction industry with appendices a substance data sheet for occupational exposure to lead bemployee standard summary cmedical surveillance guidelines and dqualitative and quantitative fit test protocols .
num .
rhode island department of health environmental lead program rules and regulations for lead poisoning prevention as applicable .
the above documents should be available as applicable through the local offices of the u.s. department of labor occupational safety and health administration .
the location of these offices is indicated in special provision code num of the contract .
the contractor shall be responsible for providing the necessary testing equipment protective clothing and facilities as required by the above documents .
num method of measurement .
containment collection storage and disposal of debris and spent materials will not be measured separately for payment .
personnel protection during painting and cleaning operations will not be measured separately for payment .
num num basis of payment .
containment collection storage and disposal of debris and spent materials will be paid for at the contract lump sum price as listed in the proposal .
the price so stated shall constitute full and complete compensation for all materials labor equipment collection and containment equipment storage requirements engineering sampling testing disposal fees and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
personnel protection during painting and cleaning operations will be paid for at the contract lump sum price listed in the proposal .
the price so stated shall constitute full and complete compensation for all materials labor equipment monitoring devices changing and shower facilities professional hygienist medical facilities and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num thermal sprayed zinc coating for new structural steel num description .
this work consists of thoroughly cleaning preparing surfaces and applying an application of thermal sprayed zinc coating to the surfaces of new structural steel and its components at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed be the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
materials shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection m.num metalizing of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num surface preparation .
a .
blast equipment .
blast equipment shall be conventional air type .
under no circumstances is any type of water or vapor blast to be utilized .
the air supplied for blasting will have sufficient pressure at the nozzle to achieve the desired profile and shall be clean and free of oil and moisture .
surfaces prepared for metal spraying shall also be kept free from oil and moisture until zinc coating has been applied .
b .
blast cleaning .
the blasting operation shall be performed in a block or sectional method and must be continued until all foreign matter and scale on the original surface has been removed and until the cleaned metal surface is bright and completely abraded by the abrasive .
all steel surfaces shall be cleaned to a white metal condition using the methods described in the steel structures painting council surface preparation specification no .
num white metal blast cleaning sspcspnum .
the steel surface temperature must be a minimum of numoc numof above the dew point .
abrasive used shall be as specified above .
the blast cleaning shall leave a num to num mil deep profile in a dense uniform pattern of depressions and ridges .
surface profile num depth shall be measured andor verified by the use of an elcometer surface profile gauge or equal or testex replica tape .
all blasting debris shall be contained collected stored and disposed of in accordance with the latest environmental regulations in effect .
blow down brush andor vacuum the surface of the steel to remove all visible abrasive and dust from the surfaces to be thermal spayed .
erection marks for the field identification of members and weight marks shall be transferred or preserved .
any grease pencil marking shall be removed by solvent wiping .
the engineers approval of the preparation of all surfaces is required before any thermal sprayed zinc is applied .
num thermal spraying zinc .
a .
thermal spray equipment .
thermal spray guns manufactured by an established domestic company of the gas or arc type are acceptable and recommended .
the equipment shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
b .
thermal spraying .
all surfaces shall have been prepared in accordance with the requirements set forth above in subsection num .
no surface shall be sprayed which shows any sign of rust scale moisture or foreign matter .
at least one single layer of the coating must be applied within a maximum of num hours of the blasting .
the sprayed metal shall overlap on each pass in a cross hatch block pattern not to exceed num feet square to insure uniform coverage .
the specified thickness of the coating shall be applied in multiple layers and in no case less than two passes of the spraying shall be made over every part of the surface .
coating operations shall be performed in a neat and workmanlike manner producing a uniform even coating which is bonded firmly with the steel .
the coating shall be free from uncoated spots lumps or blisters and shall have a uniform sprayed fine texture finish .
the dry coating thickness shall be num mils num mil .
the coating thickness shall be measured using the methods described in the steel structures painting council paint application specification no .
num measurement of dry paint thickness with magnetic gauges sspc panum .
all steel coated with impure unsatisfactory or unapproved coating material or coated in an unworkmanlike manner shall be removed and recoated or otherwise corrected as directed by the engineer .
areas not meeting the coating thickness requirements above shall be resprayed to the specified thickness after appropriate surface preparation .
c. field repair .
all field repair shall be made in strict accordance with the material suppliers recommendations these specifications and shall be approved by the engineer .
num subsequent coatings .
any top coating over the zinc required by the contract shall be compatible with the zinc and be applied in accordance with the appropriate specifications .
num num approval requirements .
a .
samples .
the contractor must submit at least num days prior to zinc metalizing application a steel plate approximately num x num to which zinc coating has been deposited to the specified thickness as checked with a fixed probe gauge for acceptance by the engineer as to grain size and texture of the sprayed metal .
such plate will be used to determine the acceptance of the finished job .
these plates shall be prepared by the same profiling process and have the same surface profile as the steel surface to be thermally sprayed .
in the event the contractors production coating is inferior to the sample he shall be required to correct the coating by an acceptable repair method and do a job comparable to the specimen submitted .
b. qualificationcertifications .
the contractor is responsible for providing certification for each journeyman applicator to the inspector prior to production assignment .
the inspector shall review the certification provided by the contractor .
if in the course of the work a certified journeyman applicators work is not considered satisfactory the contractor may be requested to recertify or replace that particular journeyman applicator .
if recertification is required it shall be accomplished by the following procedure under the direction of the inspector .
recertification shall be conducted in a suitable location removed from the area of ongoing work operations .
the qualifying test for recertification shall consist of the journeyman applying the coating system to the test panel in accordance with the requirement of the application procedures and shall include at a minimum installation of the thermal spray system in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
adjusting the system operating parameters in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
apply a steady and even application of sprayed metal to a right angle joint in order to avoid an excessive buildup in the fillet area .
repair of defect made by means of a hammer and chisel in the test panel .
c. quality control process control .
in addition to the general process control requirements of the contract the following specific process control items shall be required .
technical supervision will be required for shop and field applications .
daily logs of air and surface temperature dew point and relative humidity shall be maintained .
the surface profile of each beam will be measured using testex or equal replica tape and retained .
this shall be made available to the state inspector on request .
d. safety and health .
employees required to enter confined spaces where the work is being conducted shall be instructed as to the nature of the hazards involved the necessary precautions to be taken and in the use of protective and emergency equipment required .
all pertinent osha regulations shall apply .
num num method of measurement .
thermal sprayed zinc coating will be measured by the number of square feet of steel actually sprayed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of thermal sprayed zinc coating will be paid for at the contract unit price per square feet as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials equipment tools technical supervision and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num bridge bearings num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing bridge bearings .
bearing types specified in this provision include elastomeric pads pot and disc bearings and sliding bearings .
other types of bridge bearings if required will be specified in the special provisions .
included as components of bridge bearings are masonry sole and shim plates anchor bolts elastomeric elements tfe teflon sheets or surfacing lubricants and adhesives .
bridge bearings shall be fabricated and installed in accordance with the details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num elastomeric pad bearings .
elastomeric bearings shall include unreinforced pads consisting only of elastomer and bearings reinforced with steel or fabric laminates .
num pot and disc bearings .
pot and disc bearings provide both rotation in all directions and sliding in those specific directions indicated on the plans .
rotation is provided by an elastomeric element and sliding is provided by a sheet of polytetrafluoroethylene tfe .
manufacturers of pot and disc bearings are included in the departments approved materials list .
the pot and disc bearings detailed on the plans are of a conceptual nature only .
minimum bearing capacities are indicated on the tables on the plans .
bearings fabricated by manufacturers listed in the departments approved materials list or other qualified manufacturers will be accepted .
the overall width andor length of pot and disc bearings must fit within the limits of the concrete beam seats .
the overall height of the bearings must be known before the precise beam seat elevation can be determined .
therefore basic details of the bearings shall be submitted to the engineer within sixty days after contract award all in accordance with the provisions of subsection num plans and shop drawings of these specifications .
num sliding bearings .
sliding bearings consist of the following types .
a .
expansion bearings .
type a bearings prevent transverse movement and type b bearings allow transverse movement .
num b .
fixed bearings .
type c bearings prevent transverse movement and type d bearings allow transverse movement .
num materials .
num elastomeric bearings .
a. elastomer .
the raw elastomer shall be virgin neoprene polychloroprene .
the elastomer compound shall be classified as being of low temperature grade num num num num or num as defined by the testing requirements in table numa in section num of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges fifteenth edition .
b .
steel laminates .
steel laminates used for reinforcement shall be fabricated from rolled mild steel conforming to the requirements of astm anum or anum unless otherwise specified by the engineer .
the steel laminates shall have a minimum nominal thickness of num gauges .
holes in plates for manufacturing purposes will not be permitted unless they have been accounted for in design and indicated as such on the plans .
c. fabric reinforcement .
fabric reinforcement shall be woven from num percent glass fibers of e type yarn with continuous fibers .
the minimum thread count in either direction shall be num threads per inch .
the fabric shall have either a crowfoot or an num hardness satin weave .
each ply of fabric shall have a minimum breaking strength of num lbin .
of width in each thread direction .
holes in the fabric will not be permitted .
d. bond .
the vulcanized bond between fabric and reinforcement shall have a minimum peel strength of num lbin .
steel laminated bearings shall develop a minimum peel strength of num lbin .
peel strength tests shall be performed by astm dnum method b .
num pot and disc bearings .
all materials used in the manufacture of pot and disc bearings shall be new and unused .
no reclaimed materials shall be incorporated in the finished bearings .
all pot and disc bearings required for the contract shall be fabricated by a single manufacturer .
materials including the elastomeric rotational element sealant sealing rings steel stainless steel and tfe sheet shall conform to the requirements of subsection num of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges fifteenth edition .
num sliding bearings .
a .
carbon steel .
sole pivot and masonry plates shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum grade num. b .
stainless steel .
stainless steel shall conform to the requirements of astm anum type num or astm anum type num. c. polytetrafluoroethylene tfe .
tfe resin shall be virgin material not reprocessed conforming to the requirements of astm dnum .
specific gravity shall be between num and num .
the melting point shall be numof numo .
num d. bedding of masonry plates .
num .
preformed fabric pads used as bedding shall be composed of multiple layers of num ounce cotton duck impregnated and bonded with high quality natural rubber or of equivalent and equally suitable materials compressed into resilient pads of uniform thickness .
the number of plies shall be such as to produce the specified thickness after compression and vulcanizing .
the finished pads shall withstand compression loads perpendicular to the plane of the laminations of not less than num pounds per square inch without detrimental reduction in thickness or extrusion .
num .
sheet lead used as bedding shall be common desilverized lead conforming to astm bnum .
the sheets shall be of uniform thickness and shall be free from cracks seams slivers scale and other defects .
unless otherwise specified lead sheets shall be numinch in thickness with a permissible tolerance of numinch .
e. anchor bolts including nuts and washers shall be galvanized and shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num elastomeric bearings .
a .
fabrication .
bearings with steel laminates shall be cast as a unit in a mold and shall be bonded and vulcanized under heat and pressure .
the mold finish shall conform to standard shop practice .
the internal steel laminates shall be sandblasted and cleaned of all surface coatings rust mill scale and dirt before bonding and shall be free of sharp edges and burrs .
external load plates sole plates shall be protected from rusting by the manufacturer and preferably shall be hot bonded to the bearing during vulcanization .
bearings that are designed to act as a single unit with a given shape factor must be manufactured as a single unit .
plain pads may be molded extruded or vulcanized in large sheets and cut to size .
cutting shall not heat the material and shall produce a smooth finish .
b .
fabrication tolerances .
plain pads and laminated bearings shall be fabricated to the dimensions indicated on the plans within the tolerances set forth in the table of subsection num of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges fifteenth edition .
c. compression tests .
bearing pads will be selected at random at the project site for testing .
two samples of complete pads will be tested .
testing shall be performed by the engineer and conducted in accordance with subsection num shortduration compression tests on bearings of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges fifteenth edition .
the contractor shall furnish additional complete pads to replace those taken for testing .
sample pads used for testing shall be provided by the contractor at no additional cost to the state .
pads will be available for testing at least three weeks in advance of installation .
d. installation .
bearing pads are to be cemented to the beam seats on abutments and pier caps with a twopart epoxy glue which is compatible with the materials of the bearing pad and the concrete and which is recommended by the manufacturer for the intended use .
the bearing num seat is to be finished straight and true with the plane of contact as detailed on the plans .
the concrete surface of the beam seat is to be thoroughly cleaned of all laitance and construction residue prior to attaching the pads .
pads shall be cemented to the beam seats prior to the application of concrete protective coating to bent caps .
the contractor shall follow the manufacturers recommendations for treatment of neoprene surfaces before applying adhesive .
pads are not to be cemented to the girders .
the contractor shall exercise care to insure that the pads are not deformed during the setting of the girders in their final position .
if bearing pads are sodeformed during the setting operation the girders shall be lifted thereby allowing the pads to resume their proper configuration and then carefully reset .
when further adjustment of elastomeric type bearing pads is necessary to accommodate for variations in ambient temperature at the time of erection the contractor shall make those adjustments in accordance with the alignment scheme provided on the plans .
the method of adjusting the alignment shall be proposed by the contractor and approved by the engineer .
num pot and disc bearings .
a .
fabrication .
the contractor shall provide the engineer with written notification thirty days prior to the start of bearing fabrication .
the finish of the mold used to produce the elastomeric rotational element for pot bearings and elastomeric disc for disc bearings shall conform to the practice in modern machine shops .
after fabrication steel surfaces exposed to the atmosphere except stainless steel surfaces shall be shop painted or coated to protect against corrosion in accordance with the plans or specifications .
prior to coating the exposed steel surfaces shall be cleaned in accordance with the recommendations of the coatings manufacturer .
metal surfaces to be field welded shall be given a coat of clear lacquer or other protective coating approved by the engineer if the time of exposure before welding takes place is to exceed three months .
the lacquer coating shall be removed at the time of welding .
the final painting or coating of these surfaces shall be done after the completion of welding .
stainless steel sheet shall be attached to its steel substrate with an approved epoxy to insure complete contact and then sealed with a continuous seal weld .
for pot bearings the steel piston and the steel pot shall each be machined from a solid piece of steel .
the steel base pot of all bearings shall be either integrally machined recessed into or continuously welded to its bottom steel masonry plate .
the outside diameter of the piston shall be no more than numinch less than the inside diameter of the pot at the interface level of the piston and elastomeric rotational element .
the sides of the pistons shall be beveled to facilitate rotation .
all welding shall conform to and all welders shall be qualified in accordance with the requirements of the ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
except as noted all bearing surfaces of steel plates shall be finished or machined flat within numinch per foot .
outofflatness greater than numinch per foot on any plate shall be cause for rejection .
the bottom surfaces of lower bearing plates masonry plates designed to rest on bearing pads shall not exceed an outofflatness value of num inch per foot .
oxygen cut surfaces shall not exceed a surface roughness value of num microinches as defined by ansi bnum .
num every bearing shall have the project identification number lot number and individual bearing number indelibly marked with ink on a side that will be visible after erection .
b .
testing and acceptance .
the manufacturer shall select at random sample bearings from completed lots of bearings for testing by the manufacturer .
the manufacturer shall complete the required testing and determine compliance with this specification before submitting the lotss for quality assurance inspection testing and acceptance consideration .
the results of the manufacturers tests shall be furnished to the engineer .
c. installation .
the contractor shall certify to the engineer that a skilled representative of the bearing manufacturer will be available to the contractor to provide advice and instruction during the installation of bearings .
the manufacturers representative shall be present during the initial installation of the bearings .
the representative shall remain on the job until in the opinion of the engineer the bearing installation is proceeding smoothly and the workmen are familiar with the work required for each installation .
the contractor shall also arrange to have the representative present at such other times as the engineer may request .
the bearing shall be placed at the predetermined locations at the time of structural steel erection .
all temporary restraints shall be removed as directed by the bearing manufacturer .
the expansion bearings shall be adjusted from the normal position to allow for the ambient temperature at the time of erection in accordance with the alignment scheme as indicated on the plans .
after all adjustments and at the approval of the engineer the bearing sole plate shall be welded to the bottom flange .
num sliding bearings .
a .
fabrication .
fabrication of sliding bearings shall conform to the details indicated on the plans .
fabrication shall be performed in a workmanlike manner in conformance with the practice in modern commercial shops .
burrs rough or sharp edges and other flaws shall be removed .
horizontally installed tfe sheet shall be bonded to and recessed into its steel substrate .
tfe sheet shall have a minimum thickness of numinch and shall be recessed for at least onehalf of its thickness into its steel substrate .
stainless steel matting surfaces shall have a surface finish less than num microinches rms and shall be polished as necessary to meet the friction requirements indicated on the plans .
b .
testing and acceptance .
the manufacturer shall furnish facilities for testing and perform testing and inspection of the completed bearings or representative samples of bearings with tfe surfaces in its plant or at an independent test facility .
inspectors if appointed shall be allowed free access to the necessary parts of the manufacturers plant and test facility .
when testing is performed by the manufacturer copies of the test results shall be submitted to the engineer .
c. installation .
sliding bearings shall be installed in accordance with the alignment scheme as indicated on the plans .
the setting of sliding bearings shall take into account any variation from mean temperature of the supported span at the time of setting .
care shall be num exercised such that full and free movement of the superstructure at movable bearings is not restricted by improper settings or adjustment of the bearings .
num method of measurement .
elastomeric bearings both plain and reinforced pot bearings disc bearings and sliding bearings will be measured by the number of each type of bearing actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of elastomeric bearings both plain and reinforced pot bearings disc bearings and sliding bearings will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each such bearing as listed in the proposal .
the prices so stated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including testing services of the manufacturers representative when required bedding pads anchor bolts and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num bridge scupper piping num description .
this work consists of providing polyvinyl chloride scupper piping on bridges at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num polyvinyl chloride scupper piping .
a .
pipe shall conform to the requirements of astm d num pvc num schedule num .
solvent cement fittings shall conform to the requirements of astm d num schedule num. b .
hardware .
straps angles etc shall conform to the requirements of section m.num metals and shall be galvanized in accordance with aashto mnum .
c. manufacturers certification .
the contractor shall furnish the manufacturers certification that the materials provided meet specification requirements .
num construction methods .
num polyvinyl chloride scupper piping .
a .
field measurements .
the contractor shall make all appropriate field measurements and evaluate special conditions for installation prior to the preparation of shop drawings .
num b .
shop drawings .
the contractor shall submit shop drawings of the pipe assembly in accordance with subsection num of these specifications .
c. handling .
special care shall be taken during handling and storage to avoid damage to the pipe from impact bending compression or abrasion .
d. preparation .
pipe shall be cut with saws or pipe cutters designed specifically for polyvinyl chloride material .
the pipe and fittings shall be protected from serrated holding devices and abrasions .
all burrs shall be removed and dust and dirt shall be wiped clean from jointing surface .
pipe ends shall be beveled in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
e. installation .
the pipe shall be installed and supported and joints made in strict accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
jointing surface must be softened and made semifluid and sufficient cement must be supplied to fill the gap between pipe and fittings .
all excess cement must be removed .
num method of measurement .
polyvinyl chloride scupper piping will be measured by the number of linear feet of each type of drainpipe actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of polyvinyl chloride scupper piping will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices as listed in the proposal .
the prices so stated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including straps hardware bolts and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num metal bridge railing num description .
this work consists of the provision of any one of several types of bridge rail at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
the types of railing covered by this provision are aluminum onebar ornamental rail steel fourbar rail baldwin fourbar ornamental rail and steel twobar rail crash tested .
num materials .
materials for bridge railing shall conform to both the applicable provisions of section m.num metals of these specifications and the following additional requirements .
num posts .
a .
aluminum posts shall be shaped of cast aluminum fabricated from material which conforms to astm alloys anumtnum anumtnum or anumtnum .
num b .
steel posts for steel fourbar rail and baldwin fourbar ornamental rail shall be wide flange sections which conform to the requirements of aashto m num grade num. c. steel posts for the twobar rail crash tested shall be wide flange sections which conform to the requirements of aashto mnum grade num .
num rails .
a .
aluminum rails shall be aluminum pipe fabricated from material which conforms to astm alloys numtnum numtnum or num. b .
steel rails for steel fourbar rail and baldwin fourbar ornamental rail shall be either standard or extra strong steel pipe which conforms to the requirements of astm anum grade b. c. steel rails for twobar rail crash tested shall be hollow structural steel tubing which conforms to the requirements of astm anum grade b .
num plates .
a .
steel plates shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum grade num .
num anchor bolts .
a. anchor bolts shall conform to the requirements of astm anum .
b. threaded rods nuts and washers shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum .
c. anchor bolt assemblies shall be galvanized after fabrication in accordance with the requirements of aashto mnum .
num galvanizing and painting .
a .
when specified on the plans or in the special provisions steel railing assemblies shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of aashto mnum .
b .
fasteners including bolts nuts cap screws washers and lock washers shall be galvanized in accordance with aashto mnum .
c. galvanized railings shall either remain unpainted or painted as set forth on the plans or special provisions .
num construction methods .
the railings shall be accurately positioned at locations shown on the plans .
posts shall be installed vertical in the longitudinal plane of the bridge except that if no part of the rail has a gradient greater than num½ percent the posts may be mounted normal to the slope .
the bases shall in general be mounted level by the use of lead shims unless otherwise designated on the plans .
num rails shall be installed in pieces of maximum practical lengths over several panels .
sequence of assembly to accomplish such continuity must be submitted with the shop drawings .
the rail supports on posts shall be drafted or pitched to permit continuity of rails past the posts without cramping or crimping the rails .
if rails are to be shop cut positioning of anchor bolts must be checked in the field prior to cutting to establish rail lengths .
adjacent anchor bolts shall be trimmed as necessary to present a visual uniformity of grips .
the anchor bolts shall extend or be trimmed to a proper grip for the nut .
all aluminum faces to be installed in contact with concrete or dissimilar metal surface shall be heavily coated with an approved aluminum impregnated caulking compound or zinc chromate paint .
alternatively a synthetic rubber gasket may be placed between the two surfaces .
num method of measurement .
aluminum onebar ornamental rail steel fourbar rail baldwin fourbar ornamental rail and steel twobar rail crashtested will be measured by the number of linear feet of each such type actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of aluminum onebar ornamental rail steel fourbar rail baldwin fourbar ornamental rail and steel twobar rail crash tested will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including anchor assemblies and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num pedestrian chain link fence aluminum num description .
this work consists of providing aluminum chain link fence at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
materials for pedestrian chain link fence shall conform to both the applicable provisions of section m.num fence and guardrail of these specifications and the following additional requirements .
num wire fabric .
aluminum chain link fence wire fabric shall be no .
num gauge .num diameter wire fabric and shall have a uniform diamond mesh measuring approximately num inches between parallel sides .
it shall be woven from aluminum alloy num tnum astm bnum wire having a minimum tensile strength of num psi .
after the fabric has been woven it shall be cleaned to remove all weaving compounds and foreign matter .
num posts .
aluminum posts shall be num½inch schedule num num od pipe weighing num pounds per foot .
the posts shall be aluminum alloy numtnum astm bnum .
num num rails .
aluminum rails shall be num¼inch schedule num num od pipe weighing num pounds per foot .
the posts shall be aluminum alloy numtnum astm bnum .
num fittings and appurtenances .
all fittings tension bars rail splices washers and post connection clamps shall be aluminum alloy numtnum astm bnum .
the nuts shall be aluminum alloy numtnum astm bnum .
the bolts shall be aluminum alloy numtnum astm bnum .
a .
wire fabric connections .
aluminum fabric shall be securely fastened to all terminal posts by num inch by numinch tension bars with numinch by numinch tension bands aluminum alloy numtnum astm bnum spaced approximately num inches apart and to all line posts and rails with no .
num gauge .num diameter wire ties aluminum alloy numhnum approximately num inches on center .
b .
tension wires .
tension wires shall be numgauge minimum galvanized coil spring steel wire .
c. anchorage fittings .
the aluminum base plates shall be aluminum alloy numtnum astm bnum .
anchor bolts shall be numinch diameter galvanized bolts num inches long astm anum .
the portions of the aluminum base plate to be in contact with the concrete parapet and the steel anchor bolts shall be thoroughly coated with an approved aluminum impregnated caulking compound .
num construction methods .
pedestrian fence shall be erected in accordance with the details indicated on the plans .
fence posts shall be set vertical .
maximum post spacing shall be num .
the fabric shall be secured with ties stretchers and tensioning devices sufficiently to resist wind and weather loadings without noticeable sagging billowing or skewing of the square patterns .
num tolerance .
standard plus or minus mill tolerances on all framework members and chain link fabric will apply .
num method of measurement .
pedestrian chain link fence aluminum will be measured by the number of linear feet actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
measurement will be along the top of the fence from centerline to centerline of end posts for each continuous run of fence .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of pedestrian chain link fence aluminum will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials tools and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num section num bridge signs num description .
this work consists of providing bridge identification signs and bridge minimum clearance signs on all bridges that intersect with highways streets or ramps .
bridges over waterways railroads or other non vehicular facilities unless specifically noted will not require signs .
signs shall be installed for all directions of travel at locations described herein or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num reflectorized sheeting .
reflectorized sheeting shall be type iii and shall otherwise conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
the colors used shall be white or silverwhite for the bridge identifications signs and yellow for the bridge minimum clearance signs .
num aluminum backing shall conform to the requirements of astm bnum alloy numtnum and shall be numinch in thickness .
num black paint shall be a one component lead and chromate free paint suitable for use as a finish coat on the properly prepared reflectorized sheeting surface .
the paint color shall meet the federal standard number num color num gloss black .
manufacturers product data sheets shall be submitted for approval of the engineer prior to any use of the product in the manufacture of the signs .
num steel for wedge style anchors clips dropin anchor bodies and expansion plugs shall meet the requirements of astm anum .
num fasteners for attaching bridge signs to fascia girders either steel or concrete shall be hammerdriven lead anchors .
the anchor consists of a numinch diameter shaft numinch in length .
the shaft has a round head at one end approximately ½inch in diameter .
the shaft is split into expandable sections ½inch from its end .
the anchor is provided with a zinccoated nail numcinches long placed in a hole through the center of the round head and through the solid portion of the shaft .
num plating for components shall be zinc and shall meet the requirements of astm bnum scnum type iii .
num construction methods .
num location .
a. bridge identification signs .
the location of the signs will be as noted on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the sign will be placed level on the web of the girder face of concrete beam wall or parapet as appropriate .
the sign shall be centered vertically and centered above the travel lanes .
num b. bridge minimum clearance signs .
the location of the signs and the measured minimum vertical clearance of a particular bridge will be provided by the resident engineer .
the sign will be placed above a travel lane at the point of minimum vertical clearance .
the signs shall be located both horizontally and vertically as close to the actual point of minimum vertical clearance as is practical .
num fabrication .
the aluminum sheet shall be cut to the sizes outlined in details shown on the plans or in standard details .
the reflective sheeting shall be placed upon and completely cover the aluminum backing sheet .
the lettering shall be painted in black upon the reflective sheeting as outlined in the details shown on the plans .
all lettering and numerals shall be centered on the sign panel .
all letters and numerals shall be drawn in accordance with the standard alphabets for highway design by the u.s. department of transportation federal highway administration office of traffic operations .
all characters for bridge identification signs shall be num inches in height using a series d stroke num wide .
all characters for bridge minimum clearance signs shall be num inches in height using a series e stroke num wide for roadways with posted speed limits of forty miles per hour or greater and num inches in height using a series e stroke num wide for roadways with posted speed limit less than forty miles per hour .
num attachment .
a .
position .
signs shall be positioned on the fascia girders as described above in para .
a of subsection num .
a minimum of four fasteners will be required per sign and they shall be evenly spaced so that the maximum distance between fasteners is no greater than num inches .
b .
installation .
signs to be located on steel or concrete fascia girders shall be attached as follows num .
the sign panels shall be fabricated with numinch diameter holes as indicated on the plans .
num .
using the sign panel as a template locate the center of each hole on the face of the girder .
num .
on steel girders drill a numinch diameter hole through the girder web .
on concrete girders drill a numinch diameter hole for a depth of numdinches .
the contractor shall insure that the length of the fastener does not extend beyond the minimum concrete cover to the reinforcing steel or prestressing steel .
if concrete cover becomes a hinderance to fastener selection then additional fasteners can be utilized .
num .
place the bridge signs against the girder fascias such that the holes line up .
num .
place the lead anchors specified in subsection num above through the sign and into the holes in the girders .
num .
with a hand hammer drive the nail protruding from the head of the anchor until it is flush with the head .
num num approvals .
the contractor shall submit the following for approval by the engineer .
num .
complete shop drawings of the bridge identification signs and minimum clearance signs demonstrating that the signs comply with these specifications and the details indicated on the plans as applicable .
the drawings shall also contain the proposed message for the signs and a bill of materials describing the proposed attachment hardware along with manufacturers specifications for the proposed hardware .
num .
a sketch indicating the specific proposed location of each sign .
num method of measurement .
bridge identification signs and bridge minimum clearance signs will be measured for payment by the number of each sign installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of bridge identification signs and bridge minimum clearance signs will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each such sign as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num granite identification tablets num description .
this work consists of providing granite identification tablets on bridges at the locations indicated on the plans all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num granite tablets .
granite shall be fine grained light gray granite of sound compact structure resistant to weathering action uniform in color free from seams cracks laminations and minerals which by weathering would cause discoloration or deterioration .
a .
additional requirements .
the granite tablets shall conform to the following additional requirements .
num .
granite stone shall conform to the material characteristics and physical requirements of astm cnum standard specification for granite dimension stone .
num .
finish .
face shall be sand rubbed .
num .
thickness .
num inches plus or minus numinch .
num .
inscriptions .
numerals letters and seal shall conform to the type style and dimensions indicated on the plans .
num a seal tablets .
seal tablets shall include the rhode island state seal and the year of construction .
numerals shall have a height of num¾inches .
the type and style of lettering and size of seal shall be approved by the engineer .
b name tablets .
the letters shall be inscribed having a minimum height of num¼inches to a maximum height of num inches .
numerals shall have a height of num inches .
num .
inscribing .
inscribing letters numerals and seals shall be by blast abrasive method .
seal letters and numerals shall be incised usunk to a depth of approximately ½inch with all edges clear and sharp .
all sunken areas are to be painted with an approved blue acrylic lacquer .
color samples shall be submitted to the engineer for approval prior to using the lacquer on the sample tablet .
num .
edges pitched and straight .
no projection first inch the remaining depth plus zero minus numinch .
num .
details of numinch by numinch granite identification tablets .
a face .
num inches by num inches plus zero minus numinch .
b .
shop drawings .
shop drawings of the granite identification tablets shall be drawn to actual size and shall indicate emblems inscriptions and all other pertinent information .
shop drawings shall be submitted to the engineer in accordance with subsection num of these specifications .
c. packaging .
identification tablets shall be enclosed in wooden boxes and provided with adequate protection to prevent damage to the stones before installation .
num portland cement mortar .
mortar shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num construction methods .
the granite identification tablets shall be carefully set in a full mortar bed at the indicated locations .
the plane of the face of the identification tablets when in final position shall be flush with the plane of the surrounding concrete surface .
num method of measurement .
granite identification tablets of the types and sizes specified will be measured by the number of each such tablet actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of granite identification tablets of the types and sizes specified will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each such tablet as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials tools equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num section num granite curb for bridges num description .
this work consists of providing straight or circular granite curbing at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
the two basic types of curbing are described as follows a. vertical face granite curbing .
b. slope face granite curbing .
num materials .
granite curb for bridges shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num construction methods .
the curb shall be set accurately to line and grade in a full mortar bed and with full mortar end joints before concrete in back of curb is placed .
anchors shall be grouted into curb stones as they are being set .
care should be taken that all spaces under stones and at joints are completely filled .
if indicated on plans joints between ends of individual stones shall be raked to dimensions shown on the plans and sealed with the specified type of joint sealer .
otherwise joints shall be carefully filled with cement mortar and neatly pointed on top and face .
after pointing curb stones shall be cleaned of all excess mortar to the satisfaction of the engineer .
when placing concrete behind the curb stones care should be taken to avoid disturbing line and grade of the stones .
num method of measurement .
vertical face granite curb straight vertical face granite curb circular slope face granite curb straight and slope face granite curb circular will be measured along the front arris of the curb by the number of linear feet of such curbing actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of vertical face granite curb straight vertical face granite curb circular slope face granite curb straight and slope face granite curb circular will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num section num scuppers num description .
this work consists of providing scuppers and connections to their drains at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
scupper frames and grates shall conform to the requirements of para .
c and para .
d respectively of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num construction methods .
the scupper assembly shall be installed anchored and supported as shown on the plans .
num method of measurement .
scuppers will be measured by the number of such assemblies actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of scuppers will be paid for at the contract unit price per each assembly as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num structural concrete crack repair by epoxyresin base adhesive injection num description .
this work consists of repairing cracks in concrete by furnishing and injecting epoxyresin base adhesives into such cracks .
the work also includes surface preparation setting injection ports and cleaning surfaces following repairs .
crack repair work shall be performed at locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
all products indicated below must be listed in the departments approved materials list .
num injection material .
injection material shall be a low viscosity twopart epoxyresin system conforming to the requirements of astm cnum type iv .
the material shall also be the required grade and class to satisfactorily perform its function .
a .
quality control .
testing and certification of each lot of the adhesive is required .
the manufacturer shall both certify that every batch of the material conforms to the requirements num of this specification and submit to the engineer certified test results for each batch .
b. labeling packaging and storage shall conform to the requirements of astm cnum and shall include the following information num .
health hazard warnings precautions for handling and recommended first aid procedures in case of contact .
num .
mix ratio by volume .
c. injection equipment shall be operated either manually or automatically as required by the manufacturer .
d. surface seal .
a surface seal material as recommended by the adhesive manufacturer shall be used to confine the injection adhesive in the crack during injection and curing .
it shall have adequate strength to hold injection fittings or ports and prevent vent leakage during injection .
num construction methods .
num surface preparation .
all deteriorated concrete adjacent to the cracks and areas of application shall be removed prior to proceeding with crack repairs .
surfaces adjacent to cracks or other areas of application shall be cleaned of dirt dust grease oil efflorescence or other foreign material matter detrimental to the bond of the epoxy injection surface seal system .
use of acids or other corrosives will not be permitted .
cleaning methods shall not introduce foreign materials into the crack repair area in such a manner that the penetration of the epoxy adhesive is hindered .
entry ports shall be provided along the crack at intervals recommended by the manufacturer .
num component ratio calibration test .
the mixing head of the injection equipment shall be disconnected and the two adhesive components shall be pumped simultaneously through two independent valved nozzles .
both adhesive components shall be simultaneously discharged during the same time period such that they may be compared to determine the volume .
the engineer at any time and without prior notification to the contractor may request the contractor to conduct the calibration test specified above .
num epoxy injection .
epoxy injection shall be performed in accordance with the manufacturers recommended methods .
if a recommended application procedure is not available the contractor shall use the following epoxy injection technique a. injection of epoxy adhesive shall begin at a lower entry port and continue until there is an appearance of epoxy adhesive at the next entry port adjacent to the entry port being pumped .
num b .
when epoxy adhesive travel is indicated by appearance at the next adjacent port injection shall be discontinued on the entry port being pumped and epoxy injection shall be transferred to next adjacent port where epoxy adhesive has appeared .
c. this epoxy adhesive injection procedure shall continue until all cracks within the crack network between the designated port interval are completely filled .
d. if port to port travel of the epoxy adhesive is not indicated the work shall immediately be stopped and the engineer notified .
e. minimum ambient temperature at time of injection shall be numof or as recommended by the manufacturer .
f. the applicator engaged in the epoxy injection process shall be familiar with the specific epoxy injection method indicated as well as the operation maintenance and trouble shooting of equipment .
num finishing .
when cracks are completely filled epoxy shall be cured for sufficient time in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
surface seal material and injection adhesive runs or spills shall be removed from concrete surfaces in a manner recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the engineer .
the face of the crack shall be finished flush to the adjacent surface and show no indentations or protrusions caused by the placement of entry ports .
num method of measurement .
structural concrete crack repair by epoxyresin base adhesive injection will be measured by the number of linear feet port to port actually repaired in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of structural concrete crack repair by epoxyresin base adhesive injection will be paid for at the concrete unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor tools materials equipment including scaffolds and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num repairs to structural concrete masonry with integrally colored concrete or patching mortar num description .
this work consists of removing all deteriorated disintegrated soft honeycombed fractured or otherwise defective concrete and replacing it with integrally colored portland cement concrete or portland cement mortar at locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the concrete or mortar shall be of a color texture and have aggregates from approved sources that closely match the predominant color texture and aggregates of the num existing concrete structure .
repairs shall include but will not be limited to removal and disposal of damaged concrete cleaning and preparing of the bonding surface cleaning of existing reinforcing steel placing of additional reinforcing steel where required application of a bonding agent slurry and placement of new concrete repair materials to restore the structural elements to the original line grade and surface finish color and texture .
the contractor shall submit a repair plan for each specific type of repair in accordance with the plans and these specifications .
num materials .
all proposed repair materials shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num of these specifications andor be listed on the departments approved materials list .
num aggregate .
the fine and coarse aggregates must be approved by the engineer as to color and texture .
num integrally colored concrete .
integrally colored portland cement concrete shall conform to the applicable requirements of section num of these specifications .
the concrete classification and location used shall be as specified on the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num integrally colored patching mortar .
patching mortar shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num of these specifications except that the maximum water cement ratio shall not exceed num by weight .
the consistency of the mortar shall meet the application requirements .
num coloring pigment .
coloring pigments for integrally colored concrete or patching mortar shall meet the requirements of astm cnum and be approved by the engineer .
coloring pigments shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num portland cement bonding grout slurry .
the bonding grout slurry shall have the cement and mortar sand proportioned numtonum by volume .
water shall be added in sufficient quantity to form a slurry .
num concrete anchors .
mechanical concrete anchors shall be hooked type expansion bolts galvanized in accordance with the applicable requirements of subsection m.num para .
d of these specifications and shall be of a type approved by the engineer .
num wire mesh reinforcement .
wire mesh shall be galvanized or epoxy coated in accordance with astm anum welded fabric no .
num gauge wire minimum size spaced two inches in each direction .
wire fabric shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num prototype samples .
the contractor shall submit to the engineer a prototype numxnumxnum min .
showing color and texture of the concrete andor mortar required .
the contractor shall also provide in writing the mix design and methods for obtaining any required surface finish i.e .
exposed aggregate etc .
for each material .
the prototypes must be submitted sufficiently in advance to allow for review and approval of the repair material .
the prototypes must be approved in writing by the engineer and if necessary by the departments historic preservation specialist prior to use in production .
num num construction methods .
the contractor shall inspect the structure to acquaint himself with the nature and extent of the work .
repair of concrete shall be performed with qualified workmen .
the engineer at his option shall witness all repair work .
the engineer shall be notified of any repair work no later than num hours prior to the scheduled repair work .
num surface preparation .
a .
general requirements .
all deteriorated disintegrated soft honeycombed fractured or otherwise defective concrete shall be removed from the areas to be repaired by means of suitable power and hand tools to a uniform depth sufficient to expose a bonding surface of sound material as determined by the engineer .
power tools that cause overbreakage of concrete will not be allowed .
at the direction of the engineer the perimeter of the area to be repaired will be saw cut parallel to the horizontal andor vertical axis of the element being repaired to a depth of at least numinch .
thin or feathered edges will not be permitted .
areas to be repaired shall be roughly circular or rectangular in outline .
reentrant corners and shapes which include acute angles shall be avoided .
in areas where reinforcing steel is found to be surrounded by deteriorated concrete or where at least onehalf of the rebar surface area is exposed the depth of concrete removal shall be such as to include all deteriorated concrete and not less than num inch minimum annular clearance around the reinforcing bars .
concrete removal shall extend along the reinforcement to where it is well bonded to sound concrete .
all corroded reinforcing bars shall be thoroughly cleaned to remove all rust .
those bars that have lost num percent or more of their original cross sectional area shall be supplemented by new equal diameter bars spliced in place .
new bars shall be lapped sufficiently num diameters on both sides of the affected area to develop the full design strength of the bar .
if necessary additional chipping will be required to provide this lap .
dual bars of equivalent or greater section may be used .
repairs less than num½inches thick will not require wire mesh reinforcement unless specified by the engineer .
in cases where the thickness is greater the engineer shall in general order that wire mesh reinforcement be used every num½inches in depth and provide a minimum of numinch cover .
in such cases after the surface preparation has been approved concrete anchors to hold the wire mesh reinforcement shall be placed according to table num unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
table num size and spacing of anchors thickness overhead vertical top horizontal of surfaces surfaces surfaces placement dia .
in .
dia .
in .
dia .
in .
in .
spacing in .
spacing in .
spacing in .
num½ to num num at num num at num num at num num to num num at num num at num num at num num to num num at num num at num num at num over num num at num num at num num at num num all chipped areas corroded rebars and concrete surfaces to be repaired shall be thoroughly cleaned by means of compressed air sandblasting waterblasting steam wire brushing or by other methods approved by the engineer .
the contractor may use one or all of the various means of cleaning chipped areas as approved or as directed by the engineer .
once all deteriorated concrete has been removed the existing sound concrete shall be maintained in a clean rough and surface saturated moist condition until the concrete repair has been completed .
when an epoxyresin agent is specified the prepared sound concrete surface shall be thoroughly dried prior to application of the epoxyresin .
care shall be taken during the removal of the designated portions of the structure to avoid damaging the portions that are to remain in place .
any damage caused by the contractor to the existing structure that is designated to remain in place shall be repaired or replaced by the contractor at his own expense to the satisfaction of the engineer .
mechanical concrete anchors shall be expansion bolts of a type approved by the engineer .
the exposed end of each anchor shall have a means of engaging reinforcement either mechanical or hooked and supplemented by the use of coated steel tie wire .
if any reinforcement is damaged by the contractor in his operations the bar shall be replaced as required by the engineer at the contractors expense .
b .
forms .
forms shall be used for portland cement concrete repairs whenever necessary to confine the concrete and shape it to the required lines .
such forms may partially require progressive installation as the concrete is placed as a result of confinements for placing concrete due to the location of the particular repair or restoration required .
the forms shall have sufficient strength to withstand the pressure resulting from placing operations shall be maintained rigidly in position and shall be sufficiently tight to prevent loss of mortar from the concrete .
the use of form oils is expressly forbidden .
the contractor shall use an alternate method or material for facilitating form release that will not cause discoloration or staining of the concrete .
all such methods or materials are subject to the approval of the engineer .
c. weather limitations .
with respect to temperature and weather conditions concrete repair materials shall be used in accordance with the applicable requirements of subsection nos .
num num and num limitations of mixing cold weather concrete and hot weather concrete respectively .
num application .
a .
prime coat .
prior to placing the concrete or mortar on a previously prepared and approved concrete surface the entire area to be patched shall first be given a prime coat using a portland cement bonding grout slurry .
the consistency of the portland cement bonding grout slurry shall be such that it can be applied with a brush on a prepared moist concrete surface in a thin approximately numinch even coating that will not run or puddle .
excess bonding grout will not be permitted to collect in pockets .
the portland cement bonding grout shall be applied to the concrete and the surfaces of the reinforcing bars and into the spaces between the reinforcing bars and the prepared concrete surfaces .
care shall be exercised to ensure that all surfaces receive a thorough even coating .
num the rate of bonding grout application shall be limited to that surface area which can be covered with new concrete or mortar before the bonding grout begins to dry out .
any grout that has dried or become unworkable as determined by the engineer shall not be incorporated in the work .
in the event drying does occur the contractor shall remove the bonding grout and place new bonding grout .
the removal of the bonding grout shall be by a method approved by the engineer and at the contractors expense .
b .
placing and consolidation .
integrally colored portland cement concrete shall be placed consolidated and finished on a previously prepared surface as described in this specification and to which a portland cement bonding grout slurry has been applied .
integrally colored patching mortar shall be placed in ½inch to numinch lift layers within num to num minutes after mixing water is added to avoid the rapid setup of the material after the application of the bonding grout slurry .
if more than one lift layer is required to perform the repair the previously placed lift layer will not be allowed to dry and its surface shall be roughened prior to placing the next layer .
patching mortar shall not be applied when the ambient temperature is below numof or is not in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
c. finish .
all exposed surfaces shall be finished straight and true approximating the original contour as close as practicable .
the final finished surfaces shall match the texture color and aggregate exposure of the existing concrete surfaces adjoining or proximate to the area where new concrete has been placed .
the contractor shall capture all the waste and water from the finishing operations and dispose these materials .
all materials andor labor costs resulting from the surface finishing operations including sedimentation and dewatering controls shall be included in this item of work .
d. curing .
curing procedures and methods shall comply with the color additive manufacturers recommendations and as set forth in subsection num curing of these specifications or as otherwise directed by the engineer .
use of curing compounds is not permitted unless specifically required by the manufacturer of the color additive .
num method of measurement .
repairs to structural concrete masonry with integrally colored concrete or patching mortar will be measured by the number of cubic feet of such materials actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of repairs to structural concrete masonry with integrally colored concrete or patching mortar will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated shall constitute full and complete compensation for all materials labor equipment tools forms scaffolds wire mesh anchors and bonding grout and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
steel reinforcement and dowels shall be paid for under separate items .
num section num saw cut in existing concrete walls num description .
this work consists of saw cutting existing reinforced concrete retaining walls andor wingwalls at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction methods .
two separate horizontal saw cuts to the limits and depths as shown on the plans are required to be made along each wall face to reduce and control the amount of concrete breakage required and to assure a neat line in the finished work .
copings may be cut transversely into smaller pieces or removed in one piece at the option of the contractor as long as the concrete to remain is not damaged during the removal operations .
the intentions of the saw cut is to cut existing reinforcements at the saw cut lines .
suitable guidelines and devices must be used to assure cutting along a true line as shown on the plans .
the type of concrete saw and the method of support to be used will be subject to approval by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
saw cut in existing concrete walls will be measured by the number of linear feet actually cut in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of saw cut in existing walls will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
no payment will be made for any transverse saw cuts in walls made in order to divide it into practical lengths for removal .
section num remove and dispose bituminous concrete pavement from concrete bridge decks partialdepth and fulldepth num description .
num partialdepth removal .
this work consists of the removal and disposal of a portion of the existing bituminous pavement overlay from the concrete bridge deck within the limits indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num num fulldepth removal .
this work shall consist of the complete removal and disposal of the existing bituminous pavement overlay including the waterproofing membrane from the concrete bridge deck within the limits indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction methods .
num partialdepth removal .
the contractor shall insure that the process of partial pavement removal will not cause any damage to the waterproofing membrane underlying concrete deck andor bridge joints to remain .
the contractor shall also insure that the method proposed will remove the specified layer thickness of the bituminous wearing surface as indicated on the plans .
under no circumstances will full depth removal be allowed .
the specifications including gross weights of the proposed equipment andor machinery to be used for the removal operation shall be submitted to the engineer for approval prior to the start of work .
the proposed equipment andor machinery loads shall not exceed num pounds or the posted load limit for the bridge whichever is less .
in addition equipment andor machinery to be used shall have the capability and precision necessary to adhere to the pavement removal depth requirements .
damage caused to the waterproofing membrane bridge deck andor bridge joints as a result of the contractors operation shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the engineer at no additional cost to the state .
the pavement removal shall be performed in accordance with the sequence of construction and traffic controls indicated on the plans .
where required the contractor will saw cut the pavement to prevent overbreakage into the vehicular travel areas .
in the event that this type of overbreakage does occur the contractor shall immediately patch the damaged bituminous areas using a bituminous patching material which conforms with section num temporary patching material of these specifications at no additional cost to the state .
the removal operation shall not endanger the general public or interfere with the established traffic maintenance plan .
all materials removed shall be transported from the site and legally disposed of by the contractor .
num fulldepth removal .
the contractor shall insure that the process of removal of the pavement and the waterproofing membrane will not cause any damage to the underlying concrete deck andor bridge joints to remain .
the contractor shall also insure that the method proposed will completely remove the existing waterproofing membrane to allow for the proposed deck patching repairs and new waterproofing system installation .
the contractor will note that the thickness of the existing pavement may vary .
the specifications including gross weights of the proposed equipment andor machinery to be used for the removal operation shall be submitted to the engineer for approval prior to the start of work .
the proposed equipment andor machinery loads shall not exceed num pounds or the posted load limit for the bridge whichever is less .
damage caused to the deck andor bridge joints as a result of the contractors operation shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the engineer at no additional cost to the state .
num the pavement and waterproofing removal shall be performed in accordance with the sequence of construction and traffic controls indicated on the plans .
where required the contractor will saw cut the pavement to prevent overbreakage into the vehicular travel areas .
in the event that this type of overbreakage does occur the contractor shall immediately patch the damaged bituminous areas using a bituminous patching material which conforms with section num temporary patching material of these specifications at no additional cost to the state .
the removal operation shall not endanger the general public or interfere with the established traffic maintenance plan .
all materials removed must be transported from the site and legally disposed of by the contractor .
num method of measurement .
partialdepth removal and disposal of bituminous pavement from concrete bridge decks and fulldepth removal and disposal of bituminous pavement from concrete bridge decks will be measured by the number of square yards of each actually removed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
num partialdepth removal .
the accepted quantity of partialdepth removal and disposal of bituminous pavement from concrete bridge decks will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as set forth in the proposal which price will constitute full compensation for the complete removal and disposal of bituminous pavement and all materials labor tools equipment saw cutting and all other incidentals necessary for the proper completion of the work specified shown on the plans complete and accepted by the engineer .
num fulldepth removal .
the accepted quantity of fulldepth removal and disposal of bituminous pavement from concrete bridge decks will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as set forth in the proposal which price will constitute full compensation for the complete removal and disposal of bituminous pavement including waterproofing membrane and all materials labor tools equipment saw cutting and all other incidentals necessary for the proper completion of the work specified shown on the plans complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num deck surface concrete removal by hydrodemolition num description .
this work consists of the removal of deteriorated concrete from reinforced concrete bridge deck surfaces by the use of hydrodemolition methods the provision of adequate containment measures under the bridge deck the control and diversion of runoff during the hydrodemolition operations disposal of all concrete and other materials removed by hydrodemolition and all other incidentals as necessary to complete the work in accordance with the requirements of these specifications .
num num equipment .
the hydrodemolition equipment shall consist of filtering and pumping units operating in conjunction with a remote controlled robotic device and if applicable shall be capable of using river stream or lake water .
the withdrawal of water from any body of water under the jurisdiction of the ri department of environmental management ridem or the coastal resources management council crmc shall not be permitted unless such use is authorized by a permit issued by the appropriate regulatory agency .
the hydrodemolition equipment shall be capable of producing a water jet through an orifice at a pressure of at least num psi .
the machine shall move the jet transversely across the area and forward or backward so that the entire deck is exposed to the water jet .
the movement of the jet shall be accomplished by mechanical means no manual movement of the water jet will be allowed except at inaccessible areas such as but not limited to proximity to the curb and temporary barriers and at bridge deck expansion joints .
the equipment shall operate at a noise level of less than num decibels at a distance of num feet from either the powerpack unit or the remote robot .
num controls .
the hydrodemolition equipment shall have sufficient controls to control and vary the following functions of the machine a .
water pressure b .
angle and distance of the orifice relative to the deck surface c. limits of transverse and longitudinal movement of the orifice d. speed of the orifice in the transverse and longitudinal direction .
num submissions and qualifications .
postqualification by the engineer of the hydro demolition operation is required .
the contractor shall be responsible for any delay if the post qualification criteria are not satisfied .
the contractor shall submit the required postqualification information on the hydro demolition operations for approval by the engineer .
the contractor may submit more than one set of documentation .
a .
minimum requirements .
the postqualification documentation shall include as a minimum the following num .
the name and location of all projects completed a brief description of work performed equipment specifications estimated production rates and references of personnel .
num .
specifications for all equipment to be used for the concrete removal surface preparation and cleanup operations .
num .
anticipated rate of production .
num .
an inventory of all common spare parts and replacement accessories required for the equipment .
num .
number of personnel machine operators and supervisors and their relevant experience .
num num .
proposed method and sequencing of operation for all phases of the concrete removal and surface preparation operations .
the above postqualification criteria shall apply regardless of the arrangements made by the contractor to accomplish the hydrodemolition work .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to insure that subcontractors meet the above postqualification requirements .
approval of the hydrodemolition requirements by the engineer shall not relieve the contractor of any of his responsibility under the contract for the timely and successful completion of the work .
num shielding requirement .
shop drawings showing details design and catalog cuts for the temporary protective shield system shall be submitted to the engineer for approval at least thirty num days prior to starting work .
this shield system is to protect pedestrians vehicle andor railroad traffic and utility infrastructure and to insure that no material or debris associated with the hydrodemolition operation falls below the structure .
this system shall be designed for the anticipated weight of all material to be supported .
num construction methods .
the concrete shall be removed by hydrodemolition equipment which produces a high pressure water stream capable of removing concrete asphalt oil dirt concrete laitance and rust from the exposed reinforcing bars by direct impact .
rotary milling or mechanical abrading machines will not be allowed .
the contractor shall comply with all applicable regulations and permit requirements with respect to the use and disposal of water for hydrodemolition operations .
num concrete removal .
the hydrodemolition equipment shall be adjusted such that the depth of concrete removed from areas of sound concrete is approximately ½ inch or as specified on the plans .
in areas where deteriorated concrete is encountered the removal depth shall be established by the engineer .
the trial test procedure used to assure that the correct amount of sound concrete is removed by the hydrodemolition machine shall be as follows the engineer will locate and record the limits of a trial test of sound concrete approximately num square feet in size .
an area of sound concrete shall be defined as an area free from chemical defects delamination spalling andor cracking .
to locate and identify the area of sound concrete the contractor shall in the presence of the engineer and following the removal of the bituminous wearing surface test the deck surface for soundness .
chain dragging tapping with a hammer or other means of testing approved by the engineer will be required .
the hydrodemolition machine will then be advanced over this area and the operating parameters adjusted to remove num inches of sound concrete with in the test area .
the depth of concrete removal shall be measured by the engineer .
if the adjustment is such that the machine is removing too much or too little concrete the machine will be calibrated and the above procedure shall be repeated as many times as necessary to achieve the required depth .
one num test shall be performed for each stage of deck surface concrete removal as shown on the contract drawings .
num the equipment shall be operated by qualified personnel certified by the equipment manufacturer .
operator certification shall be submitted to the engineer for approval before beginning the concrete removal operation .
the contractor shall have available service personnel and an inventory of common wear parts and replacement accessories for the equipment to guarantee that the removal operation will not be interrupted for an extended period of time in the event of an equipment breakdown .
a list of operating parameters to be used for the hydrodemolition work shall be submitted to the engineer prior to the commencement of concrete removal .
once the operating parameters are established by programming or calibration they shall not be changed as the machine progresses across the bridge deck except to prevent unnecessary removal of sound concrete below the required minimum removal depth .
if in the opinion of the engineer after calibrating the hydrodemolition equipment and beginning production work in a particular area insufficient removal of concrete is being obtained the contractor shall recalibrate the equipment for that area to assure removal of concrete to the specified depth .
any areas of the prepared surface contaminated as a result of the contractors operations by oil or other materials detrimental to maintaining a good bond shall be removed to such depth as may be required .
such cleaning or removal shall be performed at no additional cost and the contractor shall be responsible for any resulting delays .
num control of debris and water .
the contractor shall provide structurally adequate shields to be approved by the engineer so that the water jet and broken concrete will not be a hazard to workers traffic on adjacent lanes or pedestrians and property in areas below or adjacent to the bridge .
the water shall be continually drained from the bridge and shields so that excess water will not accumulate in a manner that will not damage the area below the bridge .
broken concrete asphalt and all other debris shall be removed and transported from the site and legally disposed of by the contractor .
all debris shall be removed immediately following the hydrodemolition operation by employing a vacuum recovery system to prevent rebonding to the remaining surface .
any debris which is allowed to resettle or rebond to the surface of the sound concrete shall be removed by the contractor at no extra cost to the state .
special care shall be exercised to avoid damage to the remaining sound concrete and reinforcing steel .
methods for the control maintenance and disposal of hydrodemolition runoff shall conform to the requirements of section num of these specifications .
the runoff control features shall be in place and operational prior to beginning concrete removal .
runoff shall be prevented from running across travel lanes into bridge drainage devices or into areas below or adjacent to the bridge except for the containment basin .
num reinforcing steel .
following the hydrodemolition operation all exposed reinforcing steel shall be inspected to insure that it has been cleaned of all rust and corrosive products including oil dirt concrete fragments laitance loose scale and other coatings of any character num that would destroy or inhibit the bond with the new concrete .
exposed reinforcing steel not adequately cleaned by the initial hydrodemolition process shall be recleaned to the satisfaction of the engineer .
if in the opinion of the engineer the bars are deteriorated such that they have lost num or more of their original diameter the contractor shall replace the steel as specified in accordance with the provisions of either the contract or section num portland cement concrete bridge deck repair of these specifications .
when cleaned reinforcing steel is exposed for more than seven num calendar days measures shall be taken by the contractor to protect the steel from contamination by the type of materials indicated above .
reinforcing steel contaminated as a result of the contractors failure to provide adequate protection shall be recleaned at no extra cost to the state any resulting delay shall be the contractors responsibility .
a light coating of rust can be expected to form on the reinforcing this shall not be considered to constitute contamination .
num concrete placement .
the placement and finishing of concrete for deck repairs and deck overlays shall be as specified in section num portland cement concrete bridge deck repair of these specifications .
num method of measurement .
deck surface concrete removal by hydrodemolition will be measured by the number of square feet of deck surface actually removed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of deck surface concrete removal by hydrodemolition will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated shall constitute full compensation for the removal of the bridge deck surface concrete to the limits shown on the contract drawings including all labor equipment tools design and installation of protective shields runoff diversion and all incidentals necessary for proper completion of the work specified and shown on the plans complete and accepted by the engineer .
no additional payment shall be made for the removal of deteriorated concrete in excess of num inches with the hydrodemolition equipment unless specified on the plans or for any miscellaneous trim work along the curb temporary barriers or on the deck as required to fulfill the requirements of this specification .
num part num incidental construction and services section num steel beam guardrail num description .
this work consists of providing galvanized coated steel beam guardrail and end sections of various types and configurations at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num metal beam rail .
metal beam rail shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num guardrail posts .
guardrail posts shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num guardrail hardware .
hardware shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num installation .
a .
posts .
posts shall be set plumb and in alignment with the rail elements .
num .
steel posts with the exception of end anchor posts shall be mechanically driven .
where boulders or other unsuitable materials are encountered in driving such material shall be removed and replaced with suitable material to permit the setting of the post .
where ledge is encountered the post shall be installed as indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
in driving steel posts suitable driving caps and equipment shall be provided to prevent battering or injury to the posts and to prevent the galvanizing on the posts above the ground line from being scratched defaced or damaged .
num .
wood posts shall be set in dug holes or driven and the area adjacent to the post shall be backfilled and thoroughly compacted .
wood posts used in guardrail anchorage approach sections shall be installed as indicated on the plans .
any surplus material remaining after the completed installation shall be removed and legally disposed of by the contractor .
num the contractor is cautioned that within the limits of any project buried electrical cable for illumination or utilities may be present .
b .
rail elements .
rail elements including brackets rub rails and backup rails where required shall be erected to produce a smooth continuous installation all as indicated on the plans .
terminal sections rub rails and rail elements shall be lapped in the direction of traffic .
all bolts except adjustment bolts shall be drawn tight .
bolts shall be of sufficient length to extend beyond the nuts .
c. end sections .
when excavating for buried anchorages the trench shall be excavated so that the back face of the deadmen anchor is forced against the undisturbed material where this is practical .
the wire rope for all anchorages shall be drawn taut and fastened securely .
before the installation of longitudinal guardrail parallel to traffic begins the required end sections shall be in place .
an unprotected blunt end facing traffic will not be permitted .
by the end of each working day blunt trailing ends must be buried in either earth or earth embankment such that the tip of the rail is at least num inches below ground or mound level .
the blunt end may also be protected by an approved fitch barrel pattern when so indicated on the plans or directed by the engineer .
all costs associated with the protection of blunt trailing ends shall be incurred by the contractor at no additional costs to the state .
d. reflectorized triangular delineators .
silver reflectors shall be installed on the right side of the road and amber on the left side all in accordance with mutcd guidelines for pavement edgeline markings .
the reflectorized aluminum washer is to be placed in the valley of the beam when mounting beam onto each sixth post .
num cut galvanized elements .
before final erection all galvanized elements which have been cut or worked so as to destroy the zinc coating and cause the base metal to be exposed shall have the exposed base metal thoroughly cleaned and painted with one coat of zinc dustzinc oxide paint and a finish coat of aluminum paint .
num method of measurement .
num steel beam guardrail .
steel beam guardrail of the various types indicated will be measured by the number of linear feet endtoend of continuous sections actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num guardrail posts in ledge .
when required guardrail posts in ledge will be measured by the number of such posts actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num end sections .
end sections of the various types indicated will be measured by the number of such sections actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num num basis of payment .
num steel beam guardrail .
the accepted quantities of steel beam guardrail of the various types and configurations indicated on the plans will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including hardware nuts bolts washers splice plates reflectorized triangular delineators posts driven in earth and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num guardrail posts in ledge .
the accepted quantities of guardrail posts in ledge will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including rock excavation and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
num end sections .
the accepted quantities of end sections of the various types and configurations indicated on the plans will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including hardware nuts bolts washers splice plates and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
section num steel backed timber guardrail num description .
this work consists of providing steel backed timber guardrail and terminal sections of various types and configurations at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num timber rail blocks and posts .
timber items shall be pressuretreated sawn structural lumber either spruce or fir and shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum standard specifications for wood products and the applicable requirements of subsections m.num and m.num of these specifications .
num guardrail hardware items .
hardware items shall include all metal fastenings required for timber connections or for connecting timber to concrete or steel and shall conform to the requirements of subsections m.num and m.num of these specifications unless otherwise specified .
hardware items shall include such items as bolts washers nuts tie rods turnbuckles and other items as specified .
unless otherwise specified hardware items shall be galvanized in accordance with subsection m.num para .
e of these specifications .
steel backing plates unless otherwise specified shall be carbon steel conforming to aashto mnum astm anum grade num .
num num terminal sections and anchor sections .
earth berms for type num terminal sections shall consist of gravel borrow and a plantable soil and seed cover conforming respectively to the requirements of subsections num l.num and l.num of these specifications .
castinplace concrete anchor sections specified for the type num and type num terminal section shall be class aae concrete meeting the applicable requirements of section num of these specifications .
reinforcing steel shall meet the provisions of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num construction methods .
installation of the guardrail items including the terminal sections shall be in accordance with the plans and the applicable provisions of subsection num of these specifications .
earth berms at terminal sections shall be constructed in accordance with the plans and shall consist of the placement and compaction of the gravel borrow and the placement of the plantable soil and seed cover in accordance with subsection l.num of these specifications .
num method of measurement .
num steel backed timber guardrail .
steel backed timber guardrail will be measured by the number of linear feet endtoend of continuous sections actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num steel backed timber guardrail terminal sections .
steel backed timber guardrail terminal sections of each type specified will be measured by the number of sections actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
num steel backed timber guardrail .
the accepted quantity of steel backed timber guardrail will be paid for at the respective contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated shall constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including timber rail timber posts steel plates guardrail hardware items including nuts bolts washers and splice plates and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
num steel backed timber guardrail terminal sections .
the accepted quantities of each type of steel backed timber guardrail terminal sections will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including all earthwork excavation trimming and fine grading landscape items guardrail hardware items concrete and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num section num fences num description .
this work consists of providing woven wire fence of the chain link design including gates posts and post foundations hardware and appurtenances of various types and configurations at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
materials for chain link fences gates posts and post foundations hardware and appurtenances shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num fence and guardrail of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num general .
the contractor shall perform such clearing as may be necessary to construct the fence to the required grade and alignment .
at locations of small streams or drainage ditches where it is not practical to conform the fence to the general contour of the ground surface the contractor when directed shall span the opening below the fence with wire fastened to stakes of such length as required .
the new fence shall be permanently tied to the terminals of existing fences whenever required by the engineer .
when directed the contractor will be required to stake down the chain link fence at several points between posts .
at each location where electric transmission or distribution lines cross any of the types of fences covered by this specification the contractor shall furnish and install a ground conforming to the requirements of section num of the national electric safety code .
num installing posts .
posts shall be set in class aae concrete unless otherwise specified on the plans .
when the plans require that posts braces or anchors be imbedded in concrete the contractor shall install temporary guys or braces as may be required to support the posts in proper position until such time as the concrete has set sufficiently to anchor said posts .
no materials shall be installed on posts or strain placed on guys and bracing that are set in concrete until directed by the engineer .
concrete footings shall be carried to the depth and dimensions shown on the plans .
where rock is encountered within the required depth to which the post is to be erected a hole of a diameter slightly larger than the largest dimension of the post shall be drilled into the rock and the post grouted in .
the regular dimensioned concrete footing as shown on the plans shall then be placed between the top of the rock and required grade shown on the plans .
all hollow pipe and tube type post shall be fitted with post tops .
the bases of the post tops shall have flanges which fit around the outside of the posts and shall be secured .
unless otherwise specified tension wires shall be used in sections of chain link fence .
the top and bottom tension wire shall be placed stretched taut and secured at ends to all posts in a satisfactory manner before fabric is placed .
num installing fabric .
the fabric shall be unrolled on the outside of the fence line with the bottom edge of the fabric against the posts .
the various rolls shall be spliced by bringing the num ends close together and weaving in a picket in such a way that will engage both ends of the rolls and catch with each twist each separate mesh of the picket of both rolls of fabric .
at end corner or gate posts the stretcher bar shall be slipped through the end picket of the fabric and the stretcher bar bands at the same time .
the bolts in the stretcher bar bands shall then be tightened .
additional rolls of fabric shall be spliced and placed as the erection progresses along the fence .
in long sections the fence shall be stretched at intervals of about num feet .
the fabric shall be placed by securing one end and applying sufficient tension to remove all slack before making attachments elsewhere .
after the fabric has been stretched it shall be tied to the tension wire with fabric ties spaced not more than num inches apart .
the fabric shall then be attached to the line posts with fabric ties spaced not more than num inches apart .
the topmost clip shall be placed on the line post as near the top of the fabric as possible and the lowest clip as near the bottom of the fabric as possible .
at terminal sections end corner and pull and gate posts the fabric shall be fastened with stretcher bars and bands .
the fastenings shall be spaced not more than num inches on centers for terminal sections end corner and pull and gate posts .
the topmost band shall be placed on these posts as near the top of the fabric as possible and the lowest band as near the bottom as possible .
before making a closure the other end of the run shall be fastened to the end corner or gate post as described previously .
the operation of making a closure of a run shall be as follows .
the stretching equipment shall be clamped on the ends of the fabric parallel to each other and about num feet apart when the tension is first applied .
the stretching shall continue until the slack has been removed from both sections of the fabric .
if the ends overlap the fabric shall be cut to match .
the ends shall be joined by the insertion of a picket similar to the methods of connecting two rolls of fabric .
num braces .
when top rail is not used braces shall be placed num inches down from the top of the terminal posts and shall extend from the terminal end corner and pull post and gate posts to the brace post .
the braces shall be securely fastened to the post and trussed from brace post back to terminal post with round rod and turnbuckle all as shown on the plans .
num gates .
the gates shall be hung on gate fittings as shown on the plans .
the lower hinge ball and socket type shall be placed on top of the concrete in which the gate post is set .
the sockets for the cone and foot bolt shall be set in concrete so that the plunger pin will fit perfectly in the socket when the gate is in a closed position .
gates shall be so erected as to swing in the direction indicated and shall be provided with gate stops as specified and as shown on the plans .
gates shall be erected in suitable places as directed by the engineer or as shown on the plans .
all hardware shall be thoroughly secured properly adjusted and left in perfect working order .
hinges and diagonal bracing in gates shall be adjusted so that gates will hang level .
num existing fence connection .
wherever a new fence joins an existing fence either at a corner or at the intersection of straight line fences the corner post with brace post shall be set at said junction and braced the same as herein described for corner posts or as shown on the plans .
if the connection is made at other than the corner of the new fence the last span of the old fence shall contain a brace span .
num num method of measurement .
num fence .
fence of the various types indicated will be measured in linear feet endtoend along the top of fence of continuous sections actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num gates .
gates of the various types and sizes indicated will be measured by the number of such units actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num post holes in ledge .
post holes in ledge will be measured by the number of such holes actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
num fence .
the accepted quantities of fence of the various types and at the respective contract unit prices per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including clearing and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num gates .
the accepted quantities of gates of the various types and sizes indicated on the plans will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices per unit as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num post holes in ledge .
the accepted quantities of post holes in ledge will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including nonshrink grout or leadite backfill and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num remove and reset fence num description .
this work consists of the dismantling rehandling stockpiling and removing such sections of fence as are indicated on the plans and the subsequent resetting of said fence at new locations indicated on the plans or directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
the materials dismantled and removed shall be utilized in the fence as it is reset except where necessary new materials including new posts shall be furnished by the contractor .
num new and replacement materials necessary for the proper reconstruction of fences shall conform to section m.num fence and guardrail of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num dismantling .
fence rails gates fittings anchorages and appurtenances and materials suitable for reuse shall be carefully dismantled and detached from the posts and neatly stored and protected from damage .
the contractor shall replace at his own expense any post or other material damaged by its methods of dismantling and removing operations .
all salvaged material shall be cleaned stored and protected until it is reset .
all post holes and other holes caused by excavation under this item shall be backfilled with approved granular material and thoroughly compacted .
if post holes are located in a paved area the material shall be replaced in kind .
num resetting .
the fence shall be reset plumb in accordance with both the details indicated on the plans and the requirements for new work of the same or similar type as set forth in other sections of these specifications .
where conflicts exist the directions of the engineer shall govern .
backfilling around the fence posts shall consist of the placement of approved granular material that is thoroughly compacted .
if the fence posts were originally set in cement concrete they shall be reset in their new locations in concrete .
galvanized fence materials and fittings will not be required to be painted unless otherwise indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
post holes in ledge shall be constructed in accordance with subsection num installing posts of these specifications .
num method of measurement .
num remove and reset fence .
remove and reset fence will be measured in linear feet outside to outside of end posts of fence actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num post holes in ledge .
post holes in ledge will be measured by the number of such holes actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
fence posts unsuitable for resetting through no fault of the contractor shall be replaced with new posts and said new posts shall be measured for payment by the actual number of such posts furnished and installed .
num basis of payment .
num remove and reset fence .
the accepted quantities of remove and reset fence will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials equipment backfill num pavement patch and clearing and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
the accepted quantities of fence posts replaced will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete com pensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
num post holes in ledge .
the accepted quantities of post holes in ledge will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials equipment including nonshrink grout or leadite backfill and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num sidewalks and driveways num description .
this work consists of constructing sidewalks and driveways on prepared gravel bases at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
sidewalks and driveways may be constructed of either bituminous concrete or portland cement concrete as indicated on the plans .
num materials .
num portland cement concrete .
portland cement concrete for sidewalks typical driveways and commercial driveways shall conform to the requirements as set forth in subsections num classification and num proportioning of these specifications .
num bituminous concrete .
bituminous concrete for sidewalks and driveways shall be type inum and type inum respectively and shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num of these specifications .
coarse and fine aggregates mineral filler and asphalt cement shall be combined to produce sidewalk and driveway pavements in accordance with the requirements listed under the column heading entitled class inum or sidewalk in subsection m.num of these specifications .
performancegraded asphalt cement shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num other materials .
a. gravel borrow shall conform to the requirements set forth in subsection m.num of these specifications .
b .
reinforcing when required shall be wirefabric that conforms to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num num construction methods .
num scheduling sidewalk construction .
unless directed otherwise by the engineer the contractor shall schedule sidewalk construction activities such that no areas are left without paved sidewalks for more than seven consecutive working days .
this means that once the contractor commences the removal of existing sidewalks at any location within the project the construction of new sidewalks at that particular location must be completed within seven consecutive working days .
to maintain a portion of the existing sidewalk while replacing or resetting curb the contractor shall when indicated on the plans or directed by the engineer saw cut and remove the existing sidewalk num feet behind the face of the curb and complete all curb related activities prior to removing the remaining sidewalk area .
removal of sidewalks shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of subsection num of these specifications .
num compliance with the americans with disabilities act .
to comply with the requirements of the americans with disabilities act ada sidewalks shall provide a minimum clearance of num inches of width at point of narrowing excluding the curb width and num inches of continuous width elsewhere .
the contractor shall verify with the engineer that these requirements can be met prior to completing the construction of new sidewalks .
under no circumstances shall any sidewalks be constructed without prior approval of the engineer if it is determined that these requirements can not be attained .
num portland cement concrete sidewalks and driveways .
a. excavation .
excavation shall be made to the required depth and to a width that will permit the installation and bracing of the forms .
all existing material including gravel borrow shall be excavated to the limits indicated on the plans .
the foundation shall be shaped and compacted to a firm even surface conforming to the section shown on the plans .
all unsuitable material shall be removed and replaced with acceptable material .
b. gravel borrow subbase .
the gravel base shall be placed in layers not over num inches in depth and compacted to the specified depth below finish grade .
c. forms .
forms shall be of wood or metal and shall extend for the full depth of the concrete .
all forms shall be straight free from warp and of sufficient strength to resist the pressure of the concrete without springing .
bracing and staking of forms shall be such that the forms remain in both horizontal and vertical alignment until their removal .
d. placing concrete .
the foundation shall be thoroughly moistened immediately prior to the placing of the concrete .
the proportioning mixing and placing of the concrete shall be in accordance with the requirements for the class of concrete specified .
e. finishing .
the surface shall be finished with a wooden float .
no plastering of the surface will be permitted .
all outside edges of the slab and all joints shall be edged with a num inch radius edging tool .
f. joints .
expansion joints shall be of the dimensions specified and shall be filled with an approved type of premoulded expansion joint filler .
sidewalks and driveways shall be divided into sections by dummy joints formed by a jointing tool or other acceptable means as directed .
num these dummy joints shall extend into the concrete for at least num of the depth and shall be approximately numinch wide .
at no time shall the distance between transverse andor longitudinal dummy joints exceed num feet .
construction joints shall be formed around all appurtenances such as manholes utility poles etc .
extending into and through the sidewalk .
premoulded expansion joint filler numinch thick shall be installed in these joints .
expansion joints shall be placed every num feet .
the forcing of premoulded expansion joint filler into freshly placed concrete will not be allowed .
expansion joint filler shall be installed between concrete sidewalks and any fixed smooth structure such as a building or bridge .
this expansion joint material shall extend for the full depth of the walk .
if the sidewalk abuts an irregular wall foundation or stationary object the expansion joint filler shall be placed num inches from the irregular surface and concrete placed between the irregular surface and the expansion joint material .
the maximum tolerance for the numinch concrete thickness is plusorminus ½inch .
g. curing .
concrete shall be cured for at least num hours .
curing shall be by means of moist burlap mats or by other approved methods as set forth in subsection num curing of these specifications .
during the curing period all traffic both pedestrian and vehicular shall be excluded .
vehicular traffic shall be excluded for such additional time as the engineer may direct .
h. cutting and matching existing concrete sidewalks or driveways .
where a newly constructed sidewalk andor driveway abuts an existing sidewalk or driveway the existing sidewalk or driveway shall be cut with a concrete saw only .
the concrete saw shall conform to subsection num para .
c of these specifications .
num bituminous sidewalks and driveways .
a. excavation and forms .
excavation and forms shall meet the requirements of subsections num paras .
a and c respectively .
the limits of excavation will be as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
all material within the limits of excavation must be removed and replaced with gravel borrow subbase .
b. gravel borrow subbase .
gravel material shall be placed in layers not exceeding num inches in depth and each layer shall be compacted as specified in subsection num of these specifications .
c. placing bituminous sidewalk and driveway material .
bituminous sidewalk and driveway material shall be placed on the compacted base in one or more courses as indicated to give the required depth when rolled .
compaction shall be accomplished by means of a power roller of a type and weight acceptable to the engineer .
in areas inaccessible to the roller hand tamping or hand roller will be permitted .
in any case the bituminous material shall be uniformly compacted .
the contractor shall simultaneously extend the binder and type inum surface course from the project roadway into all driveways which are not constructed with portland cement concrete for a length of num feet thereby eliminating cold joints at the gutter line .
num num method of measurement .
num portland cement sidewalks and driveways .
portland cement concrete sidewalks and driveways will be measured by the number of cubic yards of pavement actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num bituminous concrete sidewalks and driveways .
bituminous concrete sidewalks and driveways will be measured by the number of tons of pavement material actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
num portland cement concrete sidewalks and driveways .
the accepted quantities of portland cement concrete sidewalks and driveways will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard as listed in the proposal .
a maximum num percent overrun of the calculated quantities based on the required thickness as shown on the plans is permissible .
the price so stated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including expansion joint material reinforcement and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
excavation and gravel borrow subbase will be paid for separately under appropriate work items .
num bituminous concrete sidewalks and driveways .
the accepted quantities of bituminous concrete sidewalks and driveways will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
excavation and gravel borrow subbase will be paid for separately under appropriate work items .
section num curbing for roadways num description .
this work consists of the construction of curbing on prepared gravel bases andor the construction of bituminous berm on underlying pavement courses at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num types of curbing .
the following types of curbing are designated as follows a .
granite curbing .
b. precast concrete curbing .
c. bituminous curbing .
num d. bituminous berm .
e. remove handle haul trim and reset curbing and edging straight andor circular .
all types .
num materials .
num granite curbing .
granite curbing shall conform to the requirements of subsections m.num and m.num granite curb for roadways and granite slope curbing for roadways respectively of these specifications .
num precast concrete curbing .
concrete for curbing shall be class zae and shall conform to the applicable requirements of section num portland cement concrete of these specifications with the following exceptions .
a .
job mix formula .
the contractor shall submit for approval a jobmix formula for the concrete mix design in accordance with the provisions of subsection num proportioning of these specifications .
b. tolerances .
precast concrete curbing apron stones inlets and related concrete curb products shall conform to the dimensions shown on the plans .
said dimensions shall fall within the following tolerances dimension tolerance greater than num to num num greater than num to num ½ greater than num to num num details and dimensions shall be true and square .
the tolerance allowance on each precast element shall not relieve the contractor from obtaining a suitable configuration of the various installed products .
num bituminous curbing .
bituminous material for curbing shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num bituminous berm .
bituminous material for berm shall conform to the requirements for class inum surface course as set forth in subsection m.num of these specifications .
tack coat shall conform to the requirements for emulsified asphalt as set forth in subsection m.num of these specifications .
highway joint sealant material shall be as listed in the departments approved materials list .
num gravel borrow shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num granite curbing .
num a. excavation .
excavation shall be made to a sufficient depth to allow for a gravel base course .
all soft and unsuitable material shall be removed and replaced with approved granular material which shall be thoroughly compacted .
b .
installation .
the curb shall be set such that the front top arris line conforms to the required line and grade .
the gravel base upon which the curb is to be set shall be compacted to a firm even surface .
c. joints .
curbing stones shall be placed endtoend as close as possible .
no more than ½inch opening shall show for the full width of the top and num inches down from the front .
d. backfilling .
after the curb has been set any remaining excavated areas shall be backfilled with approved material and thoroughly compacted back and front to grade .
num precast concrete curbing .
the installation of precast concrete curbing shall conform to the requirements of subsection num above .
num bituminous curbing .
a. excavation .
excavation shall conform to the requirements of subsection num para .
a above .
b .
preparation of bed .
when curbing is to be constructed on a fresh laid bituminous surface that surface must first be cleaned .
c. installation .
bituminous curbing shall be constructed by use of a selfpropelled automatic curber or curb machine or a paver equipped with curbing attachments .
the automatic curber or curb machine shall be approved by the engineer prior to its use .
the machine shall conform to the following requirements num .
the weight of the machine shall be such that required compaction is obtained without the machine riding above the bed on which curbing is constructed .
num .
the machine shall form curbing that is uniform in texture shape and density .
num .
the engineer may permit the construction of curbing by means other than the automatic curber when either short sections or sections with short radii are required or for other reasons as may be warranted .
the curbing produced by such alternate means shall conform in all respects to the curbing produced by the use of the machine .
d. painting and sealing .
painting andor sealing shall be applied only on curbing which is clean and dry and which has reached the ambient temperature .
num bituminous berm .
the bituminous berm shall be placed on the underlying pavement course in accordance with either method a or b as described below .
method a .
the berm is placed at the same time as the asphalt surface course in one operation .
num the underlying pavement shall be broom cleaned and tacked prior to placement .
the bituminous berm will be placed in one lift and will be compacted by a smooth steel wheel roller of a type and weight acceptable to the engineer .
method b .
the berm is placed independent of the asphalt surface course placement .
the berm shall be founded entirely on the base course .
any adjacent binder course and surface course shall be saw cut as required to form a true and even edge .
the portion of the base course on which the berm is to be placed as well as any vertical saw cut edge shall be cleaned to the satisfaction of the engineer and covered with an approved bituminous tack coat .
the berm shall be placed in one layer and shall be compacted by a smooth steel wheel roller of a type and weight acceptable to the engineer .
after the berm is placed the joint between the berm and the existing pavement shall be sealed with an approved highway joint sealant .
num remove handle haul trim and reset curbing and edging straight andor circular all types .
the existing curbing or edging shall be carefully removed to minimize damage to said units and adjacent pavement or sidewalks .
the curbing or edging will then be handled hauled and stockpiled as required .
the ends for jointing will be cut and squared .
all curb or edging must be thoroughly cleaned prior to resetting .
if the curb or edging is to be reset in either its original or new location excavation shall be made to the dimensions shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer to allow for the proper fine grading and compaction of the gravel borrow subbase .
all soft or unsuitable materials shall be removed and replaced with gravel borrow material which shall be thoroughly compacted to prevent future settlement of the reset curb or edging .
the curb or edging shall be reset such that the front top arris line conforms to the required line and grade .
the gravel base upon which the curb or edging is to be reset shall be placed in layers not exceeding num inches in depth .
each such layer shall then be compacted to num percent of maximum density by means of a vibratory compactor of a size and type approved by the engineer .
curbing and edging shall be laid with joints as narrow as possible for stone curb .
the individual stones shall be trimmed and cut as necessary so that no more than ½inch opening shall show for the full width of the top and num inches down from the front .
after the curbing or edging has been reset any remaining excavation areas shall be backfilled with approved granular material and thoroughly compacted back and front to grade .
methods of compaction shall preserve the line and grade of the reset curbing or edging .
the contractor shall replace with new material any existing curbing or edging that is to be reset which is lost damaged or destroyed as a result of either its construction operations or failure to properly store and protect said units all at no additional cost to the state .
num method of measurement .
num granite curbing .
granite curbstraight and granite curbcircular will be measured along the front face of the section at the finished grade elevation by the number of num linear feet of such curbing actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
granite curb corners granite curb transitions granite curb apron stones granite curb inlet stones and granite curb wheelchair ramp transitions and curb will be measured by the number of each such units actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num precast concrete curbing .
precast concrete curbstraight and precast concrete curbcircular will be measured along the front face of the section at the finished grade elevation by the number of linear feet of such curbing actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
precast concrete curb corners and precast concrete curb transitions precast concrete curb apron stones precast concrete curb inlet stones and precast concrete curb wheelchair ramp transitions and curb will be measured by the number of each such units actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num bituminous curbing .
bituminous curbing will be measured along the front face of the section at the finished grade elevation by the number of linear feet of such curbing actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
deduction in length will be made for the presence of drainage structures installed along the curbline such as catch basins drop inlets etc .
num bituminous berm .
bituminous berm will be measured by the number of linear feet actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num remove handle haul trim and reset curbing and edging straight andor circular all types .
remove handle haul trim and reset curbing and edging straight andor circular all types will be measured along the front face of the section at the finished grade elevation by the number of linear feet of such curbing reset in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
curb corners curb transitions apron stones inlet stones and curb wheelchair ramp transitions and curb will be similarly measured .
deductions in length will be made for the presence of new drainage structures installed along the curbline such as catch basins drop inlets etc .
num basis of payment .
num granite curbing .
the accepted quantities of granite curbstraight and granite curbcircular will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the accepted quantities of granite curb corners granite curb transitions granite curb apron stones .
granite curb inlet stones and granite curb wheelchair ramp transitions and curb will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each as listed in the proposal .
num num precast concrete curbing .
the accepted quantities of precast concrete curb straight and precast concrete curbcircular will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the accepted quantities of precast concrete curb corners precast concrete curb transitions precast concrete curb apron stones precast concrete curb inlet stones and precast concrete curb wheelchair ramp transitions and curb will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each as listed in the proposal .
num bituminous curbing .
the accepted quantity of bituminous curbing will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices stated above for granite curbing precast concrete curbing and bituminous curbing constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including excavation joints gravel borrow backfilling and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
the following work will be paid for separately under appropriate work items saw cutting the removal and disposal of existing pavements both rigid and flexible and sidewalks .
num bituminous berm .
the accepted quantity of bituminous berm will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
however the quantity of bituminous material used in the berm is not included in this contract unit price but rather is included in the unit price listed for class inum bituminous concrete pavement .
the unit price for bituminous berm includes all preparatory items required for proper placement of the berm including bituminous tack coat placement and compaction of the berm sealing of the joints and all other incidentals necessary to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num remove handle haul trim and reset curbing and edging straight andor circular all types .
the accepted quantities of remove handle haul trim and reset curbing and edging straight andor circular all types for each kind and type specified will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including removal and disposal of existing pavement structure excavation for removal and setting unless otherwise noted that resetting excavation is to be paid for separately all handling hauling and stockpiling cleaning all sections to be reset cutting and trimming as necessary to provide the maximum ½inch opening across the top and down the front of the curbing gravel borrow subbase course including compaction and fine grading unless otherwise noted the resetting of the curb or edging to line and grade backfilling compacting and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
saw cutting replacement concrete base and any concrete required between the reset curb or edging and the existing pavement structure will be paid for separately under appropriate work items .
num section num dust control num description .
this work consists of furnishing and applying water andor calcium chloride to reduce dust nuisance and hazard within the project limits as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num general .
water used for dust control shall be fresh and free from injurious amounts of oil acid salt alkali organic matter or other deleterious substances .
num calcium chloride .
calcium chloride used for dust control shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num water .
the contractor will be required to sprinkle with water such sections of the subgrade and slopes as the engineer may designate .
an average application of one gallon of water per square yard of exposed area should be considered for each treatment .
the exact number of applications and amount of water used shall be based upon field and weather conditions .
the application and amount of water shall be as directed by the engineer .
prior to actual use the sprinkling equipment shall be equipped with adequate shutoff control and shall be approved by the engineer .
sprinkling equipment suitable for horizontal and embankment areas shall be kept available at all times for this specific work .
the contractor shall be prepared to perform the work at any time including sundays and holidays .
the work shall be done upon order of the engineer .
the contractor shall make provisions and arrange with a public water supply for a separate meter specifically for this item .
under no conditions is the use of water necessary to obtain proper compaction of embankments base course or the proper curing of any surface course or structure to be furnished from this source .
the contractor shall make provisions and arrange with a public water supply for a separate meter for water used on other items of construction .
where a public water supply is not available as a source of water supply the contractor shall furnish the required amounts from the nearest possible location available .
num calcium chloride .
calcium chloride shall be applied only at the locations at such times and in the amount as may be directed by the engineer .
an average application of one pound of calcium chloride per square yard of exposed area should be considered for each treatment .
the exact number of applications and amount of calcium chloride shall be based upon field and weather conditions .
it shall be spread in such manner and by such devices that uniform distribution is attained over the entire area on which it is placed .
num num method of measurement .
num water .
water for dust control will be measured by the number of thousand gallons actually applied as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall provide an acceptable method for measuring the quantity of water applied to highways and embankments from sources other than a metered public water supply .
num calcium chloride .
calcium chloride for dust control will be measured by the number of tons actually applied as directed by the engineer .
the engineer may allow the weights as printed on the shipping containers to constitute the official measure .
otherwise the contractor shall provide scales to weight the material at no additional cost to the state .
num basis of payment .
num water .
the accepted quantities of water for dust control will be paid for at the contract unit price per num gallons as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated is full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num calcium chloride .
the accepted quantities of calcium chloride for dust control will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num failure to comply .
if in the judgement of the engineer the contractor fails to adequately control dust in accordance with this specification or as directed the daily charge set forth in special provision code num will be deducted from monies then due the contractor as a charge for failure to comply with this specification .
moreover the stated daily charge will continue each consecutive calendar day thereafter until dust is adequately controlled .
in addition if the departments maintenance division is required to perform dust control operations due to the failure of the contractor to provide same all costs associated with these operations of the maintenance division will likewise be deducted from monies then due the contractor .
section num flagstones num description .
this work consists of providing flagstone walks and treads of the type and at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
flagstone shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num flagstones of these specifications .
num sand shall conform to the requirements of section m.num fine aggregate for mortar of these specifications .
mortar shall conform to the requirements of section m.num mortar of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num walks .
flagstone shall be laid on a sand base to the depth indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
flagstone shall be laid to the line grade and design indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num treads .
flagstone treads shall be bedded in mortar and shall be laid to the line grade and design indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
flagstones will be measured by the number of square feet of walks or treads actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of flagstones will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including sand base and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
section num precast concrete median barrier num description .
this work consists of providing various types of precast concrete median barriers on previously prepared gravel borrow subbase courses at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num general .
a. portland cement concrete .
concrete shall be class xxae and shall conform to the applicable requirements of both sections num and m.num portland cement concrete of these specifications .
b. reinforcement .
bar reinforcement shall conform to subsection m.num bar reinforcement of these specifications .
num dowels shall conform to the requirements of astm anum and be either epoxy coated or galvanized in accordance with subsections m.num and m.num respectively of these specifications .
c. anchor bolts for light standards .
bolts and nuts shall conform to subsection m.num para .
a of these specifications .
the top exposed num inches of anchor bolts together with their nuts shall be galvanized in accordance with subsection m.num of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num plant requirements .
a .
manufacture .
precast concrete barrier units shall be manufactured in accordance with the applicable provisions of section num and section num portland cement concrete and precastprestressed structure concrete masonry respectively of these specifications .
b. reinforcement .
all reinforcing bars shall have a minimum cover of num inches .
c. dowels light standard bolts .
dowels shall be accurately set and maintained at right angles to the plane of the end of the unit .
anchor bolts for light supports shall be accurately spaced in the required bolt circle and maintained vertical to the plane of the bottom of the recess .
d. casting .
the units shall be cast with the forms in a numdegree inverted position .
devices cast flush with the bottom of the barrier to facilitate removal from the forms may be left in place with approval of the engineer .
such lifting devices shall be located so that the unit will not be overstressed while lifting in the inverted position .
the finish on all exposed surfaces shall be smooth and dense concrete with a reasonably uniform appearance .
no rub will be required but any air holes shall be immediately filled and finished after form removal to the satisfaction of the engineer .
units shall not be removed from forms before attaining the minimum numday compressive strength .
e. inspection .
all precast concrete barrier units shall be inspected both at the points of manufacture and on the project site .
any units showing defects or damage shall be removed and replaced by the contractor at no additional cost to the state .
f. tolerances .
precast concrete median barrier units shall be cast true and square in accordance with the applicable details as shown on the plans .
dimensions of units shall be accurate within the following tolerances dimension tolerance greater than num to num num greater than num to num ½ greater than num to num num greater than num to num num num num preparation of subbase .
the subbase shall be furnished and placed in accordance with subsections num and num placing and shaping and compaction respectively of these specifications .
num setting .
units shall be placed on previously prepared gravel borrow subbase to the lines and grades shown on the plans .
precast concrete blocks previously set in the compacted subbase and flush with the finish grade shall be used .
when singlefaced barrier units are installed on horizontal curves andor at locations where they are back to back because of a grade difference between roadways the contractor will be allowed to use numinch by numinch timbers as spacers to facilitate the installation of the units .
the space between the units is to be filled with a cement concrete grout mixture approved by the engineer .
care shall be exercised during hauling storage hoisting and handling of the units to prevent cracking or damage .
no damaged units shall be installed .
units showing defects or damage shall be removed and replaced or repaired by the contractor at no additional cost to the state .
num method of measurement .
precast concrete median barrier units of the various types and configurations specified on the plans will be measured in linear feet of continuous runs of said units actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
standard precast concrete median barrier light units and transition units will be measured by the number of such units actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of precast concrete median barrier of the various types and configurations specified on the plans will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the accepted quantities of standard precast concrete median barrier light units and transition units will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment for furnishing and placing units on previously prepared compacted subbase courses including spacer timbers and concrete grout where applicable and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
payment for compacted gravel borrow subbase course is not included in the contract unit prices for precast concrete median barrier units .
num section num raised reflective pavement marker snow plowable num description .
this work consists of providing snow plowable raised reflective pavement markers rrpm yellow and white at locations designated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num the unit .
the marker shall be stimsonite model numlp as manufactured by amerace corporation signal division or approved equal .
the marker shall consist of an iron casting to which is attached a replaceable prismatic reflective element .
the pavement reflector and casting shall be able to withstand snow plowing in opposite directions without sustaining damage .
a .
casting .
the casting shall be manufactured of nodular iron conforming to astm anum hardened to num rc and shall be marked with the manufacturers name and model number .
the dimensions of the casting shall be approximately num inches long by num inches wide by num inches high .
installed height shall be approximately num inches above the road surface .
its weight shall be approximately num pounds .
the surface of the keel and web of the casting shall be free of scale dirt oil grease or other contaminant which may reduce the bond of the casting to the epoxy adhesive .
b. reflectors .
the reflector shall consist of an acrylic plastic shell filled with a tightlyadherent potting compound .
the shell shall contain one or two prismatic retro reflective faces to reflect incident light from single or opposite directions .
the reflector shall be laminated to an elastomeric pad and adhesively attached to the casting .
the reflector shall be shaped like the shallow frustum of a pyramid and shall conform to the following design requirements dimensions num x num x num nominal slope of reflecting surface num degrees area of each reflecting surface num square inches nominal thickness of elastomeric pad num inch the outer surface of the shell shall be smooth except for purposes of identification .
thin untempered glass shall be bonded to the prismatic reflective faces to provide an extremely hard and durable abrasionresistant surface .
num the shell shall be molded of methyl methacrylate conforming to federal specification lpnumc type i class num .
the color of the reflective elements when illuminated by an automobile headlight shall be white or amber .
offcolor reflection shall constitute grounds for rejection .
the reflectors shall be adhered to the casting in proper position at the factory .
num epoxy adhesive marker to roadway .
the formulation of epoxy adhesive shall conform to the requirements of the current issue of aashto mnum .
the manufacturer of the rrpms must approve of the use of any particular formulation of epoxy adhesive .
the epoxy manufacturer shall provide the engineer with a certificate of analysis with the delivery of the material .
this certificate shall include the formulation of the adhesive as determined by certified test data of the component parts and the cured system .
tests shall be conducted in accordance with methods set forth in aashto mnum current issue .
the formulation should be for both components and should indicate all its various parts their brand names producers and percent by weight .
certified test data may be provided by either the epoxy adhesive manufacturer or an independent testing laboratory .
test results for each individual batch must be provided .
the contractor shall also furnish to the engineer a numpint sample of each component from the initial batch of epoxy adhesive to be used on the project and each subsequent batch .
num construction methods .
num surface preparation .
at the time of installation the metal casting shall be free of dirt oil grease rust moisture or any foreign matter which will impair adhesion to the pavement .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to clean each contaminated casting by sand blasting or some other approved method to remove all such foreign matter prior to installation .
pavement markers shall not be placed on pavement surfaces that show evidence of cracking checking spalling or failure of underlying base material .
if during the laying out process it is determined that the marker would be installed at a point with one of the aforementioned surface defects or at a pavement construction joint then the marker shall be relocated a distance not to exceed num percent of the typical marker spacing .
the minimum pavement surface temperature at the time of application shall be that recommended by the epoxy manufacturer .
no markers shall be installed if the pavement surface or precut slots are wet .
num installation .
plowable pavement markers shall be installed by inserting the two keels of the casting into parallel slots cut into the pavement said slots to be partially filled with epoxy num adhesive all in accordance with the rrpm manufacturers recommendations .
the markers shall be placed no later than seven days after the slots are cut into pavement .
before applying the epoxy adhesive the slots shall be brushed or blown clean of loose material and shall be dry .
a predetermined amount of epoxy shall be placed in and between the slots to insure that all voids beneath and around the casting are filled so as to create a watertight seal around the casting and yet not produce an excessive overflow resulting in unacceptable residue on pavement .
the keels of the pavement marker casting shall be hand placed into the slots in such a manner as to assure that the tips of the markers deflecting surface are below the pavement surface .
the four lugs on the keels of the casting shall be in contact with the pavement .
the epoxy adhesive requires that the mixing operation and placing of the pavement markers be accomplished in a timely manner .
any mixed batch that becomes so viscous that it can not be readily extruded from under the marker under light pressure shall not be used .
any heating of the epoxy shall be by the application of indirect heat .
the markers shall be protected against traffic until the adhesive has hardened .
the following table may be used as a guideline .
minimum period protected ambient air temperature of from traffic minutes num num num num num num num num num num num num note num no installations will be made at a lower temperature than numof unless the epoxy manufacturer can guarantee his product will harden sufficiently at this lower temperature to withstand traffic in num minutes .
excess adhesive on the pavement and on the exposed surface of the marker shall be immediately removed .
any marker leaving a raised end exposed above the pavement must be removed .
the resulting hole must be filled with an acceptable patch and a new marker properly installed within num feet from the faulty installation .
num method of measurement .
raised reflectorized pavement markers snow plowable will be measured by the number of such units actually furnished and installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of raised reflectorized pavement markers snow plowable will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated is full and complete compensation for all labor materials and num equipment including cutting the pavement to the specified dimensions to receive the marker housing mixing the epoxy adhesive and placing it into the parallel slots placing the marker units in the prepared slots and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
section num stone masonry walls num description .
this work consists of providing wet stone masonry walls of standard designs at locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num general .
a .
stone .
stone for masonry walls shall conform to the requirements of section m.num stone for masonry of these specifications .
b. mortar .
mortar shall conform to the requirements subsection m.num mortar of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num weather limitations .
temperature and weather conditions for stone masonry wall construction shall conform to the provisions of subsection num of these specifications .
num mixing of mortar .
the requirements for the mixing of mortar shall conform to the provisions of subsection num of these specifications .
num selecting and storing stone .
a sufficient stock of the approved stone shall be kept on the site to permit adequate selection and blending of stones by the masons .
the stones shall be kept free from dirt oil or any other injurious material which may prevent the proper adhesion of the mortar or detract from the appearance of the exposed surfaces .
num shaping and dressing stones .
selected stone roughly squared and pitched to line shall be used at all angles and wall ends .
all shaping and dressing of stone shall be performed before the stone is laid in the wall and no dressing or hammering which will loosen the stone will be permitted after it is placed .
if a stone is loosened after the mortar is set it shall be removed the mortar cleaned off and the stone relaid in fresh mortar .
num laying stone .
the wall shall be compactly laid having all vertical joints in the interior of the wall completely filled with suitable stones or spalls thoroughly bedded in mortar .
each stone to be set in mortar shall be cleaned and thoroughly wetted before being set in a full bed of fresh mortar .
the stones shall be carefully settled in place before the mortar has set .
any mortar num in which initial set has commenced shall be removed from the mixing boards or receptacles and not used in the work .
no retempering of mortar will be allowed .
when laying is interrupted the top courses shall be left unplastered .
masonry shall be laid to line and in the pattern required .
the stone shall be laid with bearing beds parallel to the natural bed of the material .
the use of chinking stones in the face must be kept to a minimum and will be permitted only in the horizontal joints to provide firm bearing of stones .
chinking of vertical joints in the face will not be permitted .
care shall be taken to prevent the bunching of small stones or stones of similar size .
when weathered or colored stones or stones of varying textures are being used care must be exercised to distribute the various kinds of stones uniformly throughout the exposed faces of the work .
the foundation base of the wall shall be composed of large stones stones that are distinctly larger than the majority of the stones in the wall that are laid to form a relatively flat surface upon which the succeeding courses may be placed .
large stones shall be used for the bottom courses and in general shall decrease in size from the bottom to the top of the work .
at least onefourth of the stones in the face shall be headers a stone laid with its end toward the face of the wall and these shall be evenly distributed .
headers shall extend not less than num inches into the core or the stones that make up the center of the wall .
headers must be uniform in height and width throughout their length .
headers in walls num feet or less in thickness shall extend entirely through the wall .
all stones shall be laid to break joints and to thoroughly bond the work .
stones are to be placed to form bonds with the stones of adjoining courses of not less than num inches in ashlar squared and dressed stone and split face masonry and num inches in rubble masonry .
headers shall be placed over stretchers stones laid with their length parallel to the face of the wall and in general the headers of each course shall equally divide the spaces between the headers of adjoining courses .
no header shall be placed over a joint and no joint shall be made over a header .
headers shall be placed in each course and must have a width of not less than num½ times their thickness and must be spaced no further than num feet apart center to center .
stretchers shall have a length of bed not less than num nor more than num½ times their thickness and not less than num feet .
the tops of walls are to be finished flat .
capstones if required are to be flat on the upward side and shall not be less than num inches in thickness for ashlar and split face masonry and num inches in thickness for rubble masonry .
at least onefourth of the stones used on the top of the wall shall be tie stones and shall extend entirely across the top .
the remaining stones used in constructing the top course must be of a size that allows the top course to be constructed by the placement of no more than two stones across the width of the wall and are to be no less than num inches in width .
num joints .
joints requiring pointing shall be finished such that the mortared joint is filled to the face line of the wall unless otherwise noted on the plans .
the mortar is to be finished such that it is pitched downward and away from the center of the wall .
joints on the top of the wall are to be pointed flush with the top of the wall and are to be slightly pitched to direct water off of the wall .
whenever possible joints are to be properly pointed before the mortar becomes set .
joints which can not be so pointed shall be prepared for subsequent pointing by raking the mortar out to a depth of num inches before the mortar has set .
joints not pointed at the time the stones are laid shall be thoroughly wet with clean water and filled with mortar .
the mortar shall be well driven into the joints and finished with a pointing tool which is approved by the engineer .
num the maximum widths of joints in the faces and tops of stone masonry walls will be as follows ashlar split face rubble face ½ num num top ½ num num num weep holes .
the contractor shall furnish and install drainage holes and weep holes as detailed and at the locations indicated on the plans or as designated by the engineer .
num excavation .
excavation below the designated slope or subgrade and subsequent backfilling shall be carried out in accordance with the applicable requirements of section num structure excavation and backfill of these specifications .
num backfilling .
the backfilling shall be accomplished with approved pervious materials placed in layers of not more than num inches in thickness .
each layer shall be thoroughly compacted before the succeeding one is placed .
num cleaning .
after the mortar has set the wall shall be thoroughly cleaned and left in a neat and workmanlike condition .
num method of measurement .
stone masonry walls will be measured by the number of cubic yards of masonry actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of stone masonry walls will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including mortar stone masonry weep holes backfilling protection during curing and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
excavation below the designated slope or subgrade line will be paid for in accordance with the applicable requirements of section num structure excavation and backfill of these specifications .
section num remove and rebuild or construct new drylaid stone walls num description .
this work consists of the removal and resetting of existing sections or the construction of new sections of drylaid stone walls at locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
walls will be considered double faced unless otherwise noted on the plans .
num num materials .
stones used to construct new walls shall conform to section m.num stone for masonry of these specifications unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
stones to be used in walls designated to be removed and reset shall consist of the stones in the present wall and any additional stones required to complete the work .
additional stones necessary to complete the wall sections shall conform to existing stones relative to shape texture color and geological composition .
in the case of existing walls comprised predominantly of flat stones any additional stones required shall not be less than num inches thick num inches wide and num inches long in size .
for walls comprised mostly of round stones any additional stones required shall be not less than num inches thick num inches wide and num inches long in size .
stones that are smaller than these dimensions may be used only for pinning andor filling interstices within the wall .
num construction methods .
num trenching .
trenches for constructing stone walls shall be excavated to a depth of num inches and to a width of num inches unless other dimensions are indicated on the plans or provided by the engineer .
num laying stone .
the stones shall be laid to line and in courses roughly leveled up .
the bottom or foundation courses shall be composed of large stones and are to be laid to form a relatively flat surface upon which the succeeding courses may be placed .
the open spaces about the foundation or base of the wall shall be filled in with suitable material excavated from the trench .
all stones shall be laid with bearing beds parallel to the natural bed of the material .
select stones roughly squared are to be used at the ends and at angles in the wall .
the foundation courses shall consist of the large stones and the thinnest courses shall be placed towards the top of the wall .
the stone wall shall have a width of not less than num inches and a height of num feet above the surrounding ground surface unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
these dimensions may be increased or decreased where necessary to conform with adjoining walls which are to remain in place all as directed by the engineer .
if in order to complete the wall it becomes necessary to use stones other than those which are present in the existing wall the additional stones shall be used in the foundation and distributed evenly throughout the wall .
care must be taken to insure that each stone takes a firm bearing at not less than three separate points upon the underlying course .
open joints shall be chinked and spalls fitted to provide firm bearing throughout the length of the stone .
face joints shall not exceed num inch in width unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
chinking will be permitted only in horizontal joints in the faces .
the chinking of vertical joints in the faces of the wall will not be permitted .
header stones shall hold in the heart of the wall and must extend not less than num inches into the core .
they shall occupy not less than onefourth of the face area of the wall and shall be evenly distributed .
header stones in walls num feet or less in thickness shall extend entirely through the wall .
the top of the wall must be finished flat and shall contain tie stones that extend entirely across the width of the wall .
tie stones shall make up no less than onefourth of the stones in num the course .
all stones used in the top course shall have a width of no less than num inches and a thickness of at least num inches .
all excess material shall be removed and disposed of and the work area shall be left in a clean and neat condition satisfactory to the engineer .
num method of measurement .
remove and rebuild new drylaid stone walls or construct new drylaid stone walls will be measured by the number of linear feet of continuous runs of those constructed or reconstructed walls actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of remove and rebuild new drylaid stone walls or construct new drylaid stone walls will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
excavation below the designated slope or subgrade line for the installation of drylaid stone walls will be paid for in accordance with section num structure excavation and backfill of these specifications .
stones required for the construction of new walls will be included in the contract price for construct new drylaid stone walls .
stones provided by the contractor to supplement quantities of existing stones from existing walls to meet the requirements of this specification will be paid for separately under proposal item supplementary stones for walls .
section num trafficpersons num description .
this work consists of providing police officers as deemed necessary by the engineer for the direction and control of both vehicular traffic and pedestrians within the limits of the project all in accordance with these specifications .
num qualifications .
police officers shall wear regulation uniforms and should be regular reserve or special officers of the communities in which they serve .
num construction methods .
not applicable .
num method of measurement .
services of trafficpersons will be measured for payment by the number of hours for each person rendering services in accordance with directions of the engineer .
this is to include however only such trafficpersons as are employed within either the limits of the construction or the rightofway for the project upon detours stipulated in num the contract or upon detours ordered by the engineer .
trafficpersons furnished by the contractor for continued use of a detour or bypass beyond the period for which the engineer deems such trafficpersons necessary to the proper completion of the project or at locations where traffic is unnecessarily restricted by the contractors method of operation will not be measured for payment .
num basis of payment .
although services of uniformed trafficpersons withwithout cruisers will be measured for payment by the number of hours for each person rendering services there is no bid item for this work .
uniformed trafficpersons withwithout cruisers shall be paid for based on actual cost as submitted by a bill of lading from the local community or communities involved and approved by the engineer .
the payment for this work shall be made directly by the state through a separate purchase order submitted by the local community or communities .
payment for the traffic persons withwithout cruisers required by the contractors operations beyond the period for which the engineer deems necessary shall be the contractors responsibility .
section num flagpersons num description .
this work consists of providing flagpersons as directed by the engineer to assist in controlling traffic through the construction site all in accordance with these specifications .
num qualifications .
flagpersons must wear protective clothing be equipped with hand signaling devices for controlling traffic and follow flagging procedures all as described in the latest edition of the manual on uniform traffic control devices mutcd with corrections and revisions .
location of flagpersons with respect to the work operation must be approved by the engineer before work commences .
flagpersons must be thoroughly familiar with the most recent publication of the flagging handbook published by the federal highway administration and must possess a certificate of satisfactory completion from a training course approved by the department .
flagpersons must dress appropriately at all times .
bright orange vests and orange hats will be worn whenever flagpersons are actively engaged in flagging .
any flagpersons determined to be ineffective in controlling traffic by the engineer may be removed at the discretion of the engineer .
num construction methods .
not applicable .
num method of measurement .
services of flagpersons will be measured for payment by the number of hours for each person rendering services in accordance with the orders of the engineer .
this is to include however only such flagpersons as are employed within the limits of the construction project upon detours stipulated in the contract or upon detours num ordered by the engineer .
flagpersons furnished by the contractor for continued use of a detour or bypass beyond the period for which the engineer deems such flagpersons necessary for the proper completion of the project or at locations where traffic is unnecessarily restricted by the contractors method of operation will not be measured for payment .
the minimum hours of payment for any individual flagperson in any one day shall be the same as for union laborers .
overtime hours will be measured separately and paid under the applicable item in the proposal .
num basis of payment .
the current minimum acceptable bid for regular and overtime hours are provided on page pnum of the proposal .
the unit bid price per manhour as paid to the contractor shall constitute compensation for the flagpersons services including fringe benefits and for associated protective clothing hand signaling devices communications equipment and other applicable equipment and incidentals deemed necessary by the engineer .
overtime will be compensated for separately and in accordance with the union contract .
the hourly rate of wages paid by the contractor for flagpersons services shall not be less than the prevailing rate set by the rhode island department of labor .
there will be no consideration for increasing the unit bid price for flagpersons during the first eighteen months of the contract dating from the contract bid date .
if after eighteen months the prevailing rate for flagpersons is increased due to contractual agreements with the applicable unions the department upon receipt of proper documentation will increase the contract unit bid price to the actual rate of pay plus fringe benefits .
all subsequent rate increases will also be addressed .
section num highway bounds num description .
this work consists of providing granite reinforced concrete or bronze highway bounds at points indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
materials shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num highway bounds of these specifications .
bronze rods shall be num¼inches in diameter and shall be split a distance of num inches from the bottom .
num construction methods .
bounds shall be set at the locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
when located in lawns sidewalks or drives bounds shall be set with the top of the bound ½inch below the surface .
otherwise bounds shall be set so as not to project above the surrounding ground by more than num inches .
when the bound point falls on ledge and the use of a bronze rod is directed by the engineer a num½inch hole shall be drilled to a depth of num inches and a bronze rod and bronze wedge shall be placed in the drill hole .
the rod shall be driven upon the wedge until the rod is solidly wedged into the hole .
the rod shall then be firmly embedded either by filling the hole with num a cement grout composed of equal parts of fine sand and cement or by packing with lead as directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
highway bounds of the various types specified will be measured by the number of such bounds actually furnished and set in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of highway bounds of the various types specified will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num remove relocate and reset shock absorbing barrier modules num description .
this work consists of removing sand filled polyethylene modules from their initial locations and subsequently installing said modules at new locations as indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction methods .
num relocation .
the contractor shall assign experienced tradesmen to provide the required technical assistance to personnel removing and relocating the various components of the modules at the site of the work .
num replacement of damaged modules .
if the shock absorbing barrier modules are damaged by traffic after installation but prior to the completion of the contract the contractor may be required to replace the damaged modules on a force account basis as set forth in subsection num para .
a.num of these specifications .
num maintenance .
maintenance of shock absorbing barrier modules shall be carried out in accordance with section num maintenance and movement of traffic protective devices of these specifications .
num method of measurement .
removing relocating and resetting shock absorbing barrier modules will be measured by the number of groups actually installed .
a group is defined as including all modules necessary to complete a specific installation as detailed on the plans .
num num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of removing relocating and resetting shock absorbing barrier modules will be paid for at the contract unit price per group as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials including sand and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num remove and replace rural mail box posts and mountings num description .
this work consists of removing existing rural mail boxes posts and mountings the setting of the existing boxes in temporary locations if and as directed the provision of new posts and the mounting of the existing mail boxes on said new posts at the locations indicated on the plans andor as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
materials for rural mail box posts mountings and foundations shall substantially conform to those indicated on the plans .
num construction methods .
num removing existing posts and boxes .
the mail boxes shall be removed together with their posts the mail boxes shall be carefully detached from the mountings and posts and saved for subsequent remounting on new posts .
the post holes shall be filled with suitable materials and properly tamped .
the contractor shall replace at his own expense any material damaged or lost due to his methods of removing and dismantling and the replacement material shall be of the type and kind that was damaged or lost .
num installation .
a .
temporary locations .
if necessary during the construction period the mail boxes shall be set in temporary locations as directed such that they are at all times insofar as possible satisfactorily accessible to the mail carrier .
b .
setting posts .
the post holes shall be dug to the depth and in the position shown on the plans or as indicated by the engineer .
the bottoms of holes shall be thoroughly tamped so that the posts will have a stable foundation .
the posts shall be set plumb and true to line and grade and the holes shall be backfilled with approved granular material and thoroughly compacted in layers in such a way as not to displace the posts .
c. mounting of mail boxes .
the mail boxes shall be remounted on the new posts as indicated on the plans .
painting of the posts and top mounts shall be in accordance with the requirements indicated on the plans .
num num method of measurement .
remove and replace rural mail box posts and mountings of the various types indicated on the plans will be measured by the number of such units actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of remove and replace rural mail box posts and mountings of the various types shown on the plans will be paid for at the respective contract unit prices per each such unit as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including all excavation backfilling disposing of surplus materials removing and salvaging the existing installations setting boxes in temporary locations and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num rural mail boxes postmaster approved num description .
this work consists of replacing existing rural mail boxes with new boxes when said existing boxes do not conform to the specifications of the u.s .
postal service all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
new rural mail boxes shall conform to the standards established by the u.s .
postal service for materials coatings and paint .
the doors of the new mail boxes must have embossed thereon the following inscriptions u.s. mail and approved by the postmaster general .
num construction methods .
mounting of new rural mail boxes on posts shall conform to the requirements of subsection num para .
c mounting of mail boxes of these specifications .
num method of measurement .
rural mail boxes of the various types indicated on the plans will be measured by the number of such boxes actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of rural mail boxes of the various types indicated on the plans will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each such box as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including removal of existing rural mail boxes hardware and other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num section num test pits num description .
this work consists of excavating exploratory test pits for the purpose of locating existing utilities of every type including but not limited to water sewer storm drains gas power distribution and communications and for determining water table elevations and soil conditions .
these excavations shall be performed at locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
materials associated with test pit excavations such as backfill subbase and base courses bituminous pavements loam and seeding are specified elsewhere in these specifications .
num construction methods .
test pit excavations may include any or all of the following items the construction methods for which are specified elsewhere in these specifica tions a .
cutting pavement .
b .
breaking up and disposal of existing pavements .
c. test pit excavation .
d. backfill and compaction where required .
e. loam and seeding .
f. replacement paving which shall match as nearly as possible the existing pavement in thickness .
num method of measurement .
test pits shall be measured by the number of individual pits actually excavated regardless of whether or not utilities were located or water table elevations were determined .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of test pits will be paid for at the contract unit price per each such excavation as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for labor materials and equipment including cutting and matching pavement removal and legal disposal of existing pavements excavation pumping and bailing backfilling loaming and seeding where required and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
the replacement of subbase and base courses and replacement paving and resurfacing will be paid for separately under appropriate work items .
num section num riprap num description .
this work consists of providing dumped or placed riprap on prepared surfaces of the sizes and layer thicknesses at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
materials shall conform to the requirements of subsections m.num m.num and m.num riprap bedding for riprap and stone for riprap respectively of these specifications .
gravel borrow shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num gravel borrow of these specifications .
filter fabric shall be a material suitable for erosion control applications and shall be one of those included on the departments approved materials list .
num construction methods .
num general .
slopes to be protected by riprap shall be free of brush trees stumps and other unsuitable material and shall be graded to a smooth surface .
all unsuitable material shall be removed to the depth shown on the plans or as authorized and replaced with gravel borrow .
filled areas will be compacted as specified in subsections num para .
a and num para .
b respectively of these specifications .
if a toe trench is shown on the plans it shall be excavated and maintained until the riprap is placed .
protection for structure foundations shall be provided as early as the foundation construction permits .
the area to be protected shall be cleaned of waste materials and the surfaces to be protected prepared as shown on the plans .
the type of riprap specified will be placed in accordance with these specifications .
riprap shall be placed in conjunction with the construction of the embankment .
the elapsed time between construction of the embankment and the placement of the riprap shall be limited to that required to permit the orderly construction of the embankment and to preclude the mixing of embankment and riprap materials .
the contractor shall maintain the riprap protection until accepted and any material displaced by any cause shall be replaced to the lines and grades shown on the plans at no additional cost to the state .
num filter fabric .
the installation of filter fabric shall strictly conform to the manufacturers guidelines and as modified herein .
a .
the surface of finished ground must be smooth and well compacted .
all rock dirt clods grass clumps trash and other obstructions which will prevent the mat from laying in direct contact with the soil surface and which may cause the fabric to puncture or tear must be removed .
num b .
a minimum overlap width of two feet must be used .
c. anchor pins must be installed immediately after placement of each section in order to protect from wind uplift .
d. the fabric must be toedin at the top and toein or toewrapped at the bottom .
num bedding for riprap .
the bedding material shall be placed on the prepared slope or area to the full specified thickness of each layer shown on the plans .
placement of stone bedding must proceed from the bottom up to the top of the slope .
at no time will the stone bedding be dumped onto the fabric from the top of the slope and allowed to roll down the surface of the fabric .
bedding shall be placed in one operation using methods which will preclude segregation of particle sizes within the layer .
the surface of the finished layer should be reasonably even and free from mounds or windows .
additional layers of bedding material when required shall be employed which shall preclude the mixing of materials in different layers .
num dumped riprap .
stone for riprap shall be placed on the prepared slope or area in a manner which will produce an evenly graded mass of stone with the minimum practical percentage of voids .
the entire mass of stone shall be placed so as to conform with the lines grades and thicknesses shown on the plans .
riprap shall be placed to its full course thickness in one operation and in such a manner as to avoid displacing the underlying material .
placing of riprap in layers or by dumping into chutes or by other methods likely to cause segregation will not be permitted .
the larger stones shall be well distributed and the entire mass of stone shall conform to the specified gradation as set forth in subsection m.num of these specifications .
all material comprising riprap protection shall be placed and distributed to preclude large accumulations of either the larger or smaller sizes of stone .
it is the intent of these specifications to produce a fairly compact riprap protection in which all sizes of material are placed in their proper proportions .
hand placing or rearranging of individual stones by mechanical equipment may be required to the extent necessary to secure the results specified .
when riprap and bedding material are dumped under water thickness of the layers shall be increased as shown on the plans .
placement methods shall be employed that will minimize segregation .
num placed riprap .
stones for riprap shall be placed on a prepared slope in a pattern that contains minimum voids .
the top surface of the riprap shall conform to a true and even plane with a tolerance of plus or minus num inches .
joints shall be broken as much as practicable and joint openings to underlying soil shall be avoided by careful arrangement of stone sizes and the chocking of the openings with smaller stones .
larger stones shall be placed near the base of the slope .
the stones shall be laid to rest on the bank and not on adjacent stones .
this shall be accomplished by laying stones from the top of the bank downward to insure independent support for each such stone .
num num method of measurement .
num filter fabric .
filter fabric for riprap will be measured by the number of square yards of exposed surface actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
overlapped portions of filter fabric will not be measured for payment .
num riprap and bedding material .
riprap or bedding material for riprap will be measured by one of the following units each as actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer a. cubic yard .
by the number of cubic yards as computed from surface area measurements parallel to the riprap surface and with the thickness measured normal to the riprap surface .
b .
ton .
by the number of tons as measured by the actual scale weight in tons of the material actually placed .
c. square yard .
by the number of square yards as computed from surface area measurements parallel to the riprap surface .
num basis of payment .
num filter fabric .
the accepted quantity of filter fabric for riprap will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num riprap and bedding material .
the accepted quantities of riprap or bedding material for riprap of the various types and configurations indicated on the plans will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per cubic yard per ton or per square yard as the case may be as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including excavation for riprap or bedding preparation of subgrade hauling and placing the material and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
riprap placed outside the specified limits will not be paid for and the contractor may be required to remove and dispose of the excess riprap at no additional cost to the state .
section num slope paving num description .
this work consists of providing precast concrete blocks on a prepared gravel base on slope areas at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num num materials .
the nominal size of the concrete blocks shall be num x num x num .
the concrete shall be class aae and shall conform to section num portland cement concrete of these specifications .
mortar for the joints shall conform to subsection m.num of these specifications .
gravel borrow shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num gravel borrow of these specifications .
num construction methods .
the blocks shall be laid on a compacted gravel base spaced to provide numinch joints .
vertical joints shall be staggered to the center of each block .
the finish surface of the slope paving shall be reasonably smooth and true to the finish grades and sections indicated on the plans .
mortar for all joints shall be poured over the blocks and thoroughly brushed into the numinch space to the full depth of the joint .
num method of measurement .
slope paving will be measured by the number of square yards in the face area of the surface actually paved in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of slope paving will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num temporary construction signs num description .
this work consists of providing temporary construction signs at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num sign construction .
plywood or aluminum sheeting reflective sheeting wood posts and other materials shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num signs and sign supports of these specifications .
num construction methods .
num design and fabrication .
signs provided under this specification shall conform in type size dimensions color design and placement to the schematic drawings contained in the current edition of the manual on uniform traffic control devices including the latest corrections and additions thereto and as indicated on the plans .
num signs and devices shall be erected prior to the beginning of the work as directed .
no work shall proceed until the necessary signs have been erected .
the signs shall be immediately removed when the need no longer exists as determined by the engineer and shall be replaced without cost to the state if in the opinion of the engineer they are damaged to the extent that the original purpose of erection is no longer being served .
all signs shall be reflectorized in accordance with subsection m.num of these specifications shall be well constructed legible and have a fresh clean appearance .
sign standards and their location shall conform to the applicable provisions of the manual on uniform traffic control devices published by the u. s. government printing office .
the contractor shall be required to provide the number and type of construction warning and guide signs ordered by the engineer .
signs shall be reused as required or directed by the engineer at the various locations as the sequence of construction progresses .
this work shall be performed at no additional expense to the state .
all signs shall be continuously maintained to the satisfaction of the engineer .
all damaged signs shall be replaced and repaired with reasonable immediacy .
num sign mountings .
temporary construction sign mountings shall conform to the details indicated on the plans .
a .
portable support systems .
when construction operations are such that wood post mounting is impractical temporary construction signs shall be mounted on portable support systems specifically designed for such use .
such support systems may be one of those products which appear on the departments approved materials list .
in no case will the bottom of the sign be mounted less than one foot above the surface upon which traffic is required to ride during the time the signs are in place .
num method of measurement .
temporary construction signs will be measured by the number of square feet of such signs actually provided in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of temporary construction signs will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including mountings placing signs at their initial locations and for eventually removing said signs from their final locations and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
payment for removing temporary construction signs from their initial locations and for handling maintaining transporting and relocating said signs to storage or to subsequent intermediate locations at which they are to be used for traffic control is not included in this section but is included under section num maintenance and movement of traffic protective devices of these specifications .
num section num portable channelizing devices and barricades num description .
num general .
this work consists of providing portable barricades of various types and configurations at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications and mutcd standards .
num types of portable channelizing devices and barricades .
the following types of portable barricades are currently in use by the department a. pvc plastic pipe barricade mutcd type iii .
b .
plastic pipe barricade with sandbag base mutcd type iii .
c. polyethylene drum barricade .
d. fluorescent traffic cones .
num materials .
num pvc plastic pipe .
plastic pipe shall be white polyvinyl chloride pressure rated class sdr num or sdr num conforming to the applicable requirements of either astm dnum or astm dnum .
num polyethylene plastic pipe .
pipe shall be white rotationally moulded polyethylene plastic conforming to the applicable requirements of astm dnum class ii anumenum or class ii anum .
num polyethylene drum .
the drum shall be manufactured from polyethylene plastic in accordance with details indicated on the plans and in conformance with mutcd standards .
num fluorescent traffic cones .
cones shall be a plastic fluorescent commercially produced product that conforms to the details indicated on the plans .
the conical upper portion shall be num percent polyvinyl chloride having a highly pigmented noninjurious fluorescent red orange color .
the upper section shall be fused to a nonpainted white base in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num construction methods .
num design and fabrication .
portable barricades and devices provided under this specification shall conform in type size dimension color and design with their respective details as indicated on the plans .
barricades shall be sturdily constructed freshly painted and shall present a clean and neat appearance .
messages shall be clearly legible .
barricades shall be painted and reflectorized in accordance with requirements set forth in other paragraphs of this specification .
num num placement .
the contractor shall provide the number and types of portable barricades and devices as indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
barricades and devices shall be erected prior to the time actual construction work commences .
conversely no construction work shall take place until the required barricades have been erected .
barricades shall remain in place until the engineer determines that they are no longer needed at a given location .
they shall be reused as directed by the engineer at other locations as the sequence of construction progresses .
care shall be exercised during transporting storing and placement of barricades and devices to prevent damage .
no damaged barricades or devices shall be placed .
barricades and other traffic protection devices showing defects or damage as a result of the contractors operations or negligence shall be removed and replaced at no additional cost to the state .
num method of measurement .
num plastic pipe barricades .
plastic pipe barricades and plastic pipe barricades with sandbag bases will be measured by the respective number of each such units actually provided in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num drum barricades .
polyethylene drum barricades will be measured by the number of barreldays such barricades are actually in place in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num fluorescent traffic cones .
fluorescent traffic cones will be measured by the number of each such cone actually provided in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
num plastic pipe barricades .
the accepted quantities of plastic pipe barricades and plastic pipe barricades with sandbag bases will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each unit as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor material and equipment including placing barricades and devices at their initial locations and for eventually removing said barricades and devices from their final locations and all other incidentals necessary to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num drum barricades .
the accepted quantity of polyethylene drum barricades will be paid for at the contract unit price per barrelday as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor material and equipment including fabrication reflective sheeting placing drum barricades at their initial locations and for eventually removing said drum barricades from their final locations maintenance replacement in the event of unacceptable damage temporary storage and all other incidentals necessary to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num fluorescent traffic cones .
the accepted quantity of fluorescent traffic cones will be paid for at the contract unit price per each such cone as listed in the proposal .
the price so stated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor material and equipment including placing cones at their initial locations and for eventually removing said cones from their final num locations and all other incidentals necessary to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
payment for removing barricades and traffic cones from their initial locations and for hauling maintaining transporting and relocating said barricades and traffic cones to storage or to subsequent intermediate locations at which they are to be used for traffic control is not included in this section but is included under section num maintenance and movement of traffic protective devices of these specifications .
section num advance warning arrow panel num description .
this work consists of providing operating and maintaining a portable trailer on which is mounted a flashing arrow unit at locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications and mutcd standards .
num materials .
num trailer .
the trailer shall be a portable rubbertired unit .
num flashing arrow unit .
the flashing arrow unit consists of a black background panel constructed of light weight aluminum .
the panel shall be approximately num feet high and num feet wide .
it shall be wired and have receptacles for at least num no .
numa amber sealed beam lamps or approved equal .
each such lamp shall have a maximum initial intensity of num candle power and a flash rate of approximately num flashes per minute .
the unit shall be provided with a locking switch box and an automatic dimming device capable of reducing maximum lamp intensity by at least num percent during nighttime operation .
the flashing arrow unit shall be capable of indicating a bar warning mode an arrow to the left an arrow to the right or an arrow in both directions simultaneously to approaching traffic .
num power supply .
the portable flashing arrow unit shall be powered by diesel fuel .
the generator shall be equipped with battery powered backup .
the portable flashing unit shall also be provided with a hardwire capability .
num construction methods .
the advance warning arrow panel shall be available for use throughout the duration of the contract .
it shall be positioned and repositioned at the direction of the engineer .
the contractor shall be required to perform all maintenance recommended by the manufacturer of the units as required to keep the unit operating properly .
said maintenance shall include the periodic cleaning of the units .
the units shall be kept in good repair at all times .
if there is a failure malfunction or damage to the unit for any reason the contractor will expedite the repair and furnish adequate num flaggers or other approved means to provide a safe means for control or traffic until the units are put back into service .
num method of measurement .
advance warning arrow panels will be measured by number of days the unit is actually employed in the construction work in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of advance warning arrow panels will be paid for at the contract unit price per day as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated consti tutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including the unit itself first placement thereof temporary storage repositioning at different locations diesel fuel electric power batteries maintenance and all other incidentals necessary to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num portable changeable message sign num description .
this work consists of providing operating and maintaining a portable trailer on which is mounted a changeable message sign at locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications and mutcd standards .
num materials .
num trailer .
the trailer shall be a portable rubber tired unit .
num message sign .
the sign shall consist of either a lamp matrix or a rectangular disk matrix system capable of a flash and sequence rate of one to six seconds .
the message displayed from the unit shall be visible from a distance of onehalf mile and have an average legibility distance of num feet under conditions of normal sunlight .
a .
the lamp matrix sign .
the sign shall consist of a three line eight charactermodule matrix .
each charactermodule shall be a minimum of num inches high and shall be configured in a num by num dot matrix .
all charactersmodules within a message line shall be equally spaced both horizontally and vertically .
under a normal operation range of num volts to num volts the clamp matrix bulbs shall have a projected design life of num hours .
the bulb shall be a twoinch diameter parnum sealed beam double contact bayonet base unit .
all lamp matrix charactersmodules shall have their own lamp driver circuit board mounted on and connected to the back side .
the charactersmodules shall be hinged to the bottom on the lamp board for ease of maintenance and repairs .
all lamp matrix charactersmodules are to be interchangeable .
num the lamp matrix sign shall be protected from sunglare by a sunscreen assembly of seventeen louvers per vertical inch at a num degree tilt .
the controller will be an all solid state unit .
a keyboard entry system shall be provided to allow an operator to generate a number of messages .
the keyboard shall be equipped with a security lockout feature to prevent unauthorized use of the controller .
the controller will contain a nonvolatile memory to hold the keyboard created messages in memory during a nonpower period .
the controller will have a local message display panel to show the message either being displayed on the sign or being created on the keyboard .
in addition this display panel will be capable of giving the operator all programming instructions .
the controller cabinet with lockable door shall be mounted on the forward part of the trailer so the operator is viewing traffic while performing operations on the controller .
this cabinet shall have an interior light for night operation and programming .
the power unit for operating the entire sign system shall be a heavy duty diesel powered generator with a battery backup system .
b .
the disk matrix sign .
the sign shall consist of a three line eight charactermodule matrix .
each charactermodule shall be a minimum of num inches high and shall be configured in a sevendisk high by fivedisk wide matrix .
the disks shall be painted fluorescent yellow on one side and flat black on the other .
the disk matrix sign shall be equipped with four numinch blacklites for nighttime operation .
the blacklites are to be arranged inside the enclosure on both the top and bottom of each line .
the front cover shall be hinged for ease of service and each charactermodule shall be interchangeable with all other characters .
the controller shall consist of a lap top computer keyboard and a liquid crystal display which will allow an operator to generate a number of different messages .
the create message option shall only be accessible by use of a password to avoid unauthorized use of the controller .
the controller cabinet with lockable door shall be mounted on the forward part of the trailer so the operator is viewing traffic while performing operations on the controller .
this cabinet shall have an interior light for night operation and programming .
the power unit for operating the entire sign system shall be a heavy duty diesel powered generator with a battery backup system .
num construction methods .
the changeable message sign shall be available for use throughout the duration of the contract .
it shall be positioned and repositioned at the direction of the engineer .
the contractor shall be required to perform all maintenance recommended by the manufacturer of the units as required to keep the unit operating properly .
said maintenance shall include the periodic cleaning of the units .
num the units shall be kept in good repair at all times .
if there is a failure malfunction or damage to the unit for any reason the contractor will expedite the repair and furnish adequate flaggers or other approved means to provide a safe means for control of traffic until the units are put back into service .
num method of measurement .
portable changeable message signs will be measured by number of days the unit is actually employed in the construction work in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of portable changeable message signs will be paid for at the contract unit price per day as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including the unit itself first placement thereof temporary storage repositioning at different locations diesel fuel electric power batteries maintenance and all other incidentals necessary to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num precast concrete median barrier for temporary traffic control num description .
this work consists of providing precast concrete median barrier for temporary traffic control at locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num median barrier units .
portland cement concrete and reinforcing shall conform to the requirements of subsection num of section num precast concrete median barrier of these specifications .
num delineators .
delineators shall have a minimum of num½ square inches of reflective surface area .
the unit shall be capable of being mounted on the side of barrier by use of an adhesive or other method approved by the manufacturer .
such delineators may be one of those products which appear on the departments approved materials list .
num construction methods .
num plant requirements .
plant requirements shall conform to the applicable provisions of subsection num of section num precast concrete median barrier of these specifications .
num delineators .
white delineators shall be installed on the right side of the travel way and amber delineators on the left side of the travel way .
the delineators shall be installed at numfoot intervals and they shall be located num inches from the top of the concrete barriers .
num num placement .
precast concrete median barrier used for temporary traffic control shall be placed on the pavement at locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
upon completion of the work the contractor shall remove said barrier units from the project site .
care shall be exercised during transporting storing hoisting and handling of the units to prevent cracking or damage .
no damaged units or units that have markings painted on them from previous worksites shall be installed .
units showing defects or damage as a result of the contractors operations or negligence shall be removed and replaced or repaired by the contractor at no additional cost to the state .
num method of measurement .
num median barrier units .
precast concrete median barrier for temporary traffic control will be measured in linear feet of continuous runs of those units actually placed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
the measured length includes all numinch joints between the units .
num delineators .
reflective delineators will be measured by the number of each such unit actually provided in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
num median barrier units .
the accepted quantity of precast concrete median barrier for temporary traffic control will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including placing the units at their initial locations and for eventually removing said units from their final locations and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
the contractor shall be paid num percent of the contract unit price when the barrier units are in place .
the remaining num percent of the contract unit price will be paid when the barrier units have been removed from the project .
num delineators .
the accepted quantity of reflective delineators for median barrier units will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including surface preparation and adhesives and for all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
payment for removing barrier units from their initial locations and for hauling maintaining transporting and relocating said barrier units to storage or to subsequent intermediate locations at which they are to be used for traffic control is not included in this section but is included under section num remove and relocate precast concrete median barrier for temporary traffic control of these specifications .
num section num remove and relocate precast concrete median barrier for temporary traffic control num description .
this work consists of removing precast concrete median barrier from one location and subsequently installing said barrier at an alternate location as indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction methods .
precast concrete median barrier units shall be carefully removed from their initial locations and transported to alternate locations where they shall be placed on the pavement as directed by the engineer .
care shall be exercised during hauling hoisting and handling of the units to prevent cracking or damage .
the contractor shall be responsible for replacing or repairing all units damaged by his operations .
the contractor shall relocate the precast concrete median barrier units in such manner as not to leave exposed blunt ends of said units .
the contractor shall not violate the open lane requirements set forth elsewhere in these specifications .
num method of measurement .
remove and relocate precast concrete median barrier for temporary traffic control will be measured in linear feet of continuous runs of these units actually moved to the new locations in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of remove and relocate precast concrete median barrier for temporary traffic control will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot relocated as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor tools for hauling handling equipment temporarily storing units off the roadway any new parts required to secure the units to the pavement or to adjacent units and all other incidentals necessary to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
the contractor will not be compensated for any work necessary to realign median barrier units if they are disturbed during construction as a result of the contractors operations .
payment for providing the barrier units at their initial locations and for removing said units from their final locations at which they were used for traffic control is not included under this section but is included under section num precast concrete median barrier for temporary traffic control of these specifications .
num section num truck mounted attenuator tma with truck mounted flashing arrow board tmfab num description .
this work consists of providing operating and maintaining truck mounted energy absorbing impact attenuators replacement attenuator cartridges and truck mounted flashing arrow boards at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num truck mounted attenuator tma .
the tma is a lightweight attenuation system designed for installation at the back of traffic control trucks .
it consists of three basic component sections a crushable module a lightweight steel backup and a support frame for attaching the backup to the truck .
the complete tma shall be designed to make attachment or detachment from the truck simple and fast and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
a. module materials .
light fixtures shall consist of combination run turn brake and side clearance lights with icc identification lights on the rear of the tma .
all light fixtures shall have rubber grommet seals .
a standard saeatttma interchangeable numway trailer light wire connector shall be installed and wired to sae standards .
all standard modules shall have a chevron pattern painted on the rear of the module .
the standard chevron pattern shall have numinch wide stripes alternating black and yellow slanted at num degrees in an inverted v form with the v located at the center of the module .
all standard modules assembly shall be covered for debris containment during an impact and for environmental protection .
b. crushable frame .
the crushable frame which supports the tma assembly shall be fabricated from standard steel shapes .
the module shall be fastened to the internal frame .
c. steel backup .
the steel backup shall be special lightweight assembly which shall support the tma cartridge during normal use and shall resist the loads applied to it during impacts .
this backup shall be capable of tilting upward toward the truck num degrees for travel or storage .
positions will be either num degrees or horizontal .
d. attachment to the truck .
the tma shall be designed to interface with a truck as specified herein .
engineers from the tma manufacturers shall be supplied with a dimensional layout sheet of the truck to which the tma will be attached .
the interface structure between the tma and the truck will then be custom fabricated by tma manufacturers .
e. metal workfasteners .
all metal work shall be fabricated from astm anum or mnum merchant quality steel .
after fabrication all metal work shall be coated with metal primer and num painted black .
all welding shall be done by or under the direction of a certified welder .
all bolts nuts and washers shall be corrosion resistant american national standard .
f. wire rope .
all wire ropes shall be numinch diameter galvanized num x num aircraft cable manufactured to military specifications .
g. weight .
the tma with numdegree tilt shall weigh approximately num pounds .
h. hydraulics .
the tma with numdegree tilt shall have a num volt d.c. hydraulic pump and cylinder which will be used to tilt the hexfoam module num degrees up from horizontal position .
the hydraulic pump shall be supplied with a remote activation switch .
i .
wheel jacks .
the tma with numdegree tilt shall be capable of accepting two hand crank swivel jacks and two swing jacks at the rear to assist in the removal of the module and backup from the truck .
these jacks shall have wheels to provide portability of the tma once it is removed from the truck .
j .
testing criteria .
the tma until shall have been tested to the criteria as listed in the national cooperative highway research program no .
num dated num .
a copy of the results of such testing must be available upon request and have been written by a registered professional engineer .
the tma shall be capable of passing the following tests num .
vibration .
eight hours of constant vibration with a frequency of num hz and a minimum amplitude of .numinch input at the base of the backup .
the intent of this test is to simulate worst case road vibrations .
num .
moisture .
twentyfour hours of simulated rain on the top of the unit at the rate of num inches per hour .
twentyfour hours of simulated rain on the bottom of the unit at num inches per hour .
the test should result in no water accumulation or moisture absorption by the module material .
num .
corrosion .
when subjected to num hours of salt spray fog in accordance with astm bnum the energy absorbing material shall show no signs of corrosion or decrease in the energy absorbing capacity of the material .
num replacement cartridges .
the contractor shall have a replacement cartridge available at all times .
in the event that the original tma is damaged due to a crash of an oncoming vehicle during construction the replacement cartridge will be used .
the replacement cartridge shall include the module internal support system and hydraulic jacks .
if the original tma is damaged the replacement cartridge will be used and a third cartridge will be ordered and paid for on a force account basis as set forth in subsection num para .
a.num of these specifications .
num truck mounted flashing arrow board tmfab .
attached to the traffic control truck as described herein shall be an illuminated truck mounted flashing arrow board .
the tmfab shall be a num foot by num foot board mounted at the rear of the truck .
the tmfab shall contain at least num numa or equal amber lights each of which shall have approximately num initial maximum candle power with a flash rate of approximately num per minute and which shall indicate an arrow to the left an arrow to the right or an arrow to both sides num simultaneously to warn approaching traffic .
the center of the arrow shall be mounted a minimum of num feet above the roadway .
for nighttime use the unit shall be equipped for lamp intensity reduction to eliminate glare .
the tmfab shall be powered by a dieselfueled generator equipped with backup batteries .
num traffic control truck .
the contractor shall provide a truck weighing between num pounds to num pounds or one specified by the manufacturer and approved by the engineer .
the truck shall be adaptable to mounting the tma and tmfab to the rear of the truck .
num construction methods .
the tma and tmfab shall be available for use throughout the duration of the contract .
it shall be positioned and repositioned at the direction of the engineer .
the contractor shall properly maintain the tma and tmfab throughout the contract period .
num method of measurement .
truck mounted attenuator with truck mounted flashing arrow board will be measured by the number of days each such assembly is actually employed in the work or as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of truck mounted attenuator with truck mounted flashing arrow board will be paid for at the contract unit price per day as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including the tma module steel backup tma support frame hydraulic pumps wheel jacks the continuous repositioning thereof the first replacement tma cartridge tmfab tmfab support frame for attachment to the truck generator and all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
no additional payment will be made for the provision of the traffic control truck .
section num field offices and materials laboratory num description .
this work consists of providing and maintaining an adequate weatherproof field office or materials laboratory for the exclusive use of the engineer and his staff during both the contract period and for a maximum of num days thereafter all in accordance with these specifications .
num general requirements .
num location .
the field office or materials laboratory shall be located on a site that is both satisfactory to the engineer and convenient to the project site .
num num minimum spatial requirements .
unless specified otherwise in the special provisions of the contract the engineers field office or materials laboratory each shall contain a minimum of num square feet of floor area and num feet of headroom .
it shall contain a sufficient number of windows to provide at least num square feet of natural light .
existing building structures meeting the above minimum requirements are considered acceptable .
num other requirements .
a .
the contractor shall be responsible for arranging and complying with all necessary local and state regulatory permits and inspections including all costs associated therewith .
b .
the engineers field office or materials laboratory shall be fully equipped and ready for occupancy at least two days prior to the start of actual construction operations .
c. the contractor shall protect the field office andor materials laboratory against fire flooding and theft throughout the num hours of every day the unit is in service .
the contractor shall be responsible for the loss of any property belonging to the state that is housed therein due to theft fire or natural causes .
d. at the time either the field office or materials laboratory is made available to the state the contractor shall furnish evidence to the engineer that adequate insurance has been obtained which protects the state against loss of property from theft fire or natural causes .
in the event of fire theft or equipment breakdown all equipment involved shall be repaired or replaced by the contractor as soon as possible .
in the event the field office or materials laboratory is destroyed or rendered untenable for any reason it shall be replaced by the contractor within two weeks or as directed .
num specific requirements .
the field office andor materials laboratory shall be provided for as follows num outside utilities .
a .
electrical power .
the contractor shall arrange for electrical service for the field office or materials laboratory and provide the necessary meter connections fuse box and switches as required by the power company all in accordance with state and local building codes .
the power supply shall be numvolt numcycle current of sufficient amperage to provide for heat interior and exterior lighting operating office equipment and air conditioning .
b. sanitary sewer outfall .
the contractor shall provide an adequate temporary outfall into either the municipal sanitary sewer system or an individual sewage disposal system that has been approved by the r.i. department of environmental management .
disposal of sanitary wastes must conform to the applicable requirements of both the r.i. department of environmen tal management and municipal regulations .
c. security .
all office or laboratory trailer units shall be enclosed within a numfoot chain link fence with adequate gates and locks .
outside area floodlighting together with appropriate timers shall be provided on all four sides of trailers .
num num interior utility services .
a .
lighting .
lighting fixtures as required to provide minimum illumination of num footcandles in all areas .
b .
electrical receptacles .
six duplex convenience electrical receptacles shall be located throughout the field office or materials laboratory as directed by the engineer .
at least two of these receptacles shall be numamp capacity .
c. heating and air conditioning .
heating equipment capable of maintaining a year round temperature between numof and numof .
d. sanitary facilities .
a water closet lavatory slop sink vent fan and a hot water heater of a minimum numgallon capacity shall be provided .
e. telephone .
telephone service and instrument for one incoming line .
num doors and windows .
doors shall be stock sizes and shall have a keyinknob lock of an approved manufacturer .
all doors shall be keyed alike .
all windows shall be operative except for picture windows .
operative windows shall be either double hung or casement type equipped with adequate locks .
all windows shall be provided with either shades or venetian blinds .
all window openings shall be adequately screened .
windows in sanitary areas shall have frosted glass .
num furnishings and equipment .
both the field office and materials laboratory will be provided with the following a. furnishings .
num .
one work table num inches high with a minimum of num square feet of work area .
num .
one drafting stool .
num .
two foldingtype chairs .
num .
one fire resistant drawertype safe legal size with combination or key lock .
num .
one fourdrawer legal size metal filing cabinet equipped with lock .
num .
two twodrawer num½ x num metal filing cabinets .
num .
two round wastebaskets .
num .
one plan rack of an approved design to be equipped with num rods .
b .
equipment .
num .
a numpound conum fire extinguisher of approved manufacture shall be furnished for each num square feet of floor area .
num .
a numvolt numcycle rotating fan .
num num .
one firstaid kit .
num .
one electric sanitary water cooler with refrigerated storage compartment supply with paper cups .
num .
toilet paper holders paper towel dispensers and soap dispensers in the toilet rooms .
num special requirements for field office .
the field office will also be provided with the following a. furnishings .
num .
three office type desks minimum top dimensions num x num with two or more drawers on each side .
num .
three swivel desk chairs .
b .
equipment .
num .
two fully automatic electronic calculators with tape .
num .
one electric typewriter with ribbon as required mounted on typewriter table on casters .
num .
one office type copying machine .
num .
one pencil sharpener .
c. computer equipment .
the items of computer equipment and software to be furnished installed tested made operational and maintained within the field office are set forth in special provision code num .
failure to furnish install make operational and maintain the field office equipment and peripheral equipmentaccessories specified under subsection num will result in delay to the processing of progress payments .
num special requirements for materials laboratory .
the materials laboratory will also be provided with the following a. furnishings .
num .
one office type desk minimum top dimensions num x num with two or more drawers on each side .
num .
one swivel desk chair .
b .
work table and sink .
the materials laboratory shall be provided with a deep sink set in a work table and equipped with a faucet and a drain to the outside of building .
a water supply sufficient for testing shall be provided .
the water supply may consist of a gravity feed tank with at least a numgallon capacity or be provided from municipal sources .
num c. concrete curing box .
a concrete cylinder curing box shall be provided .
the concrete cylinder curing box shall conform to the following minimum requirements it shall have approximate internal dimensions of num inches in length num inches in width and num inches in depth .
the top of the box shall be an insulated lid hinged at the back and with a lock at the front .
the interior of the box shall be made of num gauge rustproofed steel .
the outside of box shall be separated from the inside by num inches of rigid foam insulation .
a moistureproof seal between the lid and the box shall be provided .
the inside container shall be constructed such that heat and humidity requirements will be supplied by a numwatt immersible heater in a pool of water at the bottom of the container approximately num inches deep .
a drain pipe shall be provided through the side of the box .
suitable means of support shall be provided to hold the concrete cylinders above the water surface .
a bimetallic thermometer which can be read from outside shall be installed to measure the internal temperature of the box .
this thermometer shall have minimum graduations of numof .
a thermostat shall maintain the water at a uniform temperature of numof numof when the ambient temperature is as low as numof .
num .
equal characteristics .
a concrete curing box of a design and manufacture different from that described above but which possesses equal characteristics may be employed provided that it is approved in writing by the engineer .
d. equipment .
the contractor shall provide the materials laboratory with the following additional equipment .
num .
one gilson testing sieve shaker model tsnum or equivalent consisting of ten changeable screens mounted on a concrete base .
screens shall be calibrated to u.s. standard tolerances and shall consist of the following sizes num num½ num num½ num num ½ num no .
num no .
num and pan .
num .
one motordriven sieve shaker for operation on numvolt numcycle single phase current complete with belt driven mechanism to produce combination rocking and tapping action and with capacity for num full height sieves plus pan and cover all parts mounted on a sturdy base .
num .
one set of brassframe united states standard testing sieves all to be full height num inches in diameter matched for nesting and consisting of the following sizes ½ num nos .
num num num num num num two no .
num mesh sieves each with no .
num mesh backing two pans and one cover .
num .
one two burner electric hotplate ul approved .
num .
eight drying pans num x num x num minimum of sturdy numgauge metal .
num .
one approved digital scale with a minimum capacity of num grams and with sensitivity of num gram .
num .
one platform beam scale with pan that can be tared on scale capacity num pounds sensitivity of num pound with two beams at front of platform reading the num pounds by single pounds and to num pound by num pounds with additional hanger weights to fulfill capacity of num pounds all parts to be steel with enclosed weighing mechanisms platform to be num½ x num .
num num .
scales must be calibrated every six months and must conform to the requirements of applicable specifications and standards .
e. hardware and accessories .
the following hardware and accessories shall be provided num .
one sample splitter ½inch chute width num chutes .
num .
one sample splitter num½inch chute width num chutes .
num .
one brasswire briquette brush .
num .
three oneinch sieve or sash brushes fine .
num .
one rubber mallet .
num .
one large sampling spoon .
num .
one large scoop .
num .
one trowel .
num .
one square shovel .
num .
one spade shovel .
num .
two pairs insulated gloves hot mitts as required .
num .
one thermometer gardo model gtnumr or equivalent having an operating range of numof to numof with numinch stem and numinch diameter dial face with calibrating capabilities .
num .
one thermometer gardo model gtnumr or equivalent having an operating range of numof to numof with a numinch stem and numinch diameter dial face with calibrating capabilities .
the head should be capable of withstanding temperatures of at least numof .
num maintenance and custodial service .
the contractor shall provide the following maintenance and custodial services .
a .
maintenance .
all necessary repairs of damaged defective or vandalized parts of the field office or materials laboratory and their associated furnishings and equipment .
maintenance operations shall continue as long as the field office or materials laboratory is occupied by the engineer .
b. custodial .
num .
weekly trash removal .
num .
biweekly floor cleaning .
num .
bimonthly window cleaning .
num num .
snow plowing sanding and removal of snow at parking areas and walks .
num .
replacement of supplies as required to maintain office equipment and sanitary facilities .
num project sign .
both the field office and the materials laboratory shall be equipped with a sign for the purpose of identifying the use of the structure and providing notice against trespassing .
the field office identification sign is detailed on the plans .
num method of measurement .
field office and materials laboratory will both be measured by the number of calendar months said facilities are used under the contract .
num basis of payment .
field office and materials laboratory will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per month as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for furnishing maintaining and subsequently removing the field office or materials laboratory together with all associated costs of computer equipment and peripherals and supplies facsimile modems including all costs associated with electrical utility heating lighting air conditioning water sewer and telephone connections permits identification sign maintenance custodial services and supplies and all other incidentals required to provided this service complete and accepted by the engineer .
the timely provision of field offices and materials laboratories for use by the states engineering force shall be mandatory consideration for initial payments to the contractor for any and all work performed .
section num plant field laboratory num description .
this work consists of furnishing a building at the site of the production plant suitable for the housing and use of equipment required to carry out the various tests and for the recording and processing of the results of said tests all in accordance with these specifications .
the building shall be for the exclusive use of the engineer or his representatives for the purpose of testing and recording the results of said testing .
num laboratory building .
the laboratory building shall not be less than num feet wide and num feet long and shall have a ceiling height of at least num½feet .
the floor shall be sturdy level and constructed of concrete .
the building shall be watertight .
there shall be at least three standard windows and a door equipped with an adequate lock .
the site shall include restroom facilities that are fully equipped and accessible .
if the engineer permits the plant field laboratory may be part of an existing building .
in this case the laboratory portions of the building shall be entirely partitioned off from the remaining unrelated areas .
the use of a trailer is not permitted .
num the laboratory shall be air conditioned .
adequate and satisfactory lighting heating and drinking water shall be provided .
the contractor shall furnish all water fuel and electrical power required to conduct the various tests .
the power provided shall be adequate to simultaneously operate all laboratory equipment and utilities including an air conditioner if the laboratory is soequipped .
a table chairs desk work bench fireproof filing cabinet and telephone shall be provided in each laboratory .
in case of fire theft or breakdown all equipment involved shall be repaired or replaced by the contractor within num hours .
in the event buildings are destroyed or rendered untenable for any reason they shall be replaced within two weeks or as directed .
in the interim the contractor shall provide temporary facilities for laboratory operations .
when both bituminous and cement concrete mixing plants are located in the same compound and when the contractor provides one laboratory building for both bituminous and cement concrete testing facilities duplication of laboratory equipment will not be required with the exception of the computer equipment specified in subsection num .
num laboratory requirements .
num bituminous concrete mixing plants .
the contractor shall provide the following at the bituminous mixing plant a .
equipment and supplies .
num .
one automatic bituminous compactor complete with hammer assembly numinch numpound drop hammer and counter with automatic shutoff .
num .
four bituminous compaction molds complete with mold body base plate and collar numinch inside diameter .
num .
one sample splitter ½inch chute with width num chutes .
num .
one sample splitter num½inch chute width num chutes .
num .
one asphalt ignition oven capable of automatically determining the corrected asphalt content of a num gram sample .
the oven shall have an integral weighing system and printer capable of providing a hard copy of test results .
a suitable work area and adequate ventilation for the ovens exhaust shall be provided .
two pair of heat resistant gloves gilson model senum or equal two sample trays and a face shield gilson model senum or equal shall be provided .
the internal scale shall conform to subsection num of these specifications .
the contractor shall perform all maintenance of the oven at intervals recommended by the manufacturer .
num .
one motordriven numinch sieve shaker complete with belt driven mechanism to produce combination rocking and tapping action capacity for num fullheight numinch sieves plus pan and cover all parts mounted on a sturdy base .
num .
one gravity drying oven of rugged construction with numinch thick insulated walls minimum inside dimensions to be num inches wide num inches deep and num inches high equipped with two expanded metal shelves automatic thermostat and other controls a glass thermometer reading numo to numoc by numo divisions .
num num .
one set of us standard numinch round intermediate height testing sieves with stainless steel mesh .
sizes shall include num½ num¼ num num ½ num nos .
num num num num num num and two no .
num with square openings two pans and one cover .
num .
six drying pans approximately num x num x num½ for use in the oven .
num .
one digital scale num grams plusminus num grams .
num .
two brass wire briquette brushes .
num .
three sieve or sash brushes .
num .
two approved dial type thermometers numof to numof .
num .
one approved twoburner electric hot plate ul approved .
num .
metal mixing bowl num inches or greater diameter .
num .
sample splitting tool .
num .
two putty knives .
num .
five metal sampling buckets .
num .
dust masks .
num .
two pairs of suede work gloves .
num .
an adequate supply of towels for marshall core specific gravity test .
num .
an approved cleaning solvent for the equipment must be provided .
num .
two pairs of safety goggles and two pairs of gloves for high heat applications .
num .
one marshall core specific gravity apparatus .
num .
one density tank for marshall core specific gravity .
num .
two sampling spoons .
num .
two spatulas .
num .
one shovel .
num .
one fire extinguisher num lbs .
min .. num .
a hood with an exhaust fan or other acceptable means of ventilation .
num .
first aid kit .
num num cement concrete mixing plants .
the contractor shall provide the following at the concrete mixing plant a .
equipment and supplies .
num .
one digital platform beam scale capacity num kilograms sensitivity num grams .
num .
one approved twoburner electric hot plate ul approved .
num .
one gravity drying oven of rugged construction with numinch thick insulated walls minimum inside dimensions to be num inches wide num inches deep and num inches high equipped with two expanded metal shelves automatic thermostat and other controls a glass thermometer reading numo to numo c. by numo divisions .
num .
one gilson type sieve shaker model tsnum with timer or equivalent consisting of eight changeable screens screens to be within us standard tolerances and have openings as follows num½ num num½ num num ½ num no .
num no .
num no .
num and pan .
the unit should be enclosed and adequate ventilation shall be provided .
num .
one motordriven portable sieve shaker for operation on numvolt numcycle single phase current complete with belt driven mechanism to produce combination rocking and tapping action capacity for num fullheight sieves plus pan and cover all parts mounted on a sturdy base .
num .
one set of brassframe united states standard testing sieves all to be full height num inches in diameter and matched for nesting one each of the following num ½ num nos .
num num num num num num num num two no .
num and one no .
num mesh with no .
num mesh backing two pans and one cover .
num .
three fine numinch sieve or sash brushes and two brass wire briquette brushes .
num .
one set of num sturdy pans for drying soils approximately num x num x num¼ of numgauge metal .
num .
one complete air meter test outfit num cubic foot ref .
aashto tnum and astm cnum .
num .
one complete slump test outfit ref .
aashto tnum and tnum .
num .
one sturdy pan numgauge metal with reinforced rims num x num x num .
num .
one sample splitter ½inch chute width num chutes .
num .
one sample splitter num½inch chute width num chutes .
num .
one digital scale num grams plusminus num gram .
num .
one small concrete scoop num .
num .
two dial thermometers numof to numof .
num .
four plastic buckets numgallon capacity .
num num .
one fire extinguisher num lbs .
min .. num .
one shovel .
num .
one steel brush long handle .
num .
two putty knives .
num .
two pairs of suede work gloves .
num .
one square steel trowel numinch length center handle .
num .
firstaid kit .
num .
one plastic storage tote numgallon capacity num x num x num minimum .
num .
one large concrete scoop num .
num computer equipment .
the items of computer equipment and software to be furnished installed tested made operational and maintained within the plant field laboratory are set forth in special provision code num .
if a plant is producing both asphalt and concrete two complete sets of computer equipment will be required .
should the contractor fail to provide any of the supplies or equipment described above and deemed necessary by the engineer the state will not accept any mixes or products dispatched from subject site unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
num scales .
all scales for bituminous and cement concrete mixing plant testing equipment must be calibrated every six months and must conform to the requirements of applicable specifi cations .
num catalogues .
catalogs for the above equipment are available at the departments materials laboratory .
num method of measurement .
not applicable .
num basis of payment .
provision of plant field laboratory will not be paid for separately but shall be considered a subsidiary obligation of the contractor with the costs thereof distributed among the contract unit prices for other items of work .
num section num cleaning and sweeping pavement num description .
this work consists of cleaning and sweeping surfaces of bituminous concrete pavement and cement concrete pavement designated on the plans or as directed by the engineer to remove materials deposited on said pavements during extended delays in construction operations all in accordance with these specifications .
these delays include but are not limited to suspension of construction operations during the winter months and the interruption of construction operations for extended lengths of time between the placement of successive courses of bituminous concrete pavement .
two items of work are covered by this section .
num cleaning and sweeping pavement .
this work consists of cleaning and sweeping the entire roadway surface andor gutter area .
the sweepings must be removed prior to the placement of any successive pavement .
num cleaning and sweeping pavement for statewide striping contracts .
the work consists of cleaning and sweeping limited areas of roadway surface for the sole purpose of preparing said pavement to receive striping and markings .
the work shall be performed simultaneously with and in advance of the striping operation .
all sweeping operations will be performed at the discretion of the engineer .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction methods .
all sands silts gravels vegetation and debris of every description shall be removed from the designated areas by approved mechanical or manual sweeping methods .
all such material shall be removed to the complete satisfaction of the engineer prior to either resurfacing placing wearing surface courses or placement of striping and markings as the case may be .
num disposal of collected debris .
the legal disposal of all collected material shall be accomplished as follows .
a .
street sweepings .
this debris includes sand that may be mixed with salt used on streets roads highways for winter storm operation .
num .
acceptable uses .
street sweepings may be reused in the following ways a landfill cover may require screening .
b road base or any base course application that will be covered with an asphalt or concrete layer .
c backfill for public works construction projects other than areas adjacent to concrete pipes and structures .
num d clean fill only when analytical testing for total petroleum hydrocarbons tph toxicity characteristic leaching procedure tclp and total lead tl have been performed and submitted to ridem division of waste management for review of reuse application .
num .
unacceptable uses .
street sweepings may not be used as unrestricted clean fill in areas that will expose the debris to human contact such as a fill on residential properties public parks or playgrounds .
b fill near pristine waterways drinking water watersheds wellhead protection areas areas with groundwater classified as gaa and areas within num feet of a private drinking water well or in any other manner that would be inconsistent with state and federal laws or regulations .
b .
other debris .
all other debris collected from the roadway surface shall be legally disposed of .
num method of measurement .
num cleaning and sweeping pavement .
cleaning and sweeping pavement will be measured by the area in hundred square yards of those bituminous concrete surfaces and cement concrete surfaces actually sotreated in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num cleaning and sweeping pavement for statewide striping contracts .
cleaning and sweeping pavement for statewide striping contracts will be measured by the number of days the sweeper is actually employed in the construction work in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
the minimum width to be cleaned and swept under this item shall be no less than num feet .
num basis of payment .
num cleaning and sweeping pavement .
the accepted quantity of cleaning and sweeping pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per hundred square yards as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor equipment and materials including legal disposal of the sweepings and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num cleaning and sweeping pavement for statewide striping contracts .
the accepted quantity of cleaning and sweeping pavement for statewide striping contracts will be paid for at the contract unit price per day as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor equipment and materials including legal disposal of the sweepings and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
payment for cleaning and sweeping pavements to remove materials deposited thereon during normal uninterrupted construction operations is paid for under section num dense graded bituminous concrete pavements of these specifications .
num section num cutting and matching pavement num description .
this work consists of cutting back and matching cuts in both portland cement and bituminous concrete pavements to the required depths of the specified course or courses at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num cold joints .
this work also includes the installation of cold joints if such joints occur during paving operations .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction methods .
the method of cutting shall be approved by the engineer prior to the commencement of construction operations .
the sections of existing pavement to be removed surface course base course or combination thereof shall be cut along the neat lines shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
a vertical cut of at least num½inches deep shall be made along the designated lines .
the pavement to be removed shall then be chipped and removed .
the edge of the cut joint shall be thoroughly cleaned by sweeping and blowing with compressed air .
the clean edge shall then be protected by adequate measures until the new pavement is placed and matched thereto .
any existing pavement surface course base course or combination thereof beyond the neat lines called for on the plans that is damaged or destroyed by the contractors operations shall be either repaired or replaced at no additional cost to the state .
num cold joints .
if as a result of paving operations a cold joint occurs the contractor will install the joints as directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement .
cutting and matching pavement will be measured by the length in linear feet of cuts actually made on designated courses of pavement in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of cutting and matching pavement of the types specified will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num cold joints .
no additional payment will be made for installation of cold joints if such joints are caused by the contractors sequence of paving operations .
num section num saw cutting of pavements for installation of traffic count loop detectors num description .
this work consists of saw cutting a slot into existing pavement surfaces for the purpose of installing a traffic count loop detector at the locations indicated on the plans all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction methods .
representatives of the department will establish the location for the traffic count loop detectors .
the contractor shall then cut a slot into the existing pavement surface numinch in width and between num½inches and num½inches in depth depending upon the thickness of the final surface course .
the method of saw cutting shall be approved by the engineer prior to the start of construction operations .
the cutting of the slot is the contractors only responsibility under this item of work .
the cutting of the slot must be made prior to the placement of the final surface course regardless of the specified thickness of that course .
personnel from the department will provide all labor and materials required to install the detector loop wire and to subsequently seal the cut at each location .
num method of measurement .
saw cutting of pavements for installation of traffic count loop detectors will be measured by the length in linear feet of the slots actually cut in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of saw cutting of pavements for installation of traffic count loop detectors will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num field control and construction layout num description .
in general the establishment of basic field control and the laying out of construction work will be performed by state forces .
in certain cases however the state may assign these functions to the contractor .
in such cases this section of the standard specifica tions shall apply .
num the work of this section consists of establishing on the ground the basic horizontal and vertical control for the project and subsequently providing construction layout and reference staking for the proper control and satisfactory completion of all structures grading paving drainage and all other appurtenances all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
all stakes used for control staking shall be of the same quality as used by the department for this purpose .
for slope limits pavement edges gutter lines etc .
where so called green or working stakes are commonly used stakes of lower quality will be acceptable .
num construction layout .
num departments responsibility .
the department will furnish the contractor such control points benchmarks and other data as may be necessary for the construction staking and layout by qualified engineering or surveying personnel .
num contractors responsibilities .
the contractor shall set construction stakes and establish all lines and grades required for the work .
these stakes duly marked and checked shall constitute the basic horizontal and vertical field control by which and in accordance with which the contractor shall establish other necessary controls to perform the work .
all basic field control must be established prior to the start of the work .
in addition to basic field control the staking and layout of all elements of the work shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
a .
minimum requirements .
the following shall apply num .
require a meeting between the contractor and the departments survey section to discuss the departments surveying procedures and to coordinate its work with the survey section .
num .
provision of fullyequipped survey parties .
num .
party chiefs shall be rhode island registered land surveyors .
num .
survey work shall be performed in accordance with procedures of the survey section .
num .
all records shall be kept in standard survey section field books .
num .
survey work shall be monitored by the survey section .
num .
partyday will be defined as an eight num hour day starting onsite and ending onsite .
b .
other responsibilities .
the contractor shall establish and protect adequate ties to all control points such that they may be conveniently reestablished if disturbed or destroyed .
num all stakes references and batterboards including original additional or replacement thereof which may be required for the construction operations shall be furnished set and properly referenced by the contractor .
the contractor shall be solely and completely responsible for the accuracy of the line and grade of all features of the work .
any errors or apparent discrepancies found in previous surveys plans specifications or special provisions shall be called to the engineers attention by the contractor for correction or interpretation prior to proceeding with the work .
upon request of the engineer the contractor shall furnish copies of all data used in setting and referencing all stakes and other layout markings used by the contractor .
when requested by the engineer the contractor shall provide safe facilities for convenient access by department forces to control points batterboards and references .
the department may check the control of the work as established by the contractor at any time as the work progresses .
the contractor will be informed of the results of these checks .
however by so doing so the department in no way relieves the contractor of its responsibility for the accuracy of the layout work .
the contractor shall at its expense correct or replace any deficient layout and construction work which may be the result of inaccuracies in its staking operations or of its failure to report inaccuracies found in work performed by the department or by others .
if as a result of these inaccuracies the department is required to perform further studies or redesign or both all expenses associated therewith shall be deducted from monies due the contractor .
num method of measurement .
the establishment of field control and the layout of construction work shall be accomplished by a qualified field survey party .
the number of personnel on the party one of which will be the party chief as described above will be sufficient to perform the days required work .
the survey party will be measured by the number of days partydays as defined above the party is actually engaged in the work in accordance with the provisions of the contract andor as directed by the engineer .
calculation of survey party days will be computed by dividing the number of actual hours worked on site by eight hours .
the contractor shall make every effort to schedule survey time such that no less than four hours of survey work is completed on any particular day .
in no case will compensation be made for any work of less than four hours duration .
offsite work including but not limited to calculations sketches drawings tabulations correspondence andor research will be considered as incidental to the work described above and will not be considered for payment .
num basis of payment .
the approved number of survey party days will be paid for at the respective partyday rate as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including transportation of crews surveying supplies and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
num if this item is not specified for payment in the proposal the department will assume responsibility for its performance under the provisions of subsection num construction stakes lines and grades of these specifications .
section num removing bituminous pavement by cold planing num description .
this work consists of the removal of bituminous material using cold planing or grinding methods to a depth as specified on the plans all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction methods .
num equipment .
the equipment for removing the bituminous pavement shall be a power operated planing machine or grinder capable of removing a layer of bituminous material .
the equipment shall be capable of accurately establishing profile grades by referencing from either the existing pavement or from an independent grade control and shall have a positive means for removing excess material from the surface and preventing any dust resulting from the operation from escaping into the air .
a numfoot ski shall be utilized with the pavement removal equipment on all limitedaccess highways and on other types of highways when indicated in the contract documents .
the equipment furnished by the contractor shall be in good repair and shall be maintained so as to produce a clean cut to the pavement at all times .
num cold planing .
the planed surface shall conform generally to the grade and cross slope required and be free from being torn gouged shoved broken or excessively grooved .
the surface shall be free of imperfections of workmanship that will prevent the surface from being resurfaced with new pavement following this operation .
surface texture shall be rough grooved or as specified by the engineer and in all cases shall be acceptable to traffic in the event resurfacing is delayed .
no asphalt cuttings shall remain on the project at the end of each work day .
asphalt cuttings shall be removed and legally disposed of by the contractor .
care shall be exercised in planing adjacent to roadway joints roadway appurtenances and face of curbing .
num method of measurement .
removing bituminous pavement by cold planing will be measured by the number of square yards of said pavement actually removed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of removing bituminous pavement by cold planing will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section num mobilization num description .
this work consists of those efforts necessary for the movement of the contractors personnel and equipment to the project site and for the establishment of all the contractors field offices buildings and other facilities required for the performance of the contract .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction methods .
not applicable .
num method of measurement .
this work will be measured for payments as follows a .
first payment .
the first payment of num percent of the lump sum bid price for mobilization or num percent of the total contract amount without mobilization whichever is the lesser will be made on the first progress payment .
b .
second payment .
the second payment of num percent of the lump sum price for mobilization or num percent of the total contract amount without mobilization whichever is the lesser will be made when the progress payment estimate of the amount earned not including that amount earned for mobilization is num percent of the total contract amount without mobilization .
c. third payment .
the third payment of num percent of the lump sum price for mobilization or num percent of the total contract amount without mobilization whichever is the lesser will be made when the progress payment estimate of the amount earned not including that amount earned for mobilization is num percent of the total contract amount without mobilization .
d. final payment .
upon completion of all the work on the project including demobiliza tion payment of any amount bid for mobilization in excess of the total amount previously paid will be paid .
num basis of payment .
mobilization and demobilization will be paid for at the contract lump sum price as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and other incidentals required to establish num the contractors facilities at the site and at the conclusion of the contract for the complete removal thereof .
no lump sum breakdown will be required for this item of work .
section num maintenance and movement of traffic protective devices num description .
this work consists of removing from original locations maintaining storing covering and uncovering relocating and reerecting all temporary construction signs sign mountings portable barricades traffic cones delineators and other traffic warning devices when sodirected by the engineer all in accordance with this specification .
all such maintenance and movement work on these devices shall take place after their initial installation on the project and prior to their final removal from same .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction methods .
num normal operations .
the contractor shall maintain all signs barricades and other protective devices in a sturdy clean and legible condition .
in this regard maintenance involves the following repairing adjusting washing repainting and the reapplication of reflective sheeting .
the various devices shall be located in their proper positions such that they reflect existing traffic conditions .
as conditions change signs and devices shall be removed and covered so that the respective messages are not visible to approaching traffic .
where changed conditions warrant new devices will be provided .
when construction operations are not in progress all unnecessary signs shall be appropriately covered .
care shall be exercised such that weeds shrubbery and construction materials equipment and spoils do not obscure the message of any sign light or barricade .
no defective andor damaged devices shall be installed .
devices showing defects or damages caused as a result of the contractors operations or negligence shall be either repaired or removed and replaced at no additional cost to the state .
when the engineer determines that a sign or device requires replacement due to normal wear and tear or that said sign or device has been severely damaged by causes other than the contractors operations these signs and devices shall be replaced and paid for in accordance with the provisions of those sections of these specifications that apply to the particular devices in question .
num emergencies .
at the preconstruction conference the contractor shall provide the department with both the home telephone and beeper numbers of at least three personnel who will be available on a numhour basis for the duration of the contract .
these persons shall constitute the contacts in the event of an emergency .
num upon notification by the engineer the contractor through its contact personnel will respond to the site of an emergency within ninety minutes and immediately take steps to commence repair operations .
num method of measurement .
this work does not require a measurement for payment .
num basis of payment .
num payment for full compliance .
maintenance and movement of traffic protective devices will be paid for at the contract lump sum price as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including removing the devices from their initial locations handling maintaining transporting and relocating said devices to storage or to subsequent intermediate locations at which they are to be used for traffic control and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
monthly progress payments under this item will be made at a rate determined by dividing the contract lump sum price by the number of months allocated for completion of the contract .
said number of months shall be equal to the difference between the contract completion date and the date of the notice to proceed .
payment for authorized contract time extensions will be made at the calculated monthly rate as defined above .
if the contract is completed prior to the authorized completion date the final monthly payment will consist of the remaining balance of the contract lump sum price .
no payment will be made for unauthorized contract time extensions .
num failure to comply .
if in the judgement of the engineer the contractor fails to adequately and safely maintain traffic control devices along any portion of the project or if the contractor fails to move andor relocate traffic control devices to meet changes in traffic conditions construction operations or conditions affecting the safety of the public the following liquidated damages and penalty will be assessed .
a .
for each day the engineer determines that the contractor has failed to comply with the provisions of this section the daily charge set forth in special provision code num will be deducted from monies then due the contractor .
b .
in addition for any month that the engineer determines that the contractor has failed to comply with the provisions of this section the monthly progress payment for said month shall be reduced by an amount equal to the ratio of the number of days the contractor was not in compliance with the provisions of this section to the total number of days in the month in question times said regular monthly progress payment .
num emergencies .
in the event that emergency repair work has not been initiated within the ninetyminute time frame specified above the sum of three times the daily charge set forth num in special provision code num will be deducted from monies then due the contractor for each day until said repair work is undertaken .
a .
repair work by others .
if emergency repair work is performed by a party other than the contractor or one of its firsttier subcontractors and if the other party is not compensated for its work within num days following completion of the repair work the engineer reserves the right to withhold monies then due the contractor in order to provide payment to the other party .
section num price adjustments num description .
the intent of this provision is to insure adequate and fair compensation for unpredictable and fluctuating costs which from time to time occur in the prices of liquid asphalt and diesel fuel .
the price adjustment provisions are made part of the contract to assure more realistic bidding and encourage competition .
num definitions .
num base price .
the base price is the unit price of the material fob terminal as determined by the department just prior to the first date that the notice to contractors is advertised in the public press .
num period price .
the period price is the unit price of the material fob terminal as determined by the department for any one month period following the notice to proceed during which the price varies from the base price .
num price adjustment .
price adjustment will be determined by the difference between the period price and the base price .
price adjustments will be made at the end of each month during which a work was accomplished on the project and b prices varied .
price adjustments will not be allowed beyond the completion date of the contract or an approved extension thereof .
price adjustments will be made in accordance with an approved contract addendum .
num liquid asphalt cement .
the asphalt content will be the optimum amount used in every ton of bituminous concrete mixture as determined by the departments materials engineer using the method for determination of optimum asphalt cement content as set forth in section m.num of these specifications .
the price adjustment will be determined by multiplying the total weight of liquid asphalt in tons by the difference between the base price and period price .
the base price of liquid asphalt cement is set forth in special provision code num .
num num diesel fuel .
the fuel for operating the plant and the fuel for hauling and placing bituminous concrete will equal the total number of tons of bituminous concrete placed during the month in question times a fuel adjustment factor of num gallons of fuel per ton of bituminous concrete .
tonnage of bituminous concrete placed during the month in question will equal the sum of the weights indicated on the daily automated recordation printout slips provided at the plant .
the price adjustment will be determined by multiplying the total volume of fuel in gallons by the difference between the base price and the period price .
no price adjustment will be made unless the amount of the adjustment plus or minus exceeds num for the month .
the base price of diesel fuel is set forth in special provision code num .
section num stone walls in historic scenic or rural areas num description .
this work consists of the resetting and construction of stone walls in historic scenic or rural areas .
such walls require special treatment as indicated herein and shall be constructed at locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
num stones .
stones for walls to be reset shall include stones in the existing wall with additional stones as required to complete the wall construction .
additional stones shall conform to the stones in the existing wall relative to shape color texture and geological composition .
stones for new walls shall conform to stones found in nearby walls relative to the aforementioned characteristics unless otherwise noted on the plans or directed by the engineer .
stones used below grade for the core or for the back of a retaining wall need not meet these criteria .
however the stones must conform to section m.num stone for masonry of these specifications and must be appropriately sized and shaped to permit proper interlocking with the existing stones .
any special features such as lintels gate posts copings markers etc .
shall be retained for resetting .
num mortar .
mortar shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num mortar of these specifications .
num num construction methods .
num general requirements .
the construction of new walls or the resetting of existing walls will be carried out as indicated on the plans .
laying of stones shall conform to the requirements of subsections num and num of these specifications for wet masonry walls and drylaid walls respectively .
the construction of walls in historic areas must be accomplished by stone masons with demonstrated proficiency in historic stone masonry constructionrestoration practices .
documentation in the form of professional certifications and the locations of at least three successfully completed stone walls similar in type to the work to be performed must be presented to the engineer no less than num days prior to the start of work .
this documentation must be approved by the engineer in consultation with the ridot historic preservation specialist in order for the masonry contractor to be allowed to perform the work .
the approved masons are to complete the entire work item for which the approval was given .
num documentation .
prior to dismantling historically significant walls the contractor will measure and record their width and height at numfoot intervals and at locations where characteristics of the wall change .
he must also take a minimum of six nummm numinch by numinch color photographs of each wall to be dismantled .
the photographs are to be taken in locations that are representative of the walls original type .
if no representative wall sections exist the engineer in consultation with the ridot historic preservation specialist will determine the finished appearancedimensions .
two copies of the measurements and two sets of photographs are to be given to the engineer .
this documentation must be reviewed and approved by the engineer in consultation with the ridot historic preservation specialist for accuracy before the walls are dismantled .
once approved this record of the walls will be referenced during the reconstruction of the walls and will remain the property of the state .
num dismantling .
historically significant walls to be removed and reset must be carefully dismantled to avoid fracturing and chipping the stones .
the stones shall be stockpiled in the area where the wall is to be rebuilt .
if they must be temporarily moved to a different location they must be kept separate from any other stones .
use of a dump truck will not be permitted to transport stone from historically significant walls .
the contractor will be responsible for protecting all stockpiled stones from damage theft and vandalism .
num resetting .
exposed faces must be composed of stones from the extant walls .
care shall be taken during resetting to keep weathered stone faces exposed .
additional stones required to complete the walls are to be blended with the existing stone in order to reduce any incompatibility in the appearance of the walls .
the contractor shall carefully duplicate the original wall and any special features such as lintels gateposts openings copings markers etc .
num new walls .
when new stone walls are required in the vicinity of historic properties and districts a numfoot long sample section of wall must be constructed .
the engineer in consultation with the ridot historic preservation specialist is to approve stone joint construction and overall character of installation of the sample section .
the approved sample section may be part of the finished work .
a rejected sample section must be demolished and rebuilt to the approval of the engineer .
num weep holes .
weep holes shall be constructed of solid gray pvc pipe in the manner and at the locations indicated on the plans or required by the engineer .
num num cleaning .
all excess material shall be removed and the site left in a presentable condition satisfactory to the engineer .
if surplus stones exist the engineer will determine whether to transport the surplus stones to an offsite permanent stockpile area or to dispose of the material .
num method of measurement .
stone walls in historic scenic or rural areas will be measured either by the number of linear feet measured along the centerline of the wall or the number of cubic yards of masonry as applicable actually placed in accordance with the plans these specifications andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of stone walls in historic scenic or rural areas will be paid for either at the contract unit price per linear foot measured along the centerline of the wall or by the contract unit price per cubic yard of masonry as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full compensation for all labor materials and equipment including documenting and dismantling of the existing wall stockpiling of stone removal of stones from the stockpile all necessary cuttingdressing of stones reconstruction of special features construction of weep holes cleaning and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
special site preparation such as clearing and grubbing or gravel base courses will be paid for under other appropriate proposal items of the contract .
removal and stockpiling of surplus stone at an offsite permanent stockpile location will be paid for under an appropriate proposal item in the contract .
stones required to construct new walls or to supplement quantities of stones in existing walls will be paid for under separate proposal items in the contract .
section num onsite administration facility num description .
this work consists of providing and maintaining a suitable weatherproof unit on the project site to be used for the onsite administration of the contract .
the facility will not be for the exclusive use of the state but will be for administration activities only .
num general requirements .
num minimum spatial requirements .
unless specified otherwise in the special provisions of the contract the facility shall contain a minimum of num square feet of floor area and num feet of headroom .
it shall have suitably located windows two vented and one fixed to provide at least num square feet of natural light and one exterior entrance door .
a commercial office trailer num feet by num feet is considered to satisfy the above requirements .
num num other requirements .
a .
in the event of loss or damage resulting from vandalism or weather repairs to the facility will be completed within num hours .
if the facility is destroyed or rendered untenable for any reason it shall be replaced within num weeks or as directed by the engineer .
b .
the timely provision of the onsite administration facility as specified shall be mandatory consideration for initial payments with proper maintenance of the facility being mandatory consideration for future progress payments to the contractor for any and all work performed .
c. the contractor shall maintain this facility and its equipment on the project site until the project has been determined to be substantially complete .
num specific requirements .
the onsite administration facility shall be provided for as follows a .
equipment and facilities .
num .
numvolt numcycle numamp electrical current sufficient for lighting and equipment operation .
num .
lighting will be overhead consisting of num twin tube flourescent fixtures each num inches in length with coldstart ballasts .
num .
adequate toilet facilities with supplies .
facility may be a portajohn type external unit located in close proximity to the administration facility .
num .
all windows shall have screens as applicable clear glass and be properly shaded .
each door shall have keyinknob or equivalent of an approved manufacturer and all doors shall be keyed alike .
num .
a numpound cnum fire extinguisher .
num .
a work or plan table built in will be provided at each end of the facility .
num .
one telephone for local calls only .
num .
first aid kit .
num .
electric sanitary water cooler with bottled drinking water and cups .
num .
three chairs suitable for use with the provided builtin tables .
num method of measurement .
not applicable .
num basis of payment .
provision of the onsite administration facility together with all associated costs of equipment telephone telephone lines drinking water toilet facilities num electricity and other associated services and supplies will not be paid for separately but shall be considered a subsidiary obligation of the contractor with the costs thereof distributed among the contract unit prices for other items of work .
section num replacement of partially damaged safety related hardware num description .
this item provides a method of payment for the replacement of partially damaged or vandalized safety related hardware following partial acceptance of the work .
safety related hardware includes but is not necessarily limited to crash cushions breakaway signs and luminaries and their corresponding supports delineators guardrail and appurtenances bridge railing and concrete median barriers .
num materials .
materials shall conform to the applicable requirements of these specifications for the items involved .
num construction methods .
construction methods shall conform to the applicable requirements of these specifications for the items involved .
num measurement and payment .
replacement of partially damaged safety related hardware will be paid for at the applicable contract unit price as listed in the proposal for the partially damaged work minus a credit for any undamaged components of the partially damaged work .
the credit for undamaged components shall be verified by the contractors presentation of its original paid receipts or bills of lading for the undamaged components .
section num detectable warning systems num description .
this work consists of providing and installing a polyurethane mat with truncated domes in an offset pattern that is compliant with americans with disabilities act ada warning and directional systems for the visually impaired at locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
num materials .
the detectable warning mat shall be of dimension and color within ada standards and the discretion of the engineer .
adhesive seam sealer and edge sealer shall conform to the specifications of the mat manufacturer and shall be acceptable to the engineer .
nylon anchors shall conform to the dimension and sizes indicated on the detail and shall be acceptable to the engineer .
num num construction methods .
num surface preparation .
the concrete surface should be relatively flat smooth and dry .
fresh concrete requires a full numday cure prior to mat installation .
any cracks or holes larger than numinch need to be patched prior to applying ground adhesive .
the installation area should be prepared by using a wire brush to remove paint gum and other unwanted materials from the surface and sweeping the area to remove all dirt and dust .
num mat placement .
place mats in the desired location .
if mats need to be cut or shaped make the necessary cuts with a saw or knife and fit each mat into place .
once all mats are in position apply a numinch wide strip of duct tape around the entire outer perimeter making sure that the tape does not overlap onto the mats as this will leave an area without glue when the mats are installed .
num adhesive application .
following the manufacturers directions thoroughly mix equal amounts of part a and part b of the ground adhesive in an oversize container .
apply the adhesive to the entire area inside the taped perimeter using a numinch notched trowel approximately num mil thickness .
be certain that all edges and corners have adequate coverage of the ground adhesive .
allow the adhesive to become tacky to the touch normally about num minutes see directions on container .
do not allow the adhesive to dry completely .
num mat installation .
place mats one at a time in their prelaid positions .
take care to position them tightly against each other using the tape edge as a guide .
press firmly from the center to the outer edges to remove any air bubbles that may have formed .
press on the areas between the domes in order to remove all air that may have accumulated under the mats .
when joining mats together spot tack the edges together as tightly as possible using drops of seam sealer .
when the mats are in position carefully remove the tape from the perimeter .
press down the edges and corners of each mat firmly .
num seam sealer .
apply a small bead of seam seal adhesive along all joint seams .
num edge sealer .
apply a small bead of edge sealer along all outer edges .
num anchor installation .
after the mats have been completely installed and the ground adhesive has set the nylon anchors can be installed .
using a numinch masonry bit drill holes through the mats and at least num inch into the concrete .
place num x num nylon anchors in the holes and tap them in with a hammer .
do not place anchors in the domes .
anchor placement shall be according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num method of measurement .
detectable warning systems will be measured by the number of square feet of polyurethane mat actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of detectable warning systems will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated shall constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials equipment and other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
tnum part t traffic control systems section t.num electrical work t.num description .
this work consists of performing electrical work common to but not necessarily limited to the installation of traffic signals highway lighting and illuminated signs at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications the national electric code the national electric safety code and the electrical utility company .
the work includes all material labor equipment and incidentals necessary to provide lighting systems traffic signal systems and cable systems for police and fire alarm complete in every respect and ready for use as specified .
the work includes excavation backfill conduit and appurtenances whether encased in concrete attached to structures or buried in the ground .
wherever reference is made to the code of standards mentioned herein the reference will be construed to mean the code or standard that is in effect on the date of advertisement for bids .
all workmanship will be first class and in accordance with the highest standards of the electrical industry .
t.num materials .
rigid steel conduits handholes pull boxes manholes wire and cable shall conform to the requirements specified in section m.num traffic control systems of these specifications .
only materials listed and tested by nationally recognized laboratories and so labeled or identified will be considered for acceptance for the services indicated .
all materials shall be new and all electrical equipment shall bear the manufacturers name trademark or other descriptive marking by which the organization responsible for the product may be identified .
other markings shall be provided giving voltage current wattage or other ratings as are prescribed elsewhere in these requirements .
electrical equipment shall be designed manufactured tested and rated in accordance with ansi and the national electrical manufacturers association .
all markings shall be of a durability that will withstand the environment involved as determined by the engineer .
where two or more items of the class of equipment are required these units shall be the products of the same manufacturer .
all materials shall be approved by the engineer before installation .
tnum t.num construction methods .
t.num foundations .
foundations for mast arm and span poles lighting standards pedestal poles service pedestals controller cabinets ground mounted and overhead sign structures and other equipment shall be constructed of class aae air entrained concrete for castinplace units and class xxae for precast units all conforming to the requirements specified in section num portland cement concrete .
concrete for castinplace units shall be placed in accordance with section num castinplace structure concrete masonry of these specifications .
all foundations shall rest on firm ground and shall be poured monolithically .
conduits and anchor bolts shall be placed in proper position and shall be held in place by means of a template until the concrete sets .
forms shall not be removed until the concrete has hardened properly and not less than num hours after the concrete has been placed .
all exposed portions of foundations shall be neatly finished with a wood float .
the tops of foundations shall be finished flush with the finished grade .
aluminum surfaces to be placed in contact with portland cement concrete shall be given a heavy coat of an alkaliresistant bituminous paint before installation .
the bituminous paint used shall meet the requirements of united states military specification milpnum .
the paint is to be applied as it is received from the manufacturer without the addition of any thinner .
t.num bonding and grounding .
traffic signals highway lighting illuminated sign circuits rigid steel conduits and aboveground equipment shall be effectively bonded and grounded as hereinafter specified and as shown on the plans for the respective installations .
bonding and grounding shall conform to the requirements of the national electric code and the utility company .
ground wire and grounding rods shall conform to the applicable requirements set forth in section m.num traffic control systems of these specifications .
the contractor shall be responsible for maintaining num ohm to ground resistance in all systems .
t.num connection with utility services .
for electrical work the contractor shall install conduits and electric conductors as shown on the plans in accordance with the requirements of the utility company and subject to its approval .
the contractor will arrange with the serving utility to complete service connections .
t.num testing .
upon the completion of each wiring system and before any connection is made to operating equipment the contractor shall perform in the presence of the engineer the following tests of each circuit to determine whether the installations are in acceptable working order a .
tests for continuity .
b .
tests for grounds .
tnum c. tests for insulation resistance from circuit wires to ground and between circuit wires .
the insulation resistance shall not be less than the value specified in the national electric code .
with all equipment connected to the wiring system a functional test shall be performed by the contractor in the presence of the engineer to demonstrate that the system as a whole and all parts thereof function as specified or intended herein .
any defective materials or faulty or improper installation shall be permanently corrected by repairs or replacements to be made by and at the expense of the contractor to the satisfaction of the engineer and the utility company .
lighting circuits shall be subjected to such other tests as may be required by the utility company .
it shall be the responsibility of the contractor to ascertain what tests are required and to perform these tests in the presence of the engineer and the utility companys representative .
the cost of testing shall be included in the prices bid for other scheduled items of work as specified in sections t.num through t.num respectively .
t.num painting .
signal heads including hanger shall be painted with two coats of federal yellow enamel except that the interior of hoods shall be finished with two coats of flat black enamel unless specified otherwise .
aluminum or galvanized steel fittings and parts shall not be painted unless part of an adjacent assembly is to be painted .
the cost of painting shall be included in the prices bid for other scheduled items of work as specified in sections t.num through t.num and t.num through t.num respectively .
t.num topsoiling and seeding .
topsoiling and seeding after excavation and backfill shall conform to the applicable requirements of sections l.num and l.num respectively of these specifications .
the cost of topsoiling and seeding shall be included in the prices bid for other scheduled items of work as specified in sections t.num through t.num respectively .
t.num shop drawings .
the contractor shall submit manufacturers shop drawings layout drawings and specifications for equipment and appurtenances for the approval of the engineer in accordance with subsection num plans and shop drawings of these specifications .
a .
design computations .
design computations for mast arms and poles span poles and lighting standards shall be complete and shall include but not be limited to the following consideration for all parts of the structure consideration for all possible loading combinations including wind and ice loads and the design stresses and allowable stresses for all components which comprise the proposed structure .
all complete shop drawings and design computations shall bear the stamp of a registered professional engineer .
shop drawings shall be approved prior to fabrication and it shall be expressly understood and agreed upon that said approval does not relieve the contractor of its responsibility for the design fabrication and erection of the structure .
b .
equipment lists .
within num days of signing the contract the contractor shall furnish for the approval of the engineer a minimum of five copies of a listing of the controller equipment tnum proposed for use under the contract .
the listing shall be supplemented by catalog cuts manufacturers specifications and other descriptive or pictorial data sufficient to identify and explain the method of operation and construction of the proposed equipment .
upon approval the engineer will retain four copies and return one approved copy to the contractor .
t.num existing systems .
where existing systems are to be modified the existing equipment and materials shall be salvaged and incorporated in the revised system salvaged for other use by the department or removed and disposed of by the contractor as may be provided in the plans or as specified .
material required to be salvaged shall be removed carefully and stockpiled on site at the location designated in the contract documents or as directed by the engineer .
existing equipment and materials specified for reuse or to be reserved for the department which are disturbed damaged or removed in performing the work shall be repaired or replaced with equivalent new equipment and materials acceptable to the engineer at no expense to the state .
existing systems or portions thereof may be abandoned in place only upon receipt of the written permission of the engineer .
t.num lines and grades .
it shall be the responsibility of the contractor to arrange for the furnishing of lines and grades by the engineer as may be necessary to lay out the work correctly all as specified in subsection num of these specifications .
t.num excavation and backfill .
excavation and backfill for the construction of manholes handholes foundations conduits cables and other appurtenances shall conform to the applicable requirements of section num structure excavation and backfill of these specifications .
t.num disruption of and damage to existing improvements .
all pavements curbs gutters culverts guardrail sidewalks walls landscaping conduit or wire and all other existing improvements removed due to construction damaged or injured by any reason of or resulting from the contractors operations shall be replaced or reconstructed of similar materials in a manner satisfactory to the engineer at no additional cost to the state .
when placing foundations handholes or conduit in existing bituminous sidewalks the entire width of sidewalk shall be replaced .
in the case of concrete sidewalks saw cuts shall be made at score lines and the entire square of concrete shall be replaced .
saw cuts shall be made at no additional cost to the state .
t.num method of measurement .
electrical work will not be measured separately but will be included in the measurement of specific items such as conduit foundations standards and posts luminaires traffic signal controllers and traffic signal heads .
measurement for payment will be as specified in sections t.num through t.num respectively .
t.num basis of payment .
electrical work will not be paid for separately but will be included in the price of specific items as listed in the proposal such as conduit foundations standards and posts luminaires traffic signal controllers wire and cable and traffic signal heads as specified in sections t.num through t.num respectively .
the cost of excavation and backfill for manholes handholes foundations conduits cables and other appurtenances shall be included in the prices bid for such structures and tnum appurtenances .
the excavation of rock encountered in the excavation for the above mentioned structures and appurtenances will be paid for under the provisions of trench excavation rock as set forth in section num trench excavation of these specifications .
section t.num highway lighting t.num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing highway lighting of multiple circuit type andor modifying existing highway lighting in accordance with the dimensions and details indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
a highway lighting installation will be composed of two systems one underground and the other aboveground .
the underground multiple circuit installation will consist of conduits handholes and concrete foundations for lighting standards or service pedestals .
the aboveground multiple circuit installation will consist of lighting poles luminaires lamps service pedestals wiring bonding grounding and all other incidental work .
reference is made to the following sections which are relevant to highway lighting section t.num ground rods and bare ground wire section t.num wire and cable section t.num handholes manholes and pull boxes section t.num conduit section t.num luminaires section t.num aluminum light standards and foundations section t.num service pedestal t.num materials .
refer to sections t.num through t.num for specifics on materials .
t.num warranties for highway lighting installations .
a .
manufacturers warranties .
copies of any warranties that the contractor receives from each manufacturer on all electrical or mechanical equipment pertinent to the complete and satisfactory operation of highway lighting installations shall be turned over to the department at the time of acceptance at no cost to the department .
each warranty so furnished shall indicate its expiration date and be in effect for a period equal to the customary trade practice .
b .
contractors warranties .
the contractor will warranty the satisfactory in service operation of the mechanical and electrical equipment and related components for six months following the acceptance of the contract by the state .
during this period it will be the contractors responsibility when notified by the engineer to repair or replace equipment or materials necessary to insure satisfactory operation of the system and to correct malfunctions attributable to installation deficiencies .
tnum all workmanship parts tools equipment and all appurtenances necessary to correct malfunctions attributable to installation deficiencies are to be supplied by the contractor at his own expense .
any labor necessary to comply with the requirements of the manufacturers and contractors warranties will be compensated by force account .
t.num construction methods .
refer to sections t.num through t.num for specifics on construction methods .
t.num method of measurement .
highway lighting will not be measured separately but will be included in the measurements of specific items such as conduit cable luminaires poles bases handholes etc .
refer to sections t.num through t.num for specific methods of measurement .
t.num basis of payment .
highway lighting will not be paid for separately but will be included in the price of specific items as listed in the proposal and outlined above in subsection t.num .
section t.num ground rods and bare ground wire t.num description .
this work consists of effectively grounding rigid steel conduits service pedestals lighting and signal poles illuminated sign circuits and traffic signal controller cabinets as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications and the requirements of the national electric code .
t.num materials .
ground rods will conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
ground wire will conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
t.num construction methods .
equipment grounding conductors will be provided between bridge lighting standards and their respective ground rod .
ground rods shall extend num inches to num inches above the floor of the handhole .
ground rods shall be driven to a depth such that the resistance to ground does not exceed num ohms .
the measurement shall be measured by common industry practice in the presence of the engineer with the ground wire disconnected from the neutral .
in the event that after driving the rod beyond the minimum depth the resistance still exceeds num ohms additional ground rods shall be driven outside the handhole approximately num feet apart to a depth of num feet and connected in parallel with no .
num awg bare conductors until the resistance to ground does not exceed num ohms .
tnum the bare conductors shall be then pulled into the handhole through a hole drilled in its side num inches below grade and connected to the neutral wire and the conduit system .
the conductors and the top of ground rods outside the handholes shall be placed a minimum of num inches below grade .
only u.l.approved ground wire clamps shall be used to bond the conductor to the ground rod .
ground rods shall be driven in all handholes servicing light standards traffic signal equipment and at such other locations as specified on the plans or as directed .
if no ground rod is used in the equipment base the contractor shall install a ground wire from the grounding lug on the equipment ground to the nearest ground rod at no additional cost to the state .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer with the results of all resistivity tests indicating the values obtained for each installation .
this report shall become a permanent project record .
t.num method of measurement .
ground rods and bare ground wire shall not be measured for payment but shall be included with the pay item with which they are associated .
additional ground rods required to reduce the resistance to ground below num ohms will be measured separately in accordance with these specifications andor as directed by the engineer .
additional ground wire will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the cost of additional ground rods .
t.num basis of payment .
ground rods and bare ground wire will not be paid for separately but shall be included with the pay item with which they are associated .
the accepted quantities of additional ground rods will be paid for in accordance with subsection num differing site conditions change extra work and force account work of these specifications .
section t.num wire and cable t.num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing wire and cable of the type and at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
this work also includes the use of material and equipment for furnishing and installing semipermanent splice kits and completing twoway splices in handholes and manholes as indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
t.num materials .
wire and cable shall conform to subsection m.num of these specifications .
tnum t.num construction methods .
splices taps and terminations shall be made with solderless pressure connectors .
connectors shall be sufficiently large to enclose all strands of the conductors .
conductors shall be fastened securely and shall not loosen under vibration or normal strain .
the splices taps and terminations shall be taped with a rubber tape to replace the cables insulation .
the tape shall match the cables insulation and shall have high insulation resistance and dielectric strength shall fuse into a homogeneous mass shall be durable and easy to apply and shall be moisture resistant .
before application of the insulating tape the cable insulation shall be penciled to a length not less than four times the insulation thickness .
after the application of the rubber insulation tape the splices taps and terminations shall be protected with a neoprene blend sheathing tape resistant to weather oil acid alkali and normal physical abuse .
finished splices taps and terminations shall be covered with friction tape .
wires and cables shall be handled carefully during storage .
all conductors and cables shall be drawn into the conduit system without damage to covering sheath insulation or conductor .
wiring shall not be done until the raceway system has been completed .
only lubricant manufactured specifically to assist cable pulling shall be used .
wires on poles shall be installed by a licensed electrician andor a licensed journeyman .
wiring installed in raceways shall have slack cable left at all pulling points .
installation of twoway splices and semipermanent numway splice kits shall be as recommended by the manufacturer and the national electric code .
all splices shall be in a handhole or manhole and at no time shall a splice be located in the conduit .
the contractor shall submit for approval the manufacturers notarized certificates of compliance for all wire and cable .
t.num method of measurement .
t.num wire and cable .
wire and cable will be measured by the linear foot actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
measurement shall be along the centerline of the conduit .
an allowance will be made for num feet of slacked cables in handholes .
t.num twoway splice .
twoway splices will be measured by the number of units actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num semipermanent numway splice kits .
semipermanent splice kit will be measured by the number of units actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num basis of payment .
t.num wire and cable .
the accepted quantities of wire and cable will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot of the various types as listed in the proposal .
the tnum prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all materials equipment tools labor and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
t.num twoway splice .
the accepted quantities of twoway splice will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for furnishing and installing all materials tools labor and all incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
additional inline splices approved by the engineer to facilitate the pulling of cables through long conduit runs shall not be paid separately but shall be considered incidental to the cost of the cable .
t.num semipermanent numway splice kits .
the accepted quantity of semipermanent num way splice kits will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for furnishing and installing all materials tools labor and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
section t.num handholes and pull boxes t.num description .
this work consists of providing precast type a handholes precast type h heavy duty handholes and precast type b pull boxes at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the work also includes the provision of type w pull boxes on those structures indicated on the plans .
all such work will be in full accordance with these specifications .
t.num materials .
t.num precast handholes and pull boxes .
precast handholes and pull boxes shall conform to subsection m.num of these specifications .
t.num metal pull boxes .
pull boxes shall conform to subsection m.num of these specifications .
t.num construction methods .
t.num plant requirements for precast units .
a .
casting .
precast concrete units shall be cast true and square in accordance with the applicable details as shown on the plans .
dimensions of units shall be accurate within the following tolerances tnum dimension tolerance greater than num to num num greater than num to num ½ greater than num to num num b .
manufacture .
precast concrete units shall be designed and manufactured in accordance with astm cnum precast concrete manhole sections with the additional stipulation that the concrete mix design shall be class xxae as set forth in section num of these specifications .
c. inspection .
all precast concrete units shall be inspected both at the points of manufacture and on the project site .
any units showing defects or damage shall be removed and replaced by the contractor at no additional cost to the state .
t.num setting .
except as otherwise specified precast units shall be placed on previously prepared gravel borrow subbase to the lines and grades shown on the plans .
the grade of the handhole frame and cover shall be even with the surrounding ground or as directed by the engineer .
all holes for conduit and ground wire shall be drilled .
no punched holes will be allowed .
all holes drilled in handholes shall be grouted with a material approved by the engineer .
t.num metal pull boxes .
pull boxes when used in castinplace bridge parapets or barrier shall conform to the details indicated on the plans and shall be adequately anchored in place to prevent displacement during concrete pouring operations .
t.num excavation .
excavation for precast handholes and pull boxes shall be completed as nearly as practicable to the dimensions shown on the plans .
t.num method of measurement .
precast type a handholes precast type h heavy duty handholes precast type b pull boxes and type w pull boxes will be measured by the number of units of each type actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of precast type a handholes precast type h heavy duty handholes precast type b pull boxes and type w pull boxes will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each such type as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all materials labor tools and equipment including concrete ground wire grounding clamps and support grips ground rods gravel cast iron frame and cover excavation and backfill and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
payment for trench excavation rock will be made under the applicable provisions of section num trench excavation of these specifications .
tnum section t.num conduit t.num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing rigid steel conduit and pvc plastic conduit of the size specified including the necessary fittings at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
t.num materials .
conduit and fittings shall conform to subsection m.num of these specifications .
t.num construction methods .
all work shall be performed strictly in accordance with the requirements of the national electric code .
t.num rigid steel conduit .
conduit shall be placed as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
bends which are not smooth or which show any evidence of flattening or destruction of the protective coating will not be accepted .
all joints requiring rethreading shall be made with a zincbased cold galvanized sprayapplied compound as approved by the engineer applied to the male threads .
oils shall be removed from the threads prior to applying the galvanizing compound .
all threaded couplings shall be tightened until the ends of the conduit are brought together to form a good electrical connection .
a no .
num awg galvanized steel pull wire shall be installed in all conduits which do not carry conductors under the contract .
such pull wire shall be for subsequent use to facilitate pulling of cables .
cost of this pull wire shall be considered incidental in the price of the conduit involved .
conduit bends and elbows made in the field shall have a radius of not less than six times the inside diameter of the conduit and all such bends shall be made without crimping heating denting or otherwise damaging the conduit .
a .
underground .
all conduit shall be provided with grounding watermain clamps .
ends that have bonding clamps shall be filled with sealing compound to prevent the entrance of moisture except at handholes .
all ground lugs shall be copper bronze or brass .
underground conduit shall refer to all conduit placed underground in nonpaved areas or in paved areas where the pavement will be replaced as part of the project under other contract items .
underground conduit shall be placed at a minimum depth of num inches under vehicular travel areas and num inches under nonvehicular travel areas .
if the condition of the bottom of the trench is in any way unsatisfactory as determined by the engineer the engineer may require the contractor to excavate additional material and replace it with clean gravel to provide a firm bearing for the conduit .
the backfill shall be compacted in layers not more than num inches in depth .
after the trench is backfilled the contractor shall in the presence of the engineer test the installation by pushing or pulling a mandrel not less than numinch less than the inside diameter tnum of the conduit through the entire length of the conduit .
any debris including stones and dirt shall be removed .
all damaged conduit shall be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
b. conduit under existing pavement .
conduit under existing pavement shall refer to all conduit placed under existing paved areas where removal of the pavement is required only for the placement of conduit and the pavement is to be restored as part of this item .
conduit under existing pavement shall be placed in accordance with all applicable requirements of para .
a of this subsection .
the use of an automatic trenching machine is preferred .
the excavation shall be patched in accordance with the plans regardless of the method of excavation .
when conduit is placed in existing paved sidewalks the sidewalk shall be replaced in accordance with subsection t.num of these specifications .
c. overhead .
all conduit above grade shall be securely attached using clamps andor hangers at intervals not exceeding num feet or as directed .
all clamps and hangers shall be galvanized .
a weatherhead shall be installed on all risers .
d. conduit in structure .
conduit to be embedded in concrete structures shall be rigidly supported in the concrete form by methods and materials which will not cause injury to the zinc coating of the conduit .
rigid steel conduit installations on bridges and other structures shall be provided with expansion fittings at all structure expansion joints .
the expansion joint fittings shall be installed as shown on the plans and meet the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
t.num pvc plastic conduit .
pvc plastic conduit shall be installed as shown on the plans and in conformity with the requirements previously specified except those referring specifically to rigid steel conduit .
t.num method of measurement .
rigid steel conduit and pvc plastic conduit will be measured by the number of linear feet actually installed of the type or types indicated on the plans andor as directed by the engineer with no deduction for fittings and couplings .
t.num basis of payment .
t.num conduit underground .
the accepted quantities of rigid steel conduit under ground and pvc plastic conduit underground will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot for the type or types as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all materials equipment tools and labor including all fittings couplings and restoration of existing ground surfaces excavation and backfill saw cutting pavements temporary patch testing and all other incidentals necessary to satisfactorily finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
t.num conduit under existing pavement .
the accepted quantities of rigid steel conduit under existing pavement and pvc plastic conduit under existing pavement will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot for the type or types as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for furnishing all materials tnum equipment tools and labor including fittings couplings saw cutting excavation and backfill restoration of existing pavements and sidewalks testing and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
t.num conduit overhead .
the accepted quantities of rigid steel conduit overhead and pvc plastic conduit overhead will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot for the type or types as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for furnishing all materials equipment tools and labor including fittings couplings clamps and hangers and weatherhead and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
t.num rigid steel conduit in structure .
the accepted quantities of rigid steel conduit in structure will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot for the various types as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for furnishing all materials equipment tools and labor including fittings couplings and expansion fittings and all other incidentals necessary to satisfactorily finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
section t.num luminaires t.num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing num or num watt high pressure sodium luminaires on appropriate lighting standards and understructure luminaires along with their supports and protective screens at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
t.num materials .
luminaires understructure luminaires and photoelectric controls shall conform to subsection m.num of these specifications .
t.num construction methods .
t.num high pressure sodium luminaires .
the num or numwatt high pressure sodium luminaires shall be installed as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
luminaires shall be securely attached to ends of arms and shall be accurately plumbed with luminaire reflector properly and accurately placed .
t.num understructure luminaire with protective screen .
angle iron shall be drilled to accept wire mesh .
wire mesh ends shall be crimped at every end into holes in the angle iron .
the protective screen shall be of the size indicated on the plans and shall be secured to the bridge structure with galvanized c clamps located in each corner .
the furnishing and installing of supports for the understructure luminaires shall include the first num feet of numinch conduit installed from the luminaire .
the high pressure understructure luminaire shall be furnished and installed as indicated on the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
tnum t.num method of measurement .
t.num high pressure sodium luminaires .
num or numwatt high pressure sodium luminaires will be measured by the number of units actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num understructure luminaire with protective screen .
understructure luminaire with protective screen will be measured by the number of units actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num basis of payment .
t.num high pressure sodium luminaires .
the accepted quantities of num or numwatt high pressure sodium luminaires will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all materials equipment tools and labor including ballast lamp and photoelectric control and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
t.num understructure luminaire with protective screen .
the accepted quantities of understructure luminaires with protective screens will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all materials including angle mesh and clamps for the protective screen luminaire support luminaire ballast photoelectric cell lamp and conduit and all labor tools equipment and all incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
section t.num aluminum lighting standards and foundations t.num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing aluminum lighting standards foundations anchor bolts and breakaway support couplings of the sizes and at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
t.num materials .
t.num light standards .
light standards shall conform to subsection m.num of these specifications .
t.num light standard foundations .
light standard foundations shall conform to subsection m.num of these specifications .
tnum t.num construction methods .
t.num light standards .
lighting standards shall be securely bolted to foundations in a vertical position employing approved shims if necessary .
arms shall be securely attached to poles in such a manner as to develop the full design strength of the arm and shall be aligned perpendicular to centerline of roadway .
the use of breakaway support couplings shall be limited to pole heights that provide luminaire mounting heights of num feet or less and a total pole arm and luminaire weight of num pounds or less .
t.num light standard foundations .
a. castinplace concrete units .
excavation shall be completed as nearly as practicable to the dimensions shown for the concrete foundation .
all loose material shall be removed before the forms are installed .
all conduits ground rods reinforcing steel and anchor bolts shall be installed rigidly in place before the concrete is placed .
anchor bolts shall be spaced by means of a template furnished by the pole manufacturer .
anchor bolts and conduit extending above the top of the base shall be wrapped with oiled burlap for protection until the post is mounted on the base .
the concrete shall be placed in accordance with section num castin place structure concrete masonry of these specifications .
grounding shall be accomplished through the ground rod in the associated handhole with a bare copper ground wire .
if there is no associated handhole and when called for in the plans a ground rod shall be installed in the light standard foundation .
the ground rod shall extend num inches above the top of the base and shall be equipped with a copper clamp to secure the ground wire .
after the concrete foundation has been poured finished level and cured forms shall be removed .
the area around the concrete base shall be backfilled and compacted in numinch uniform layers .
available stones in the area shall be used to chink the backfill to insure the concrete foundation remains in a stable vertical position .
the contractor shall protect the foundation and anchor bolts until the system is fully accepted by the state .
foundations or anchor bolts damaged prior to final acceptance shall be replaced at no additional cost to the state .
after backfilling all pavement or surface treatment which has been disturbed by the construction operation shall be replaced with similar material in a manner satisfactory to the engineer at no additional cost to the state .
the site shall be neatly trimmed and left in a satisfactory condition .
all excess materials shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor in accordance with the applicable requirements of section num excavation and embankment of these specifications .
b. precast units .
precast foundation units shall be manufactured in accordance with the applicable provisions of section num and section num portland cement concrete and precastprestressed structure concrete masonry respectively of these specifications .
tnum num .
reinforcement .
all reinforcing bars shall have a minimum cover of num inches .
num .
dowels .
dowels shall be accurately set and maintained at right angles to the plane of the top of the unit .
num .
casting .
precast concrete foundation units shall be cast true and square in accordance with the applicable details indicated on the plans .
dimension of units shall be accurate within the following tolerances .
dimension tolerance greater than num to num num greater than num to num ½ greater than num to num num num .
inspection .
all precast concrete foundation units shall be inspected both at the points of manufacture and on the project site .
any units showing defects or damage shall be removed and replaced by the contractor at no additional cost to the state .
c. preparation of subbase .
the subbase shall be furnished and placed in accordance with subsections num and num placing and shaping and compaction respectively of these specifications .
d. setting .
units shall be placed on previously prepared gravel borrow subbase to the lines and grades shown on the plans .
care shall be exercised during hauling storage hoisting and handling of the units to prevent cracking or damage .
no damaged units shall be installed .
units showing defects or damage shall be removed and replaced or repaired by the contractor at no additional cost to the state .
t.num breakaway support couplings .
the installation instructions shall be in strict conformance with the manufacturers recommendations using torque control nuts or galvanized steel hex nuts which yield at the load specified by the manufacturer .
t.num method of measurement .
t.num light standards .
light standards will be measured by the number of units actually furnished and installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num light standard foundation with anchor bolts .
light standard foundations with anchor bolts will be measured by the number of units actually furnished and installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
the numinch rigid steel conduit contained within the concrete base and the first num inches outside thereof will be considered as part of the foundation unit and will not be paid for separately .
tnum t.num breakaway support couplings .
a .
new foundations .
breakaway support couplings for light standards will not be measured separately for payment but will be included in the payment for light standard foundation with anchor bolts .
b .
existing foundations .
breakaway couplings to be installed on existing foundations will be measured by the number of existing foundations on which a set of four such couplings are to be installed all in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num basis of payment .
t.num light standards .
the accepted quantities of light standards will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all materials including poles cast aluminum bases ground wire ground lugs grounding bushings no .
num awg cable and inline fuses and for all labor tools equipment and incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
t.num light standard foundations with anchor bolts .
light standard foundations with anchor bolts will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all materials including anchor bolts breakaway support couplings ground rods reinforcing steel conduit conduit couplings washers and nuts excavation backfilling and compaction replacing flexible pavement concrete or other surface treatment and for all labor tools equipment and incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
allowance for rock excavation shall be made for a distance of one foot outside the foundation and num inches below the bottom of the foundation as constructed and will be paid for as trench excavation rock under the applicable provisions of section num trench excavation of these specifications .
t.num furnish and install breakaway support couplings on existing light standard foundations .
furnish and install breakaway support couplings on existing light standard foundations will be paid for at the contract unit price per each existing foundation as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all materials labor tools and equipment including furnishing and installing breakaway support couplings on each existing light standard foundation anchor bolt removing and resetting existing light standards on the existing foundations extending existing conduit stubs and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
section t.num service pedestal t.num description .
this work consists of furnishing and placing the service pedestal the service riser concrete mat and anchor bolts at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed tnum by the engineer complete in every respect fully wired thoroughly tested and ready for use all in accordance with these specifications .
electric service shall be as specified on the plans and available at the indicated transformer .
the contractor shall provide the conductors of the size indicated .
t.num materials .
all materials for this item of work shall conform to subsection m.num service pedestal of these specifications .
t.num construction methods .
all work shall be performed in accordance with the national electric code and the national electric safety code .
the service pedestal shall be installed as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the work under this item shall include all conduit contained within the concrete base .
the pedestal shall be installed on the concrete mat as indicated on the plans with the power distribution panel mounted inside .
the concrete pad shall be placed on num inches of gravel subbase .
the enclosure shall be made watertight .
a bead of silicon sealer shall be applied to the base of the cabinet inside and out .
all electrical conductors within the cabinet shall be enclosed in pvc conduit .
the electrical components shall be mounted with machine screws and wired as shown on the plans or as directed .
all rigid steel conduits in the service cabinet shall be bonded together and grounded to the cabinet with no .
num awg bare copper conductors .
a ground rod shall be driven into the ground and stubbed up num inches above the mat .
a no .
num awg bare copper grounding conductor from the neutral bus shall run continuous to the ground rod .
t.num method of measurement .
service pedestal will be measured by the number of units actually furnished and installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of service pedestal will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all material labor and equipment including furnishing and installing the service pedestal anchor bolts concrete foundation crushed stone excavation and backfill meter socket contactor panelboard photo control relays neoprene gasket grounding bushings ground rod and ground wire and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
section t.num traffic signal systems t.num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing all necessary materials and equipment in order to complete the new traffic signal systems at the locations designated on the plans andor as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
reference is made to the following sections which are relevant to traffic signal systems .
tnum section t.num electrical work section t.num ground rods and bare ground wire section t.num wire and cable section t.num handholes manholes and pull boxes section t.num conduit section t.num traffic signal standards and posts section t.num traffic signal controllers section t.num traffic signal detectors and relays section t.num traffic signal heads t.num materials .
signal heads controllers standards and posts electrical conduits and fittings wire and cable detectors and relays handholes and pull boxes shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num traffic control systems of these specifications and the national electric code .
concrete for foundations shall be as specified in section num portland cement concrete of these specifications .
unless otherwise indicated on the plans or specified all materials shall be new .
t.num warranties for traffic signal systems .
a .
manufacturers warranties .
copies of any warranties that the contractor receives from each manufacturer on all electrical or mechanical equipment pertinent to the complete and satisfactory operation of traffic signal installations shall be turned over to the department at the time of acceptance at no cost to the department .
each warranty so furnished shall indicate its expiration date and be in effect for a period equal to the customary trade practice .
b .
contractors warranties .
the contractor will warranty the satisfactory in service operation of the mechanical and electrical equipment and related components for six months following the acceptance of the contract by the state .
during this period it will be the contractors responsibility when notified by the engineer to repair or replace equipment or materials necessary to insure satisfactory operation of the system and to correct malfunctions attributable to installation deficiencies .
the contractor at his own expense must install a temporary traffic controller and replace any auxiliary equipment in the control cabinet as approved by the engineer when the approved traffic controller or auxiliary equipment must be removed from the job site for repairs in order that the traffic signal system is operating immediately after the contractor has been notified of any breakdown or malfunction of any unit .
the contractor at his own expense must install a new controller that meets the plans and specifications of the contract and the approval of the engineer when the approved traffic controller can not be repaired within num days after any breakdown or malfunction of any controller part .
the new controller must conform to the plans and these specifications .
the contractor will be backcharged by the maintenance division of the rhode island department of transportation for all tools workmanship parts equipment and all appurtenances necessary to repair or replace any controller part or auxiliary equipment in the control cabinet that malfunctions within the above guarantee period in order to maintain the traffic signal system in proper operating condition at all times as approved by the engineer .
tnum all workmanship parts tools equipment and all appurtenances necessary to correct malfunctions attributable to installation deficiencies are to be supplied by the contractor at his own expense .
any labor necessary to comply with the requirements of the manufacturers and contractors warranties will be compensated by force account .
t.num construction methods .
the applicable requirements of subsections t.num t.num t.num t.num t.num t.num t.num t.num and t.num shall apply .
poles pedestals and controller cabinets shall be securely bolted to foundations in a vertical position employing approved shims if required .
push button assemblies shall be accurately positioned and securely fastened in place .
push button assemblies shall be installed on poles pedestals wrought iron pipe standards or on controller cabinets as shown on the plans to form the push button stations .
mast arm poles span poles controller cabinets and signal heads shall be positioned as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the final location shall be approved by the engineer in the field prior to installation .
all wiring shall be installed and the bonding and grounding shall be performed in conformance with the plans the requirements of the national electric code and requirements of subsection t.num .
in addition all splices made in wiring signals shall be made inside the signal heads at the provided terminal strips .
rigid steel conduits poles pedestals detectors controller cabinets and pedestrian push button stations shall be effectively bonded and grounded .
all improvements and equipment disturbed damaged or removed during foundation construction shall be removed and replaced or repaired to the satisfaction of the engineer at no additional cost to the state .
incidental parts not shown on the plans or specified which are required to complete the traffic signal or other electrical systems shall be furnished and installed as though such parts were shown on the plans or specified at no additional cost to the state .
all systems shall be complete and in operation to the satisfaction of the engineer at the time of completion of the work .
all such incidental parts shall be approved by the engineer prior to installation .
t.num method of measurement .
traffic signal systems will not be measured separately but will be included in the measurements of specific items such as conduit cable controllers signal heads etc .
refer to sections t.num through t.num and t.num through t.num for specific methods of measurement .
t.num basis of payment .
traffic signal systems will not be paid for separately but will be included in the price of specific items as outlined in subsection t.num .
full compensation for all additional materials and labor not shown on the plans or specified which are necessary to complete the installation of the traffic signal systems shall be considered as included in the prices bid for the individual items and no additional allowance will be made therefor .
tnum section t.num traffic signal standards and posts t.num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing galvanized steel mast arms and poles with foundations galvanized steel span poles with foundations and wood span poles at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
t.num materials .
t.num design .
traffic signal poles mast arms span poles connections clamps anchor bolts shoe bases and all other members shall be designed and fabricated in accordance with the requirements of the latest edition and interim specifications of the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals and shall be designed to withstand the specified forces including those produced by a basic wind speed of num miles per hour .
the span poles shall be designed to withstand a dead load cable sag of num percent of the span length and for a maximum allowable dead load pole deflection as specified in subsection t.num .
the engineer reserves the right to reject a pole design if the calculated deflection exceeds that specified therein .
vibration mitigation devices will not be allowed .
all traffic signal structures must comply with fatigue category ii requirements including galloping vortex shedding if applicable natural wind gusts and truck induced gusts .
the truck induced loading is based on num mph velocity .
cantilever traffic signal structures that have tapers of num inches per foot or greater are not susceptible to vortex shedding .
structure components and their connections shall be designed to resist the worstcase fatigue loading upon evaluation of all applicable cases acting separately .
the design of anchor bolts shall result in a ductile steel failure prior to any sudden brittle failure of the concrete .
when the clearance between the bottom of the leveling nuts and the top of the concrete is equal to or greater than one bolt diameter bending stresses in the anchor bolts shall be considered in the design .
the following notes shall be included on all plans andor shop drawings in reference to anchor bolts pretensioning of all anchor nuts is required and shall be accom plished by tightening to numth turn beyond the snugtight position .
tnum the maximum clearance between the bottom of the leveling nuts and the top of the concrete is critical and shall not exceed the amount specified on the drawing .
t.num manufacture .
traffic signal mast arms and poles and span poles shall be manufac tured with high strength galvanized steel .
if the pole or mast arm is manufactured in two pieces the sections shall be joined by an approved method .
all materials for the structure including anchor bolts bolt covers and hardware must meet the approval of the engineer .
the threaded ends of the anchor bolts and the nuts and lock washers shall be hotdipped galvanized in accordance with astm anum or anum .
t.num construction methods .
standards and posts for traffic signals shall be installed as indicated on the plans and shall conform to the following requirements tnum steel poles .
a. workmanship and finish shall be equal to the best general practice of modern metal fabrication shops .
b .
traffic signal poles may be tubular hexagonal octagonal or elliptical of constant section or tapered and shall be capable of withstanding the applied load shown on the plans with the maximum deflection as indicated above without the necessity of a back guy .
traffic signal poles shall be installed in accordance with the national electric safety code .
a maximum static deflection of num inches without wind load will be permitted for span poles not over num feet in height and num½inches for span poles greater than num feet in height .
static deflection shall be measured by the engineer with the span wires and signal heads in place .
the span poles shall be raked back to allow for the anticipated dead load pole deflection as indicated in the shop drawings such that the final position of the poles under dead load is essentially vertical .
the shop drawings shall indicate the theoretical dead load deflection .
c. foundations .
the foundations shall be constructed in accordance with subsection t.num .
the dimensions and reinforcing steel shall be in accordance with the requirements of the plans .
in the event that the design loads produce a base moment in excess of those indicated on the plans the contractor will be required to provide at its own expense a foundation design by a rhode island registered professional engineer in accordance with the aashto standard specifications and detailed similarly to the plans .
the use of grout under base plates is generally not be permitted .
if specific conditions warrant its use the grout shall not be considered load carrying .
loads shall be directly supported by the anchor bolts .
adequate drainage shall be provided .
headed castinplace anchor bolts shall be used in lieu of hooked anchor bolts .
the top num inches of the foundation shall be formed and the remainder shall be cast against undisturbed earth .
if adjacent earth is disturbed or removed beyond the neat lines of the foundation it shall be replaced with concrete fill .
this excavation shall be no larger than num foot greater than the dimension of the foundation unless authorized by the engineer .
the top of tnum foundation shall be set to finished grade and finished level .
after curing the forms shall be removed and backfilled with suitable material and compacted in numinch layers .
t.num wood poles .
wood poles used for span wire suspensions shall conform with the applicable requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
the hole to receive the pole shall be num feet in depth and num inches to num inches in diameter .
the pole after being placed into position shall be backfilled with a onefoot layer of crushed rock or coarse gravel and the remaining space shall be backfilled with earth tamped down in numinch intervals until the hole is filled .
guy anchors required for wood poles shall be installed in accordance with the following contact area of anchor normal soil conditions num sq .
in .
minimum sandy or marshy conditions num sq .
in .
minimum minimum depth of anchor hole num feet .
anchor rod num x num double eye .
eye shall project above grade num to num .
dig channel for rod to line up guy .
fit anchor in hole with anchor rod laying in channel .
tamp crushed stone or coarse gravel between anchor face and undisturbed earth .
backfill all removed earth compacted in numfoot layers .
t.num method of measurement .
galvanized steel mast arms and poles and foundations traffic signal standards galvanized steel and foundations and traffic signal standards wood will be measured by the number of units of each such type actually installed in accordance with the plans or as directed by the engineer .
t.num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of galvanized steel mast arms and poles and foundations traffic signal standards galvanized steel and foundations and traffic signal standards wood will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each such type as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all design materials labor tools equipment and all incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
section t.num traffic signal controllers and cabinets t.num description .
this work consists of supplying and installing a nema tsnum type num actuated traffic signal controller with internal timebase coordination and internal preemption capabilities at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer along with any necessary appurtenances all in accordance with these specifications .
all controllers supplied for this project shall be identical models of current production and recent manufacture .
untried or prototype units shall not be acceptable .
all software supplied shall be of the most recent revision .
tnum t.num materials .
traffic signal controllers and cabinets shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection m.num traffic signal controllers and controller cabinets of these specifications .
t.num construction methods .
t.num the new installation .
controllers and cabinets shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and the latest edition of the nema standards .
t.num temporary controllers .
when traffic signal poles signal heads conduit conductor cable detectors and other traffic signal appurtenances are installed and if the specified controller is not available the contractor shall immediately provide at his own expense a temporary controller capable of operating the installation as specified on the plans .
t.num method of measurement .
numphase actuated controllers cabinets and foundations will be measured by the number of units of the type or types actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of numphase actuated controllers cabinets and foundations will be paid for at the contract unit price per each type or types as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials tools and equipment including mounting hardware foundations concrete work pad ground wire ground rod malfunction management unit mmu bus interface unit biu detector racks programming and all required tests and appurtenances and other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section t.num detectors and relays t.num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing inductance loop vehicle detectors loop detector relays pedestrian detectors and necessary wiring and appurtenances at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
t.num materials .
loop detector wire loop detector leadin cable loop detector relays and pedestrian detectors shall conform to subsections m.num m.num m.num and m.num respectively of these specifications .
t.num construction methods .
t.num scheduling loop detector installations .
the contractor must schedule loop detector installations such that no roadway approach is without detection for more than num calendar days .
once a loop detector has been disconnected due to pavement removal trench tnum excavation for drainage or utility work conduit installation or any other construction activity the contractor must restore loop detection within num calendar days unless otherwise authorized in writing by the engineer .
t.num inductance loop detector installation .
inductance loops shall be installed in accordance with the details specified on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
loop dimensions shall be as specified on the plans .
handholes conduits and curb cuts shall be completed before beginning the loop installation .
the loop shall be outlined on the pavement to conform to the specified configuration .
a power saw shall be used to cut a slot in the pavement .
the cut shall be of sufficient width min .
num to allow easy placement of loop wire single or twisted pair into the saw cut and have a depth which will place the last loop turn from num½inches to num½inches below the final surface unless specified otherwise on the plans .
the corners shall be saw cut cored drilled or chipped out as indicated on the plans .
sharp edges in the corners shall be smoothed .
the inter section of saw cuts shall overlap so that the slots have full depth and a smooth bottom .
immediately after sawing the slot and pavement shall be flushed with high pressure clean water to remove the saw slurry .
filtered compressed air shall be used to remove all dust and moisture from the slot .
the installation shall not proceed until the slot is dry .
hot air may be used to dry the saw slot .
to protect the loop wire at the edge of the pavement or curb numinch minimum diameter flexible pvc or vinyl conduits shall be installed between the pavement and handhole in accordance with the details indicated on the plans .
the loop wire shall be installed starting at the roadside handhole around the loop for the specified number of turns and back to the handhole .
splices shall not be permitted outside the handhole .
the wire shall be depressed in the slot without the use of sharp objects which might damage the wire insulation .
the loop shall be held in place every num feet with numinch approximate strips of opencelled polyurethane backer rod as approved by the engineer .
these hold down strips shall be left in place when the slot is filled with roadway loop embedding sealer .
where the loop wire crosses pavement joints and cracks the loop wires shall be further protected using the method specified on the plans .
the ends of the vinyl or pvc tubing encasing the wire shall be given a waterproof seal immediately after placing the wire to prevent moisture from entering the tube .
the tubing shall be of a continuous length from the curb to the handhole .
the pair of loop wires between the edge of the loop and the splice to the shielded leadin cable in the handhole shall be twisted together num to num turns per foot .
the splice between the loop wires twisted pair and the shielded leadin cable shall be moisture proof and shall have a dielectric strength at least equal to that of the original insulation .
moisture shall be excluded from the splice during the operation and the work shall be done in dry weather or under shelter .
all parts of the splice and tools involved shall be clean and dry .
individual splices in each wire shall be staggered in a manner so as to minimize the outside diameter of the finished splice .
the bared conductor ends shall be twisted and soldered and reinsulated using an electrical grade fast drying sealant and plastic polyvinyl chloride tape .
the tnum reinsulation shall extend approximately one inch onto the adjacent insulation at each end .
sufficient layers of tape shall be applied such that the thickness is one and one half times that of the original insulation .
reinsulation of the outer jacket shall be accomplished in a similar manner except that the reinsulation shall extend approximately num inches onto the adjacent jacket at each end .
the shielded leadin cable shall be continued no splices from the splices to the loop wires to the controller cabinet terminals only .
the completed loop installation including the shielded leadin to the controller cabinet shall have a minimum of num megohms leakage resistance to ground .
this resistance shall be tested after the splice is made between the loop wires twisted pair and shielded leadin .
the contractor in addition to measuring the leakage to ground shall by test instruments capable of measuring electrical values of the installed loop wires and leadins measure induced ac voltage inductance in microhenries high q indication and the resistance of the conductors in ohms .
upon measuring the loops the contractor shall report to the engineer any unusual readings or readings not in agreement with the calculated values .
testing of the loop may take place during or after the installation of the loop .
when a loop is found to be not in accordance with calculated values a new loop will be installed in its place at the contractors expense .
the pavement temperatures shall be numof and rising before the sealer is placed .
all work involving the sealer shall be done in compliance with the manufacturers specifications .
when the loop embedding sealer has set sufficiently to open the loop to traffic but the surface remains tacky the loop may be dusted with cement to facilitate opening the loop to traffic .
t.num pedestrian detector installation .
pedestrian pushbuttons shall be installed in accordance with subsection t.num of these specifications .
all pushbuttons regardless of mounting type shall be mounted at a height of num feet num inches .
the measurement shall be made from the center of the pushbuttons to the finished sidewalk elevation .
all pushbutton housings shall be painted federal yellow unless other signal equipment within the same intersection is being painted a different color .
in such case the color of the pushbutton housing shall match that of the other equipment .
t.num method of measurement .
t.num traffic detector loop .
traffic detector loops will be measured by the number of linear feet of saw cut actually made in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num traffic detector relays loop num and num channel .
traffic detector relays loop num and num channel will be measured by the number of units actually furnished and installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
tnum t.num pedestrian detectors .
pedestrian detectorpushbutton with sign will be measured by the number of units actually furnished and installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num basis of payment .
t.num traffic detector loop .
the accepted quantities of traffic detector loop will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot of saw cut as listed in the proposal .
the price so stated constitutes full and complete compensation for all materials tools labor and equipment including saw cut loop cable flexible pvc or vinyl conduit under the curb sealing compound splicing and connecting testing and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
when replacing existing loops the cost of installing flexible conduit between the handhole and the curb shall be included in the cost of the loop .
t.num traffic detector relays loop num and num channel .
the accepted quantity of traffic detector relays loop num and num channel will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each type or types as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials tools and equipment and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
t.num pedestrian detectors .
the accepted quantity of pedestrian detectors pushbutton with sign will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials tools and equipment including ada compliant pushbutton and housing wiring sign sign hardware and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
t.num failure to comply .
subsection t.num requires that no roadway approach may be without loop detection for more than num calendar days .
if in the judgement of the engineer the contractor has failed to comply with this requirement liquidated damages and penalties will be assessed .
for each day the engineer determines that the contractor has failed to comply with the provisions of this section the daily charge set forth in special provision code t.num will be deducted from monies then due the contractor .
section t.num traffic signal heads t.num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing vehicular signal heads and pedestrian signal heads as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
t.num materials .
materials shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num traffic control systems of these specifications .
tnum t.num construction methods .
vehicular signal heads are to be attached to mast arms and span wires with cast iron or steel signal head hanger assemblies and galvanized steel safety chains .
the bottom of the signal head housing shall be mounted such that it is not less than num feet num inches above the roadway for a numsection head or num feet above the roadway for a num section head .
in no instance shall the bottom of the housing be more than num feet above the roadway .
when mounted over a sidewalk the bottom of a vehicular signal head shall be num feet above the sidewalk .
pedestrian signal heads shall be num feet above the finished sidewalk .
the contractor shall include num feet of slack in the cable to form a drip loop adjacent to the signal head .
if within the duration of the contract or before the installation has been accepted by the state the signal heads are determined to be less than the minimum height they shall be adjusted to meet the required clearance at no additional cost to the state .
the signal heads shall be mounted such that the top of the assembly does not exceed the heights shown in figure numdnum in the manual of uniform traffic control devices millennium edition .
all new signal heads shall be supplied with red yellow and green l.e.d .
modules .
the modules shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
when vehicular or pedestrian signal heads are bracket mounted to steel or aluminum poles they shall be mounted to the pole using stainless steel straps .
when vehicular or pedestrian signal heads are mounted on wood poles they shall be attached with bolts .
at all new locations work to make the system fully operational will be completed before the signal heads are installed .
the heads will be installed and the system immediately put into the flash mode .
at locations with existing signals all new signal heads shall be covered with an opaque material upon erection which when in place will assure passing motorists that the signal heads are not in operation .
the covering is to remain in place until the new signal system is operational at which time the existing signal heads shall be covered or removed .
t.num method of measurement .
vehicular and pedestrian signal heads will be measured by the number of units of the type or types actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of vehicular and pedestrian signal heads will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each type or types as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for furnishing and installing all materials tools labor and equipment including mounting hardware tethering hardware safety chains lamps l.e.d .
modules and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
tnum section t.num directional regulatory and warning signs t.num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing directional regulatory and warning signs on wood posts square tubular steel posts tubular steel posts uchannels or traffic signal supports and reflective sheeting all in accordance with these specifications at the locations indicated on the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
also included is the removal and relocation of existing directional regulatory and warning signs .
t.num materials .
aluminum sheets sign posts reflective sheeting and hardware shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num signs and sign supports of these specifications .
t.num construction methods .
t.num preparation of aluminum sheets .
prior to application of reflective sheeting the aluminum sign sheets shall be treated in strict accordance with the following procedure a .
the sign panel shall be degreased by total immersion in a saturated vapor of trichloroethylene .
trademark printing shall be removed with lacquer thinner or controlled alkaline cleaning system .
b .
preliminary cleaning shall be followed by a surface etch in a numtonum percent phosphoric acid solution at numof followed by spraying with a cold water rinse and immersion for one minute in circulating hot water at not less than numof .
the surface etch shall provide a clean nonshine or nonglare finish suitable for the application of sheeting .
c. the sign panel shall be dried by the use of a forced hot air drier .
d. no metal shall be handled except by device or clean canvas gloves between all cleaning and etching operations and the application of paint or reflective sheeting .
there shall be no opportunity for metal to come in contact with grease oils or other contaminants after cleaning and etching and prior to the application of paint or reflective sheeting .
t.num sign face .
the design color type size and dimensions of the sign faces shall conform to the plans and to the applicable requirements of the latest edition and revisions of the manual on uniform traffic control devices .
alphabet designs of upper and lower case letters and spacing of letters shall conform to the standard alphabets for highway signs published by the u.s. department of transportation federal highway administration .
the engineer reserves the right to make any changes in sign texts prior to sign manufacture at no additional expense to the state .
drawings showing dimensions sizes shapes and spacing of letters and arrows for all directional signs shall be submitted to the engineer within num days following the award of the contract .
tnum t.num application of reflective sheeting and finish .
a .
method .
application of reflective sheeting shall be by the mechanical squeeze roller applicator method in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer .
b. splices .
at splices pressuresensitive adhesivecoated sheeting shall be overlapped not less than numinch .
heatactivated adhesivecoated sheeting may be spliced with overlap not less than numinch or butted gap not to exceed numinch .
only butt splices shall be permitted on signs screen processed with transparent color .
sheeting applied to extruded sections shall extend over top edges and down side legs a minimum of numinch .
c. finish .
reflective sheeting splices and sign edges shall be sealed and signs clear coated with materials supplied and in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
t.num locations .
the approximate locations of the signs are shown on the plans but exact locations shall be determined in the field by the engineer .
posts shall be erected plumb .
signs shall be erected to face num degrees away from the direction of approaching traffic so that there will be no specular glare from the reflective sheeting .
steet signs shall be mounted horizontally on the posts in accordance with standard commercial processes as approved by the engineer .
sideofroad signs shall be mounted at locations indicated on the plans .
the height of the sign shall be determined in accordance with the plans the manual on uniform traffic control devices or as directed by the engineer .
t.num post holes .
post holes shall be excavated to the depth and in the position shown on the plans or as indicated by the engineer .
a tolerance of plus or minus num inches will be permitted in the depth of the holes for wood posts .
the exposed portions of the posts shall be set plumb and true to line and grade and holes shall be backfilled with sound earth and tamped in numinch layers in such a way as not to displace the posts .
post holes to be excavated through an existing concrete or asphalt surface shall be backfilled with earth as prescribed above to within num inches of the original grade .
after this is completed num inches of concrete shall be placed in the hole and the surface leveled and finished with the original grade .
when sign posts except uchannels are to be installed within areas where new concrete or asphalt pavement is to be placed the following method shall be used .
at the post location a square wood box will be installed .
the side dimension of the box shall be num inches larger than the greatest dimension of the required post but no less than num inches and its depth shall be num inches .
the box shall be firmly anchored and shall be placed such that the top of the box is at the finished grade of the pavement .
the pavement shall be installed around the box .
the required post hole shall then be excavated within the area of the box and the post will be installed with the proper backfilling as described above .
t.num remove and relocate signs .
the sign panels and posts shall be relocated as a complete unit .
if any hardware or posts are damaged or faulty then posts and hardware shall be utilized from the sign assemblies removed and disposed .
all costs for the replacement of damaged or faulty hardware andor posts shall be included in this item of work .
tnum t.num street signs .
street sign blade dimension and text sizes shall be as follows a .
height and letter sizes .
all faces with numinch caps and numinch suffix copy will trim to a numinch height and shall be used for highways with posted speeds of num mph or more unless otherwise noted .
all faces with numinch caps and numinch suffix copy will trim to a numinch height and shall be used for highways with posted speeds of num mph or less unless otherwise noted .
all street signs mounted overhead will have numinch caps and numinch suffix caps and will be num inches in height regardless of posted speed .
all suffix copy shall be placed directly to the upper right hand of the street name designation .
b .
length and letter series .
prescreened street name sign faces in num num num and numinch lengths for capital legend will be in accordance with the following guidelines the majority of prescreened faces will be num inches or num inches in length and the legends shall be d series letters unless otherwise authorized by the engineer .
if legends in the d series letter size have a primary copy of num inches and are of such lengths as to require faces longer than num inches the c series letter size shall be used and the sign shall be made to the shortest of the allowable sizes i.e .
num inches num inches or num inches .
if legends in the d series letter size have a primary copy of num inches and are of such lengths as to require faces longer than num inches the c series or b series letter size the boldest which space allows shall be used and the sign shall be made to the shortest of the allowable sizes i.e .
num inches num inches or num inches .
overhead mounted sign blades shall have a minimum length of num inches and a maximum length of num inches .
legend shall be series d. spacing may be reduced by up to num percent if the text does not fit on the numinch sign blade .
if the legend exceeds the numinch length with the reduction in spacing then series c text may be used .
lateral spacing from the edge of the sign to the edge of the text shall not be less than num inches .
t.num parking signs .
a .
posts .
posts shall be driven to a depth of num feet .
the post shall be placed such that the sign is at an angle of not less that num degrees nor more than num degrees with a line parallel to the flow of traffic .
the edge of the sign shall be num inches from the face of curb unless space does not permit in which case the edge of sign shall be num inches from the face of curb .
at no time will the sign be placed closer than num inches to the face of curb .
b .
panel .
the sign panel shall be attached to the post using two numinch by num½inch galvanized bolts with two num washers per bolt .
t.num signs mounted on mast arms .
all signs attached to traffic signal mast arms shall include galvanized steel safety chains .
tnum the mounting bracket used for the overhead street signs will be held in place with stainless steel bands and must be adjustable such that the sign blade is perpendicular to the direction of traffic .
the mounting shall hold the sign rigidly in place and resist movement in all directions .
sign blades num inches and greater in length shall be held in place with two brackets .
t.num method of measurement .
t.num .
directional regulatory and warning signs .
directional regulatory and warning signs will be measured by the number of square feet actually furnished and installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num remove and relocate signs .
remove and relocate ground mounted signs and remove and relocate directional regulatory and warning signs will be measured by the number of units actually displaced and replaced in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num street sign assembly .
street sign assembly will be measured by the number of units actually furnished and installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num overhead street sign .
overhead street sign will be measured by the number of units actually furnished and installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num parking signs .
parking signs will be measured by the number of square feet actually furnished and installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num basis of payment .
t.num directional regulatory and warning signs .
the accepted quantities of directional regulatory and warning signs will be paid for at the contract unit prices per square foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor tools materials and equipment including posts hardware excavation and backfilling and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
t.num remove and relocate signs .
the accepted quantity of remove and relocate ground mounted signs and remove and relocate directional regulatory and warning signs will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated shall constitute full and complete compensation for all labor tools materials and equipment including installing stockpiled materials as necessary and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
t.num street sign assembly .
the accepted quantity of street sign assembly will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated shall constitute full and complete compensation for all labor tools materials and equipment including tnum post sign blades two or more as required mounting brackets straps and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
t.num overhead street sign .
the accepted quantity of overhead street sign will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated shall constitute full and complete compensation for all labor tools materials and equipment including sign blades mounting hardware galvanized steel safety chain and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
t.num parking signs .
the accepted quantity of parking signs will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated shall constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including posts and hardware and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
section t.num ground mounted primary directional signs t.num description .
this work consists of ground mounted primary directional signs furnished and installed including the necessary concrete bases for supporting posts at the locations indicated on the plans andor as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
the work also includes furnishing fabricating and erecting ground mounted primary directional sign posts steel breakaway at locations indicated on the plans andor as directed by the engineer including all necessary foundations breakaway couplings and other required hardware all in accordance with these specifications .
all work shall conform to the details shown on the standard drawings entitled ground mounted primary directional sign post on breakaway coupling .
t.num materials .
extruded aluminum sign panels sign posts reflective sheeting text borders colors and hardware shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num signs and sign supports of these specifications .
t.num construction methods .
t.num posts .
the lengths of the posts may vary from the lengths indicated on the plans to fit the final designated sign location and accommodate the method of setting .
the contractor is cautioned to take these contingencies into account .
t.num foundations .
foundations shall be constructed of class aae castinplace concrete which conforms to the applicable requirements of section num portland cement concrete of these specifications .
the contractors design for foundations founded on rock or otherwise unsuitable material shall conform to the applicable requirements contained in the most recently published edition of tnum aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
a num mph wind load shall be the design wind load .
oversized augured holes shall be filled with concrete to provide good bearing against existing soil or against newly compacted fill .
if the wall along the neat lines of earth excavation collapses the hole shall be filled in and compacted and then reexcavated to the neat lines of the proposed footing at no additional cost to the state .
t.num sign panels .
the requirements of subsections t.num through t.num shall apply .
whenever each sign face comprises two or more pieces or panels of reflective sheeting the sign face must be carefully matched for color at the time of fabrication in order to provide uniform appearance and brilliance during day and night .
alternate successive width sections of either sheeting or panels must be reversed and consecutive to insure that corresponding edges of reflective sheeting lie adjacent to each other on the finished sign .
nonconformance may result in nonuniform shading and an undesirable contrast between adjacent widths of applied sheeting which will not be acceptable .
the method of attachment of the extruded aluminum panels to an overhead sign bracket assembly or a ground mounted assembly shall be as follows a .
two clips shall be used at each attachment location regardless of the structural shape utilized in the bracket assembly .
b. centertocenter spacing of locking tabs along the supporting stringer shall not exceed num of the cantilever overhand of the sign sheets above and below the sign stringers .
c. the maximum length of locking tabs shall not exceed num inches shall not be less than num inch in length and may be varied in increments of ½inch length to develop proper strength .
d. locking tabs shall be drilled and tapped to receive numinch set screws as shown on the plans .
e. each locking tab shall be fastened to the reverse side of the sign face by means of two or more threaded aluminum studs welded to the aluminum sign sheets and studs shall be provided with aluminum nuts to engage the locking tab as shown on the plans .
f. fasteners .
all fastening to the sign sheets exclusive of attaching legend and border shall be done by means of aluminum studs .
t.num locations .
the requirements of subsection t.num shall apply .
t.num shop drawings .
the contractor will be required to furnish drawings showing arrangements and spacing of texts and indicating colors of texts and reflective sheeting .
signs found not to conform strictly with the manual on uniform traffic control devices shall be brought into conformance with said manual prior to acceptance at no additional cost to the state .
the shop drawings will show cross sections of the highway in the areas involved and the dimension type and positioning of the signs to be mounted .
tnum within num days after award of the contract and prior to fabrication the contractor shall furnish in duplicate for the approval of the engineer complete shop drawings or manufacturers standard specifications and drawings showing the material and design of the structure proposed to be erected including details of bases and method of attaching signs to the structure .
after investigating the site conditions the contractor shall develop shop drawings in accordance with subsection num plans and shop drawings of these specifications .
shop drawings shall be developed for the foundations and structural supports based on details indicated on the plans .
t.num sign covering .
the contractor is to cover and keep covered all signs which have been erected until the message on the signs is pertinent to traffic operations at the time .
the covering shall be no .
num duck mildewproof canvas .
no .
num spur grommets shall be provided on the periphery of the canvas num inches from center to center of grommets to receive manila rope having a diameter of numinch to numinch for fitting and attaching the canvas to the sign panel .
the canvas shall be dull green in color and have sufficient overlap on the back of sign to be crosslashed with manila rope to prevent excessive movement and ripping by wind .
t.num method of measurement .
t.num ground mounted primary directional sign panels extruded aluminum .
ground mounted primary directional sign panels extruded aluminum will be measured by the number of square feet actually furnished and installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num ground mounted primary directional sign post steel breakaway .
ground mounted primary directional sign post steel breakaway will be measured by the number of units actually furnished and installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num basis of payment .
t.num ground mounted primary directional sign panels extruded aluminum .
the accepted quantity of ground mounted primary directional sign panels extruded aluminum will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot as listed in the proposal .
the price so stated shall constitute full and complete compensation for all labor tools materials and equipment including application of reflective sheeting exit sign panels legends borders arrows shields hardware sign coverings and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
t.num ground mounted primary directional sign post steel breakaway .
the accepted quantities of ground mounted primary directional sign post steel breakaway will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor tools materials and equipment including foundations breakaway couplings the restoration of existing ground surfaces and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
tnum section t.num overhead sign panels and supports t.num description .
this work consists of furnishing fabricating transporting and erecting overhead signs and structures of the type and at the locations indicated on the plans andor as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
the sign structure design shall be furnished by the contractor with construction contingent upon approval of the engineer .
this work also includes steel overhead sign structures including concrete bases for supporting columns extruded aluminum overhead sign panels and all necessary hardware and attachments required .
t.num materials .
extruded aluminum sign panels structural sign supporting members and shapes reflective sheeting text borders colors and hardware shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num signs and sign supports of these specifications .
concrete for bases shall be class aae and shall conform to the applicable requirements of section num portland cement concrete of these specifications .
t.num construction methods .
t.num sign design .
each complete sign which includes sign structure sign panel and sign panel supporting frame shall be designed fabricated and erected to withstand wind loadings and design stress values as set forth in the latest revision of aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
t.num steel overhead sign structure .
prior to the start of fabrication of the overhead sign supports the contractor shall in the field verify the location of the foundations and establish and verify all elevations dimensions and longitudinal grades .
all connections using high strength bolts shall conform to the applicable requirements of section num structural steel construction of these specifications .
prior to assembly the top and bottom surfaces of the base plate shall be planed or else the plate shall be hot straightened .
the post shall be faced at the bottom end .
the top leveling nuts and the grout leveling template shall be removed prior to placing the base plate and post assembly upon the foundation .
the overhead truss sign support shall not be painted except that any damaged galvanized areas shall be given two coats of zinc paint conforming to the requirements of the federal specification ttpnumbnum .
t.num sign panel .
signs shall be fabricated of extruded aluminum sign panels in accordance with the requirements of subsection t.num of these specifications .
t.num shop drawings .
the requirements of subsection t.num shall apply .
tnum t.num method of measurement .
t.num overhead sign panels .
overhead sign panels will be measured by the number of square feet of panels actually furnished and installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num overhead sign structures .
overhead sign structures will be measured by the number of such units actually furnished and installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num basis of payment .
t.num overhead sign panels .
the accepted quantity of overhead sign panels will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated shall constitute full and complete compensation for all labor tools materials and equipment including reflective sheeting legend borders arrows exit sign panels shields hardware and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
t.num overhead sign structures .
the accepted quantity of overhead sign structures will be paid for at the contract unit price each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated shall constitute full and complete compensation for all labor tools materials and equipment including foundations hardware and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
allowance for rock excavation shall be made for a distance of one foot outside the foundation and num inches below the bottom of the foundation as constructed and will be measured and paid for as trench excavation rock under the applicable requirements of section num trench excavation of these specifications .
section t.num delineators and hazard markers t.num description .
this work consists of furnishing and erecting delineators and hazard markers of the type and design as indicated on the plans andor as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
this work also includes the provision of flexible delineator posts .
t.num materials .
single or multireflector delineators reflectorized sheeting and posts shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num signs and sign supports of these specifications .
t.num flexible delineator posts .
the delineators shall be manufactured from a flexible material which meets the following requirements tnum a .
height .
the overall dimensions of the delineator post shall be such that when installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions the top of the post shall be num inches above the final surface .
b. delineator posts shall remain flexible at temperatures between numof and numof and shall be durable resistant to impact ultraviolet light ozone hydrocarbons and other atmospheric weathering .
posts shall be white or yellow in accordance with details indicated on the plans .
c. posts may be either a onepiece system or a twopiece system .
when a twopiece system is used the post portion shall be readily replaceable without removing or partially removing the anchor and without displacing the soil around the anchor .
d. surfaces .
both the front and back surfaces of the delineator shall be smooth surfaces capable of accepting numinch wide reflective sheeting .
t.num sheeting .
reflective sheeting shall be type iii meeting the requirements of subsection m.num reflective sheeting and shall be applied to one or both sides of the post as specified on the plans .
the reflective sheeting shall be num inches wide and num num or num inches high .
the color of the sheeting shall be white yellow or red as specified on the plans .
t.num construction methods .
t.num delineators .
the spacing placement type and color of the delineators shall conform to the latest edition of the manual on uniform traffic control devices .
delineators shall be installed on delineator posts of the size and type indicated on the plans .
t.num flexible delineator posts .
onepiece flexible delineator post shall be installed in a pilot hole num x num x num deep seated and tamped to the satisfaction of the engineer .
the pilot hole shall be formed by a hand held pilot hole driver as recommended by the manufacturer .
at no time shall a delineator be driven into the ground .
a twopiece system utilizes an anchor which is driven into the ground using a hand or mechanical driver .
the post is subsequently attached to the anchor in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
t.num hazard markers .
hazard markers shall consist of groups of reflector units placed as shown or directed .
the markers shall be mounted at a height of num feet above the pavement except when applied directly to a hazardous object which by its nature requires higher or lower mounting .
t.num method of measurement .
delineators flexible delineator posts and hazard markers will be measured by the number of units of the type or types actually furnished and installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of delineators flexible delineator posts and hazard markers will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per each such type as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor tools materials and equipment including the reflector units assembly bolts and tnum theftresisting nuts posts and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
where required onetenth mile station notation shall be included in the price of delineators andor flexible delineator posts .
section t.num milepost markers t.num description .
this work consists of milepost markers furnished and installed at locations as indicated on the plans andor as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
t.num materials .
aluminum sheets reflective sheeting sign posts and bolts shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num sign and sign supports of these specifications .
t.num construction methods .
the post shall be driven into the ground to a depth of num feet utilizing a driving cap to protect the post .
the milepost markers are to be attached to the post such that the bottom of the marker is num feet above grade .
a .
sign face .
the requirements of subsection t.num shall apply .
t.num method of measurement .
milepost markers will be measured by the number of units actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of milepost markers will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated shall constitute full and complete compensation for all labor tools materials and equipment including reflective sheeting legend posts and hardware and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
section t.num pavement markings t.num description .
this work consists of furnishing and applying andor removing the following items of pavement marking at the width and locations indicated on the plans all in accordance with these specifications .
a. waterborne pavement markings .
b. thermoplastic pavement markings .
c. epoxy resin pavement markings .
tnum d. bidirectional control devices .
e. temporary reflectorized pavement markings tape .
f. temporary fast drying waterborne pavement markings .
g. removal of existing pavement markings .
t.num materials .
composition binder pigments thermoplastic compound pavement marking material reflective glass spheres and epoxy resin marking material shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num pavement markings of these specifications .
t.num construction methods .
t.num cleaning pavement .
all dirty pavements shall be swept or air blasted clean .
the piles of dirt obtained by sweeping shall be picked up and disposed of by the contractor .
oil grease and similar adherent matter shall be removed by washing with a suitable solvent .
excess solvent shall be wiped from the pavement and allowed to evaporate before applying pavement marking material .
the contractor shall be responsible for all pavement cleaning which may be required .
markings shall not be applied to any surface which has not been inspected and approved by the engineer .
t.num defective work .
unsatisfactory markings resulting from the presence of dirt oil grease scale moisture or other foreign substances and all other traffic markings rejected by the engineer shall be obliterated by a method approved by the engineer and replaced by the contractor at its own expense .
t.num waterborne pavement markings .
a .
condition in container .
the paint as received shall show no livering skinning mold growth corrosion of the container or hard settling of the pigment .
any settling shall be readily dispersed when stirred by hand with no persistent foaming .
b .
packaging .
containers must be either rust resistant e.g .
stainless steel or coated with a good quality epoxy or phenoxy clear coating numgallon openhead drums with drum lever lock or ring and bolts with rust resistant cover or numgallon rustresistant moveable totes .
drums should be tightfilled and have a floating polyethylene lid liner in contact with the paint surface .
containers and lids should be white or offwhite on the outside to avoid excessive heat buildup when sitting in sunlight .
c. samplinginspection .
the paint manufacturer shall submit to the department two onequart samples of the paint along with a batch formula in weight proportions and total gallons per batch prior to the award of the bid .
the formula shall be in generic terms rather than trade names .
after the paint has been manufactured a onequart sample along with the batch analysis shall be submitted to the departments materials section two capitol hill room num provi dence ri num .
tnum field samples should be sealed tightly immediately upon sampling and submitted to the materials testing laboratory within num hours for laboratory testing .
d. installation .
the paint must be reflectorized for night visibility by adding glass beads before the paint dries or sets by using dropon or pressurized methods .
the glass beads shall be evenly dispersed on a wet paint film of num num mils num square feet per gallon at a rate of num pounds per gallon .
the lines shall be applied with airless or airassisted spray equipment so as to have the paint at a temperature of numof maximum in the heat exchanger and between numo and numof at the spray nozzle .
the maximum notracking time shall not be exceeded when the pavement temperature is greater than numof under humidity conditions of num percent or less on dry pavement .
paint shall be applied in accordance with the requirements of subsection t.num para .
c weather conditions of these specifications .
t.num temporary waterborne pavement markings .
paint to be used for temporary pavement markings shall conform to the requirements of subsection t.num paras .
a b and c above .
this paint must be reflectorized for night visibility by adding reflective spheres before the paint dries or sets by using dropon or pressurized methods .
the reflective spheres shall be evenly dispersed on a wet paint film of num mils num square feet per gallon at a rate of num pounds per gallon .
the contractor shall schedule temporary pavement markings such that they shall be placed on newly paved roadways which shall be opened to traffic at the completion of each days paving operations .
t.num thermoplastic pavement markings .
when thermoplastic pavement markings are specified the material used shall be a thermoplastic compound free of volatiles which is designed for machine application from approved equipment and shall readily extrude at temperatures between numof to numof to produce a cross section of line numinch to numinch thick .
after cooling to the ambient temperature and without polymerization or other chemical change the line shall form a pavement marking continuous and uniform in shape having a clear and sharp dimension and of the quality and appearance herein specified .
the material shall be especially compounded for traffic marking and shall not lose its bond with the pavement when the ambient temperature falls below numof .
reflectorization shall be obtained from approved glass beads conforming to subsection m.num of these specifications .
the application of additional glass beads by the dropon method shall be at the rate of .num pounds per square foot of marking .
the pigmented binder shall be well dispersed and free from all skins dirt foreign objects or ingredients that will cause bleeding staining or discoloration due to dissolution of asphalt in the pavement .
tnum after application and drying time the material shall show no appreciable deformation or discoloration under local traffic conditions and in air and road temperatures ranging from numof to numof and shall adhere securely under repeated freezing and thawing .
the stripes shall maintain the original dimensions and placement .
the exposed surface shall be free from tack .
cold ductility of the material shall be such as to permit normal movement with the road surface without chipping or cracking in order to prevent dimensional distortion as a result of traffic impact within the temperature range specified .
ability to resist distortion by natural discoloration shall be retained for the life of the stripe .
the compound shall not be deteriorated by contact with sodium chloride calcium chloride or mild acids alkalies or other chemicals used against formation of ice on roadways by oil contained in the pavement material or by oil drippings from vehicular traffic .
when installed at an air temperature of numof between num and numinch thick composition shall be completely solid and shall show no effect of tracking after num minutes .
equipment must be provided to insure removal of dust debris and other foreign matter from the road surface immediately prior to the installation of the pavement marking .
thermoplastic applicating equipment shall be approved by the engineer prior to the start of work .
for heating the thermoplastic composition the application equipment shall include a melting kettles of such capacity as to allow for continuous marking operations .
application equipment shall be constructed to provide continuous mixing and agitation of the material .
conveying parts of the equipment between the main material reservoir and the extrusion shoes shall be so constructed as to prevent accumulation and clogging .
all parts of the equipment which come into contact with the material shall be so constructed as to be easily accessible and exposable for cleaning and maintenance .
the equipment shall be constructed so that all mixing and conveying parts up to and including the extrusion shoes maintain the material at the required plastic temperature .
the applicating equipment shall be so constructed as to insure continuous uniformity in the dimensions of the stripe .
the applicator shall provide a means for cleanly cutting off stripe ends squarely and shall provide a method of applying skip lines .
the equipment shall be capable of applying varying widths of traffic markings .
the applicator shall be equipped with a dropon type bead dispenser capable of uniformly dispensing reflective glass spheres at controlled rates of flow .
the bead dispenser shall be automatically operated in such a manner that it will only dispense beads while the composition is being applied .
the bead dispenser shall be positioned so that the beads will be applied no more than num inches behind the molten thermoplastic .
applicating equipment shall be mobile and maneuverable to the extent that straight lines can be followed and normal curves can be made in a true arc .
the equipment used for the placement of thermoplastic pavement markings shall be two general types mobile applicator and portable applicator .
tnum a .
mobile applicating equipment .
the mobile applicator shall be defined as a truck mounted selfcontained pavement marking machine that is capable of hot applying thermoplastic by the extrusion method .
the unit shall be equipped to apply the thermoplastic material at temperatures of from numof to numof at the widths and thicknesses specified herein .
ribbon and spray methods are prohibited .
the mobile unit shall be equipped with an extrusion shoes and shall be capable of marking edgeline and centerline stripes .
the extrusion shoes which shall be so constructed that the numth side of the extrusion consists of the pavement itself shall be closed heat jacketed or a suitably insulated unit shall hold the molten thermoplastic at a temperature of from numof to numof and shall be capable of extruding a line of from numtonum inches in width and at a thickness of not less than numinch nor more than numinch and of generally uniform cross section .
material temperature gauges shall be affixed or incorporated in the extrusion shoe in such a manner as to be visible and capable of monitoring the composition temperature throughout the marking operation .
the mobile unit shall be equipped with an electronic and programmable line pattern control system or mechanical control system so as to be capable of applying skip or solid lines in any sequence and through any extrusion shoe in any cycle length .
b .
portable applicating equipment .
the portable applicator shall be defined as hand operated equipment specifically designed for placing thermoplastic installations such as crosswalks stop bars legends arrows and short lengths of lane edge and centerlines .
the portable applicator shall be capable of applying thermoplastic pavement markings by the extrusion method .
it is intended that the portable applicator will be loaded with hot thermoplastic composition from the melting kettles .
the portable applicator shall be equipped with all the necessary components including a materials storage reservoir bead dispenser extrusion shoe and heating accessories so as to be capable of holding the molten thermoplastic at a temperature of from numof to numof of extruding a line of from numtonum inches in width and in thickness of not less than numinch nor more than numinch in thickness and of generally uniform cross section .
material temperature gauges such as a probe type or a remote reading infrared thermometer shall be affixed or incorporated in the extrusion shoe in such a manner as to be visible and capable of monitoring the composition temperature throughout the marking operation .
c. weather conditions .
thermoplastic pavement markings shall be placed upon dry pavement surfaces .
at the time of installation the pavement surface temperature shall be a minimum of numof and rising .
num .
option .
in the event that the surface temperature is numof and rising the contractor may choose to apply thermoplastic pavement marking material provided that the surface is dry and the contractor accepts all responsibility for the performance of the thermoplastic line striping for a period of one year from the date of application .
the contractor shall submit his request in writing to the engineer for approval .
replacement of any thermoplastic material which fails for any reason during this oneyear period shall be replaced by the contractor at its own expense .
no payment will be made for that quantity of material placed at surface temperatures below numof for the period of one year .
tnum t.num epoxy resin pavement markings a .
equipment .
equipment for the application of epoxy resin traffic stripes or special handwork shall consist of one or more mobile truckmounted and selfcontained pavement marking machines specifically designed to apply epoxy resin striping material and reflective glass beads in continuous and skipline patterns .
the equipment shall be capable of applying straight and curved lines in a true arc .
in addition the truckmounted unit shall be provided with accessories to allow for the marking of legends symbols crosswalks and other special patterns .
at any time throughout the duration of the project the contractor shall provide free access to the equipment for inspection by the engineer .
the engineer may approve the use of a portable applicator in lieu of mobile truckmounted accessories for use in applying special markings only provided such equipment can demonstrate satisfactory application of reflectorized epoxy markings in accordance with these specifications .
the application equipment shall be capable of installing a minimum of num miles of epoxy reflectorized pavement markings in an eight hour day and shall include the following features num .
individual material reservoirs for the storage of each of the components and each type of glass beads .
num .
heating element of sufficient capacity to maintain the individual epoxy resin components at the manufacturers recommended temperature for spray application .
num .
two separate gravity type glass beads dispensers capable of uniformly applying glass beads to epoxy resin traffic stripes at the rate required .
num .
accurately calibrated tamperproof metering type devices to monitor the ratio of the components being fed to the spray nozzle .
the devices should be visible to the operator while the equipment is in use and can be capable of displaying the proportioning such that the actual mixing ratio can be determined at all times .
num .
accurately calibrated tamperproof metering type devices that measure and record the number of gallons of epoxy resin material used and corresponding length of stripes applied .
each application gun shall have individual footage accumulators which are activated only when material is being applied .
this information shall be provided in a format that permits a direct determination of the yield average mil thickness of the applied materials .
num .
all applicator guns on the spray carriages shall be in full view of the operator during operation .
the equipment shall be capable of placing two lines simultaneously with either line a solid or intermittent pattern in yellow or white .
when the color of the material is changed a quantity of material equal to num linear feet of stripes shall be wasted to eliminate the chance of contamination of the alternate color .
num .
an air pressure nozzle directed to the area to be striped to permit cleaning of the road surface immediately prior to application of the material .
the pressure in the line shall be a minimum of num psi .
num .
when working on a roadway with more than one lane in either direction the applicator truck shall have a permanently mounted variable direction illuminated arrow board fully operational and visible to approaching traffic .
tnum b .
general .
before any pavement marking work is begun a schedule of operations shall be submitted for the approval of the engineer .
at least numdays prior to starting striping the contractor shall provide the engineer with the epoxy manufacturers written instructions for use including but not limited to material mixing rations and application temperatures .
when pavement markings are applied under traffic flow conditions the contractor shall provide all necessary signs cones arrow boards etc .
in accordance with the contract provisions and the latest edition of the mutcd to maintain and protect the traffic the marking operation and the pavement markings until thoroughly set .
the application of pavement markings shall be performed in the general direction of traffic .
striping against the flow of traffic will not be allowed .
if for any reason it is not possible to place epoxy lane and center lines within the guidelines and restrictions of the contract and no previous lines exist the contractor at his expense shall place the appropriate color of fourinch reflective temporary pavement markings for the entire length of the roadway that is unstriped in accordance with the latest edition of the mutcd .
the temporary pavement markings and possible subsequent removal shall be at the contractors expense .
the type of temporary markings will be approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall be responsible for removing to the satisfaction of the engineer all tracking marks spilled epoxy and epoxy markings applied in unauthorized areas .
c. test strip and calibration .
prior to the start of striping operations one or more test strips shall be constructed .
each test strip shall consist of approximately num linear feet of pavement with white and yellow striping lane and edgeline similar to that required for the project .
the purpose of the test strips is to demonstrate the capability of the proposed epoxy resin striping material the equipment and procedures to place epoxy resin traffic stripes that comply with these specifications including but not limited to retroreflectivity dimensions appearance uniform color and crisp welldefined edges wet film thickness drying time and glass bead quantity application and retention .
when the test strips are in compliance the contractor will be permitted to proceed with the striping operations .
a test strip shall be required for each applicator unit used .
additional test strips may be required when major equipment repairs or adjustments are made or at any time requested by the engineer .
d. procedures .
the road surface shall be cleaned and free from all dirt oil grease and other foreign material including curing compound on new portland cement concrete immediately prior to the striping operation .
new epoxy markings may be applied over worn wellbonded epoxy if approved by the engineer all others such as but not limited to thermoplastic tape and newly striped paint will be removed as follows and as approved by the engineer num .
grinding .
markings shall be removed to a minimum of num percent of their surface area .
the method shall not damage the surface in any way and have no more than a moderate color andor texture change .
the grinding truck must be capable of removing num linear feet of numinch line per day and must be equipped with a vacuum and dust collector that is num percent efficient in removing particles no bigger than num microns .
any pavement markings removed must be replaced within num day .
removal is at no extra cost .
a sweeper with the tnum capacity to pick up grindings simultaneously with the removal operation is required .
if the contract eliminates grinding of material power washing remains a requirement .
num .
power wash. all special patterns handwork and oil or other deleterious substances shall be removed by a power wash machine with a pressure of num psi with the water heated to numof .
no chemicals shall be added to the water in the process .
the machine will be equipped with a turbo blast tip with oscillating head and shall be capable of supplying num gallonminutegun .
pavement cleaning shall consist of at least a brushing with a rotary nonmetallic broom and additionally as may be recommended by the material manufacturer all to the satisfaction of the engineer .
new portland cement concrete shall be cleaned by sandblasting to remove any surface treatments andor laitance .
surface cleaning and preparation work shall be performed only in the area of the epoxy markings applications .
the pavement surface shall be airblasted to remove dirt and residues just prior to the application of the markings .
e. restrictions .
epoxy striping material shall be applied to substantially dry pavement surfaces .
the pavement surface temperature and the ambient temperature shall be a minimum of numof at time of application .
operations shall neither start nor be continued during periods of rain or in the case of damp pavement .
operations shall not continue until the engineer determines that the roadway surface is dry enough to achieve adhesion .
the individual epoxy components shall be heated to the temperatures recommended in the epoxy manufacturers written instructions for use or as stated in the fhwa standard specifications for construction of roads and bridges on federal highway projects note maximum temperature of numof .
the ratio of the two components shall be monitored during the application using the installed metering devices .
should the ratio fall outside the range of num percent of the manufacturers specified mixing ratio for over num seconds or at any time fall outside the range of num percent the application shall be stopped and the cause of the problem determined and corrected before proceeding .
f. application .
epoxy pavement markings must be reflectorized for night visibility by adding reflective spheres before the paint dries or sets by the doubledrop method .
the reflective spheres type i followed immediately by type ii shall be evenly dispersed on a minimum wet film thickness of num mils on existing and new pavements at a minimum rate of num pounds per gallon for each type of glass sphere .
all special patterns and handwork i.e .
stop bars arrows legends symbols etc .
shall meet the above application rates with the following exception the doubledrop application of glass spheres will use the type ii gradation only with two applications at a minimum of num pounds per gallon each .
the contractor shall place necessary spotting at appropriate points to provide horizontal control for striping and to determine necessary starting and stopping points .
longitudinal joints pavement edges and existing markings shall serve as horizontal control when approved by the engineer .
epoxy reflectorized pavement markings shall be placed at the width thickness and pattern designated by the contract documents .
marking operations shall not begin until applicable surface preparation work is completed and approved by the engineer and the tnum atmospheric conditions and pavement surface temperature are acceptable to the engineer .
the temperature of the mixed epoxy may be adjusted as required for prevailing conditions including air temperature and pavement temperature to achieve the prescribed notrack time .
the speed of the applicator truck shall not exceed the recommended rate for the combination of the truck rate pressure in the lines and the tip opening and height of the spray gun to insure the required thickness .
g. quality assurance .
a tolerance of numinch under or over the specified width will be allowed for striping provided the variation is gradual and does not detract from the general appearance .
alignment deviations for the control guide shall not exceed num inches provided the variation is gradual and does not detract from the general appearance .
material shall not be applied over a longitudinal joint .
establishment of these tolerances shall not relieve the contractor of his responsibility to comply as closely as practicable with the planned dimensions .
retroreflection shall be measured using a nummeter geometry portable unit following astm dnum with the following exceptions minimum values shall not be less than num mcdlummnum for white and num mcdlummnum for yellow as measured by the engineer and measurement for acceptance shall be performed between num and num days after placement .
epoxy reflectorized pavement markings which after application and curing are determined by the engineer to be defective and not in conformance with this specification shall be repaired .
repair of defective markings shall be the responsibility of the contractor and shall be performed to the satisfaction of the engineer at no additional cost to the state .
repair methods shall be detailed and submitted for approval to the engineer prior to corrective action .
t.num symbols and word messages .
symbols and word messages shall be applied to the pavement where designated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the letters shall be elongated in the direction of traffic as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
t.num bidirectional control device .
the raised reflective pavement markings rrpms and thermoplastic shall be applied according to the method indicated in the respective requirements of these specifications for each item and as detailed on the plans .
t.num method of measurement .
waterborne pavement markings thermoplastic pavement markings epoxy resin pavement markings temporary fastdrying waterborne pavement markings temporary pavement markings tape and remove existing pavement markings will be measured by the number of linear feet excluding skips and spaces actually installed or removed as the case may be in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
the following items will be measured by the number of each such unit actually furnished and installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
waterborne pavement arrow straight left right or combined waterborne pavement marking word only waterborne pavement marking word stop thermoplastic straight arrow thermoplastic leftright arrow thermoplastic combined arrow tnum thermoplastic marking word only thermoplastic marking word stop bidirectional control device epoxy resin pavement arrow straight left right or combined epoxy resin pavement marking word only epoxy resin pavement marking word stop in certain cases any or all of the items of work may be paid for on a lump sum basis .
in such cases no measurement is required .
t.num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of pavement markings will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot per each or by lump sum for each type or types as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated shall constitute full and complete compensation for all labor tools materials and equipment including protection of newly applied markings from traffic layout cleaning and sweeping furnishing and applying the pavement markings and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
t.num epoxy retroreflection values .
payment shall be as follows a .
minimum num num whiteyellow num contract unit price .
b .
minimum num num whiteyellow num contract unit price .
c. minimum num num whiteyellow num contract unit price .
d. minimum num num whiteyellow num contract unit price .
e. below num num whiteyellow num contract unit price .
t.num the accepted quantity of temporary pavement markings tape will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for each type or types as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated shall constitute full and complete compensation for all labor tools materials and equipment including protection of newly applied markings cleaning and sweeping pavement applying pavement markings and removal of pavement markings when no longer in use and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
fifty percent of the contract bid price will be paid at the time of installation and num percent upon removal of such markings .
section t.num temporary construction zone reflective pavement delineators t.num description .
this work consists of furnishing placing maintaining and removing construction zone reflective pavement delineators at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
t.num materials .
the delineator shall consist of a shell and lens molded of methyl methacrylate conforming to federal spec .
ld numc type num class num .
the shell shall reflect incident light for traffic flow in a singular direction .
dimensions are to be at least num x num and a tnum minimum reflective area of num square inches in each reflective face .
the delineators must be installed using the bituminous adhesive that must conform with the delineator manufacturers requirements and specifications .
t.num construction methods .
the delineators shall be placed on bridges or lane shifts .
at the time of installation the pavement surface must be clean and dry so that it will not impair the adhesion .
prior to installation of the delineators the adhesive must be heated to the temperature determined by the manufacturer .
the delineator must be applied with quick pressure to insure proper adhesion to the pavement surface .
the reflective faces must be placed perpendicular to the line of traffic flow .
t.num method of measurement .
temporary construction zone reflective pavement delineators will be measured by the number of such units actually furnished and installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
t.num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of temporary construction zone reflective pavement delineators will be paid for at the contract unit price per each as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including surface cleaning bituminous adhesive and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete in place and accepted by the engineer .
if in the opinion of the engineer any delineator fails to perform satisfactorily such delineator shall be replaced by the contractor at no additional cost to the state .
moreover any damage to the finished pavement surface any permanent marks or scars on the finished pavement surface including marking materials or any adhesive residues left in a pattern that may mislead or misdirect traffic that results from removal of delineators shall be removed or repaired as directed by and to the satisfaction of the engineer all at no additional cost to the state .
if necessary this would include complete removal andor replacement of the damaged pavement section .
section t.num lighting for night work operations t.num description .
this work consists of illuminating work zone and lane drop areas and all other areas within which are located channelization devices placed along the roadway for the purpose of directing or restricting traffic all as required for night work operations .
illumination of these areas will be provided by both floodlighting and equipmentmounted lighting .
t.num materials .
t.num floodlights .
all floodlights for both the lane drop areas and the equipment mounted lighting shall have cutoff type light distribution and shall have a diecast aluminum housing with integrallycase heavyduty hinges .
fixture housing door shall be closed with two or more captive tnum screws and shall have positive gasketing to insure water tightness and dust tightness .
the housing shall have no weep holes .
the reflector shall be high purity anodized aluminum with a secondary internal reflector element to reflect high angle rays back into the beam to achieve high beam utilization and meet ies definition of cutoff distribution .
a. lamp sockets shall have prewire griptype mogul base with additional support on the glass gasketed to the fixture housing .
ballast shall be prewired regulating type designed for numof starting with an operating lamp current crest factor not exceeding num .
mounting shall be accomplished with a diecast aluminum slipfitter designed for a numinch tenon .
surface mounting brackets shall be provided for alternate mounting at the contractors option .
fixture shall be u.l .
listed .
lamps shall be metal halide of the wattage specified .
b. flourescent fixtures shall be twinlamp numfoot long fixtures utilizing two highoutput coolwhite flourescent lamps fnumtnumcwho .
housing shall be extruded aluminum with high gloss baked white enamel finish .
lens shall be either tempered glass polycarbonate or virgin acrylic and shall be fully framed and gasketed .
lens frame shall be hinged or captive latched on one side and shall be togglelatched on the other side with a stainless steel spring loaded bail to apply constant pressure between the lens and fixture housing .
all fasteners shall be stainless steel .
the lamp holder shall be selfsealing selfaligning and spring loaded .
lens unlatching and lamp removal shall be accomplished without the use of special tools .
the fixtures shall have integral high power factor ballasts capable of starting to numof .
fixtures shall have fittings for standard continuous row mounting and shall have topmounting brackets for additional support .
approval shall be obtained from the engineer prior to the purchase or rental of any lighting fixtures .
t.num construction methods .
t.num plan of operation .
prior to proceeding with any night work the contractor shall submit a plan of night work operations including placement of illumination devices to the engineer for review and approval .
t.num illumination standards .
the following standards shall be maintained at all times during night operations .
a .
lane drops .
the traveled way within the lane drop areas and all cones barrels or other physical barriers placed on the roadway for the purpose of channelizing or restricting vehicular traffic shall be illuminated to a minimum average of num footcandles measured on both the horizontal and vertical planes num inches above the surface in question .
the lane drop areas to be illuminated shall be defined as beginning at the first cone barrel or other physical channelizing device continuing through the full roadway width transition area and ending where the traveled way attains the constant width which will be maintained through the construction area .
a uniformity ratio average to minimum to one or better shall be maintained at all times within the illuminated transition area .
all portable lighting shall be located off the traveled way opposite the channelizing devices i.e .
when closing the left or high speed lanes all lighting should be placed on the right side of roadway .
all lighting shall be aimed in such a manner to avoid shadows on the traveled way and prevent excessive glare to the motorist .
illumination of the lane drop areas shall be accomplished using numwatt numwatt num watt metal halide floodlights in any combination and any number necessary to achieve the footcandle levels and tnum uniformity ratios specified above .
all floodlights shall have flat tempered glass or polycarbonate lenses securely fastened to the housing to prevent personal injury in the event of lamp breakage .
floodlights shall be mounted on portable or fixed poles tripods or staging in a location off the traveled way .
the lighting staging area shall be roped off to all personnel except the lighting technicians .
all generator and wiring shall be within the restricted area and shall conform to all applicable electrical codes and pertinent osha safety standards .
t.num equipment lighting .
a. rollers .
each roller shall be equipped with a numunit light cluster on both the front and back .
a single cluster with num units one wide beam and one narrow beam aimed towards the front is to be used .
all floodlights shall be securely mounted to minimize vibrations during roller operations .
floodlights should be mounted on steel bullhorn style brackets with numinch tenons and a numinch spread .
mounting height shall be a minimum of num inches above the top platform surface of the roller provided the overall height from ground level does not exceed num feet .
mounting height and placement shall be designed to allow the operator to run the roller from a standing position without blocking the lighting beams onto the roadway .
floodlights for the roller shall be numwatt metal halide fixtures as described below .
b .
trucks .
a minimum of two pickup trucks equipped with floodlights shall be provided by the contractor .
each truck shall have a minimum of three num wide beam and num narrow beams numwatt metal halide floodlights mounted on supports on the pickup truck bed .
the floodlights shall be aimed in a forward direction over the truck cab but shall also have the capability of being adjusted and aimed in any direction if required .
floodlights for truck mounting shall be as described below .
c. pavers .
single width numfoot nominal and double width numfoot nominal pavers shall be equipped with a continuous twin lamp flourescent bar consisting of enclosed numfoot flourescent fixtures mounted end to end across the full width of the screed area .
fixtures shall be adjustable so that they may be tilted toward the work area .
a minimum of num footcandles must be provided at the screed area and in the area minimum num feet immediately behind the screed where manual raking operations are taking place .
two auxiliary floodlights narrow beam shall be provided one to illuminate guide line and one to illuminate the auger area .
care shall be taken in the placement of these floodlights to avoid aiming of the lights into the line of sight or into the mirrors of trucks which are backing into the augerhopper area to unload bituminous concrete .
floodlights for the pavers shall be as described below .
d. equipment mounting .
mounting shall be designed and constructed by the contractor at his option to suit the configuration of the equipment to which the lighting is attached .
mounting heights placement and aiming shall be as hereinbefore described .
mounting shall be secure to prevent excessive vibration and to insure there is no hazard to equipment operators or other personnel .
care shall be exercised to insure that fixture mounting will clear all overhead structures .
lighting configurations for the equipment lighting may with the concurrence of the engineer vary from those specified herein provided that the specified light output is adhered to .
all equipment lighting shall be aimed in such a manner as to maximize the illumination on each individual task .
tnum t.num lighting equipment schedule .
no .
of location fixtures size type remarks lane drop area varies varies metal halide min .
fc .
rollers num numw metal halide aim num forward num back pickup trucks num numw metal halide variable aiming pavers single width num num twin lamp screed area flourescent num numw metal halide auger guide line pavers double width num num twin lamp screed area flourescent num numw metal halide auger guide line a .
spare parts .
an inventory of spare lamps and spare fixtures shall be maintained on the job site by the contractor and all lamp or fixture failures shall be repaired or replaced immediately .
t.num power sources .
the contractor shall provide portable generators of type size and wattage output required to adequately energize the lighting equipment specified .
generator placement and wiring shall be in compliance with all applicable electrical codes and pertinent osha safety standards .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to insure that lighting fixture and generator electrical rating are compatible .
t.num inspection .
the illumination on the project shall be monitored at random intervals for conformance to the specifications set forth herein .
substandard illumination in any area traveled way work area or equipment lighting may be sufficient reason for the engineer to direct stoppage of all work until the substandard situation is corrected .
if there are sufficient noncompliance incidents relating to the illumination of the work area and the lane drops e.g .
failure to maintain the minimum light levels and the uniformity ratios specified as determined by field tests or if the finished roadway surface is unsatisfactory in any way or if safety considerations dictate the engineer at his discretion may revoke the nighttime paving operation for the contract .
the contractor shall have no claim for loss of anticipated profit because of any such revocation .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer for the duration of the project and at no additional compensation a handheld digital light meter complete with instructions capable of measuring numtonum footcandles .
the light meter is to be returned to the contractor upon completion of the project .
t.num method of measurement .
lighting for night work operations will not be measured separately for payment .
tnum t.num basis of payment .
provision of lighting for night work operations will not be paid for separately but shall be considered a subsidiary obligation of the contractor with the cost of said lighting distributed among the contract unit prices for those items of work that are to be performed during nighttime operations .
these unit prices shall include full and complete compensation for furnishing and operating all equipment labor and materials necessary to illuminate the roadway surface lane drop and work zone area including necessary lighting on the equipment and all other incidentals necessary to complete the work of this item as previously specified and to the satisfaction of the engineer .
lnum part l landscaping section l.num loam plantable soil or high organic soil l.num description .
l.num loam .
this work consists of placing loam to the lines grades and depths shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
the loam shall be furnished by the contractor from sources outside the project limits loam furnished and spread .
l.num plantable soil .
this work consists of furnishing and placing plantable soil to a numinch depth on designated areas in close conformity to the lines and grades as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
plantable soil shall be either furnished by the contractor from sources outside the project limits plantable soil furnished and spread or material removed and stockpiled by the contractor under the excavation items plantable soil rehandled and spread .
l.num high organic soil .
this work consists of furnishing and placing high organic soil to the lines grades and depths in detention ponds wetland replacement andor wetlands restorationreclamation areas as specified herein as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
high organic soil shall be either furnished by the contractor from sources outside the project limits high organic soil furnished and spread or material removed and stockpiled by the contractor under the excavation items high organic soil rehandled and spread .
l.num materials .
loam plantable soil and high organic soil shall be clean and free of any undesirable material and conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num landscaping materials .
l.num construction methods .
l.num loam .
the contractor shall submit a sample for testing prior to the placement of loam .
the sample will be taken from material furnished by the contractor or from the removed and stockpiled material on site .
the sample shall be approved by the engineer prior to the placement .
loam which does not meet the requirements specified in section m.num landscaping materials shall be rejected .
prior to the placement of loam the contractor shall prepare the surface to receive the loam .
all roots sod weeds cobbles or stone with any dimension greater than num inch shall be removed and legally disposed of .
lnum loam shall be placed on surfaces which are true to the lines grades and crosssections shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
loam shall be placed and spread to the required depth the minimum thickness shall be as indicated on the plans andor in the proposal .
the loamed surface shall be graded and all roots sods weeds cobbles or stones with any dimension greater than num inch shall be removed and legally disposed of .
after shaping and grading all trucks and other equipment not required to perform seeding mulching or mowing operations shall be excluded from the loamed areas .
work under this item shall be performed only with the permission of the engineer .
the engineer may suspend work when he determines soil or weather conditions are unsuitable for spreading andor grading loam .
the contractor may resume work when directed by the engineer .
all loamed areas shall be seeded no more than two weeks after spreading the loam .
refer to section l.num seeding for dates and other requirements .
loamed areas shall be maintained free from erosion until acceptance of the project .
l.num plantable soil .
the contractor shall place plantable soil in accordance with subsection l.num above .
when items for both plantable soil rehandled and spread and plantable soil furnished and spread appear in the contract the contractor shall complete the placing of all plantable soil available on the project before proceeding to obtain plantable soil from outside sources to the extent feasible in the construction sequence .
l.num high organic soil .
the contractor shall submit a sample for testing prior to the placement of high organic soil .
the sample shall be approved by the engineer prior to placement .
high organic soil which does not meet the requirements specified in section m.num landscaping materials shall be rejected .
high organic soil shall be placed on surfaces which are true to the lines grades and cross sections shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
the depth and location of high organic soil shall be as shown on the plans .
all slopes shall be tracked with a dozer .
the resulting tracks shall be perpendicular to the flow of water .
all roots sods weeds cobbles or stones with any dimension greater than num inches shall be removed from the soil surface and legally disposed of .
no raking will be permitted .
when items for both high organic soil rehandled and spread and high organic soil furnished and spread appear in the contract the contractor shall complete the placing of all high organic soil available on the project before proceeding to obtain high organic soil from outside sources to the extent feasible in the construction sequence .
the contractor shall apply a wetland seed mix immediately after spreading and tracking the high organic soil .
refer to section l.num seeding for dates and other requirements .
lnum l.num method of measurement .
l.num loam .
loam will be measured by the number of square yards surface measurement of the area on which the placing of loam has been installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
l.num plantable soil .
plantable soil will be measured by the number of square yards surface measurement of the area on which the placing of plantable soil has been installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
l.num high organic soil .
high organic soil will be measured by the number of square yards surface measurement of the area on which the placing of high organic soil has been installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
l.num basis of payment .
l.num loam furnished and spread .
the accepted quantity of loam furnished and spread will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
the loam shall be furnished by the contractor from sources outside of the project limits .
l.num plantable soil furnished and spread .
the accepted quantity of plantable soil will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
the plantable soil shall be furnished by the contractor from sources outside the project limits .
l.num high organic soil four inches num deep slopes .
the accepted quantity of high organic soil four inches num deep slopes shall be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
the high organic soil shall be furnished by the contractor from sources outside the project limits .
l.num high organic soil six inches num deep bottom .
the accepted quantity of high organic soil six inches num deep bottom shall be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
the high organic soil shall be furnished by the contractor from sources outside the project limits .
lnum section l.num seeding l.num description .
this work consists of the preparation of the seed bed furnishing and placing materials and the establishing of grassed areas as shown on the plans in accordance with these specifications or as directed by the engineer .
work shall consist of the following six types type num .
plantable soil areas either flats to be seeded with a park seed mix or slopes to be seeded with a slope seed mix type num .
loamed areas adjacent to lawns or sidewalks seeded with a residential seed mix type num .
temporary seeding using a temporary seed mix on sloped and flat areas of embankments or excavation sites to provide temporary vegetative cover for erodible soils type num .
plantable soil areas either flats or slopes seeded with a native seed mix type num .
wetland areas and high organic soil seeded with a wetland seed mix type num .
plantable soil areas either flats or slopes seeded with a wildflower seed mix .
slope areas shall be defined as being num or greater .
l.num materials .
lime fertilizer mulch water and seed mixtures shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num landscaping materials .
l.num construction methods .
l.num seeding dates .
full advantage shall be taken of time and weather conditions best suited for seeding .
the normal dates for seeding shall be as follows type num type num and type num dates shall be spring seeding april num to may num .
fall seeding august num to october num .
type num seeding may be done at anytime between march num and november num with approval of the engineer .
type num seeding shall not be permitted on frozen ground .
type num seeding dates shall be as follows spring seeding may num to june num fall seeding august num to september num lnum type num seeding dates shall be as follows spring seeding april num to may num fall seeding september num to september num seeding at other than the above time will be allowed only with the written permission of the engineer .
the engineer may suspend work when heshe determines that soil or weather conditions are unsuitable for raking andor seeding .
the contractor may resume work when directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall notify the engineer at least num hours in advance of the time intended for commencement of seeding .
no payment will be made for work performed when the engineer is not present .
in cases where there is existing or new plant material care shall be taken to insure that no lime fertilizer mulch andor seed mix comes in contact with the plant material or their mulched areas .
l.num preparation of areas for seeding .
a .
type num general highway seeding .
type num areas shall be raked either by hand or mechanically i.e .
power rake so as to produce a loose friable seed bed .
slopes num and greater shall be tracked with a dozer .
the resulting track imprints shall be perpendicular to the flow of water .
all sticks litter wire weeds cable cobbles or stones larger than num inch in any dimension shall be removed and legally disposed of .
where the seed bed has become compacted it shall be scarified to a depth of num inches prior to raking .
no seeding of this type will be permitted on areas where the seed bed has not been properly prepared or where the soil is compacted .
b .
type num residential seeding .
type num areas shall be hand raked to a finished grade .
all sticks litter wire weeds cable cobbles and stones larger than ½inch in any dimension shall be removed and legally disposed of .
after hand raking and at the discretion of the engineer the contractor shall roll with a hand roller the entire area .
the finish grade of the proposed area shall blend into the adjacent lawns when applicable .
where the seed bed has become compacted it shall be scarified to a depth of num inches prior to fine raking .
no seeding of this type will be permitted on areas where the seed bed has not been properly prepared or where the soil is compacted .
c. type num temporary seeding .
type num areas to be seeded shall be free of depressions and unprotected channels where runoff may cause erosion .
d. type num native grass seeding .
type num areas shall be prepared in accordance with para .
a above .
e. type num wetland seeding .
type num areas shall not be raked .
all sticks litter wire weeds cable cobbles or stones larger than num inches in any dimension shall be removed and legally disposed of without disturbing the finish grade .
lnum f. type num wildflower seeding .
type num areas shall be prepared in accordance with para .
a above except as designated below .
type num areas previously seeded or having existing vegetation shall have all sod removed from the site proposed for wildflower seeding .
plantable soil as designated on the plans or as directed by the engineer shall be applied to raise the planting bed to final grade after sod removal .
areas shall be raked to produce a loose friable soil .
l.num application of lime .
lime ground or pelletized shall be applied dry and spread evenly over the entire surface to be seeded .
unless otherwise specified the application rate shall be num ton per acre .
raking shall be completed after the fertilizer has been applied .
no lime will be applied on type num type num and type num areas .
l.num application of fertilizer .
after the application of lime fertilizer shall be spread at the following rates type num and num eight hundredfifty pounds num lbs .
per acre .
type num six hundredfifty pounds num lbs .
per acre .
type num five hundred pounds num lbs .
per acre .
type num no fertilizer shall be applied .
type num one hundredfifty pounds num lbs .
per acre .
both the lime and fertilizer shall be thoroughly incorporated into the soil by raking .
raking shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements of subsection l.num above .
l.num sowing of seed .
after the seed beds have been prepared as outlined in subsections l.num through l.num above grass seed conforming to the respective formula specified in subsection m.num seed mixtures shall be applied according to the specified rates .
application of fertilizer grass seed and cellulose fiber mulch for type num type num type num type num type num and type num may be accomplished in one operation by the use of a hydroseeder .
a .
type num general highway seeding .
type num areas shall be seeded with park mix on flats and with slope seed mix on slopes .
both mechanical and hydroseeding methods may be used .
b .
type num residential seeding .
type num areas shall be seeded with a residential seed mix .
additional hand raking and rolling with a light roller shall be employed in lieu of mulch .
such areas will not be accepted until a generally weedfree numinch stand of grass is established .
c. type num temporary seeding .
type num areas shall be seeded with a temporary seed mix on flats and slopes .
both mechanical and hydroseeding methods may be used .
d. type num native grass seeding .
type num areas shall be seeded with a native seed mix .
both mechanical and hydroseeding methods may be used .
e. type num wetland seeding .
type num areas shall be seeded with a wetland seed mix .
in areas where there is access for a hydroseeder the wetland seed mix shall be spread using lnum this method only .
in areas where there is no access for a hydroseeder the wetland seed mix shall be spread by a hand held spreader .
f. type num wildflower seeding .
type num areas shall be seeded with a wildflower seed mix .
seeds may be mechanically applied by overseeding the area with a slit seeder or broadcast with the use of a drop or broadcast spreader .
a hydroseeder may be used .
when hydroseeding method is used the seed fertilizer and num percent of the mulch shall be used in the first application followed by the remaining num percent of mulch to be used in a second application .
if a slit seeder is used seed disbursement shall be num inches on center and numinch deep .
two passes the second perpendicular to the first shall be made .
small seeds shall be seeded separately from larger seed .
if a drop or broadcast seeding method is used large seed shall be spread separately from small seeds .
each seed type large or small disbursement shall be applied in two passes the second perpendicular to the first .
the area shall be hand raked to provide a soil coverage of a numinch .
l.num mulching .
all seeded areas shall be covered with a suitable mulch at the time of the application of the seed .
unless otherwise specified cellulose fiber mulch shall be used .
cellulose fiber mulch shall conform to subsection m.num of these specifications .
cellulose fiber mulch may be employed separately or as part of a hydroseeding operation .
if cellulose fiber mulch is applied separately it shall be applied immediately after the seeding operation .
cellulose fiber mulch that becomes adhered to signs sign posts lighting standards new or existing plant materials andor walls shall be removed .
l.num care during construction .
any areas which fail to show a uniform growth of grass for any reason whatsoever shall be reseeded until the areas are covered with a satisfactory growth of grass as approved by the engineer .
the seed fertilizer etc .
used in the reseeding operations shall be at the same application rates and during appropriate seeding dates as those previously specified unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
a. watering .
the contractor shall water all type num type num type num and type num seeded areas within num hours of the seeding operation .
one additional watering may be required and such will be at the discretion of the engineer .
water shall be applied at a controlled rate and in such a manner to insure the water reaches the root zone .
watering operations shall not flood adjacent areas erode soil or cause any damage to the seeded areas .
b. mowing .
mowing for type num seeded areas shall be accomplished in two mowings per year on areas flatter than num .
mowing on type num seeded areas shall be performed when the grass has obtained a height of num inches and shall be maintained at a numinch height until accepted .
lnum mowing will be performed for type num and type num only .
each cutting shall result in a stand of evenly mowed grass num inches tall immediately following the cutting .
neat trimming shall be necessary around all poles trees ledges delineators curbs piers abutments and other structures falling within the seeded areas this trimming will be conducted simultaneously with the mowing during each cutting operation .
all curbs shall be trimmed and exposed all gutters will be left free of all grass clippings .
c. failure to perform care during construction .
if the engineer decides that the care during construction tasks as specified in the contract have not been performed the daily charge set forth in special provision code l.num will be deducted from monies due the contractor as a charge for failure to comply with this specification .
the daily charge will continue each consecutive calendar day until the deficiencies have been corrected to the satisfaction of the engineer .
l.num method of measurement .
seeding will be measured by the number of square yards actually seeded in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
l.num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of seeding will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for preparation of seed beds for furnishing and applying all lime fertilizer mulch seed raking mowing watering and care during construction of the seeded areas for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
payment for all types shall be made as follows eightyfive percent of the total contract price will be paid at the time of initial seeding .
the remainder num percent will be paid when the newly seeded areas have been accepted .
if seeding is done at a time other than the specified seeding date the entire payment for seeding will be withheld until a uniform acceptable stand of turf as determined by the engineer has been obtained .
section l.num sodding l.num description .
this work consists of the preparation of the sod bed and of furnishing placing and caring for sod as indicated on the plans in accordance with these specifications or as directed by the engineer .
l.num materials .
sod lime fertilizer water and wooden pegs shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num landscaping materials .
lnum l.num construction methods .
l.num sodding dates .
the dates for sodding shall be as follows spring sodding april num to june num fall sodding august num to november num sodding shall not be performed on frozen ground nor shall frozen sod be placed .
the contractor shall notify the engineer at least num hours in advance of the time intended for commencement of sodding .
in cases where there is existing or new plant material care shall be taken to insure that no lime or fertilizer comes in contact with the plant material or their mulched areas .
l.num shipping handling storage delivery .
sod loads shall be covered at all times during shipment and during delivery to the project site .
sod shall be protected from weather or other damaging andor deteriorating conditions while in transit or in storage .
any sod which has been damaged or has deteriorated in transit or storage will not be accepted and shall be removed from the project .
sod shall be harvested delivered and installed within a period of num hours .
sod not installed within this time period will not be accepted and must be removed from the project .
l.num preparation of the sod bed .
sod shall be placed on a minimum of num inches of loam or plantable soil .
the top surface of the sod shall meet specified grades or be flush with surrounding finished grades andor structures .
the sod bed shall be hand raked to produce a loose friable surface .
all sticks litter wire weeds cable cobbles or stones larger than ½inch in any dimension shall be removed and legally disposed of .
after hand raking the contractor shall roll the entire area with a hand roller .
where the sod bed has been compacted it shall be scarified to a minimum depth of num inches prior to fine raking .
no sodding will be permitted on areas where the sod bed has not been properly prepared or where the soil has become compacted .
l.num application of lime .
lime ground or pelletized shall be applied dry and spread evenly over the entire surface to be sodded .
unless otherwise specified the application rate shall be num ton per acre .
raking shall be completed after the fertilizer has been applied .
l.num application of fertilizer .
after the application of lime fertilizer shall be spread at the rate of num pounds of fertilizer per acre on both flats and slopes .
both the lime and fertilizer shall be thoroughly incorporated into the soil by raking .
unless otherwise approved sod areas shall be raked by hand only .
l.num placing of sod .
the sod bed shall be moist .
a watering truck shall be on site at all times during the sodding operation .
sod to be placed in drainage ways and in cases where continuous or solid sodding is called for on the plans shall be laid with the longest dimension parallel to the contours .
special care shall be taken in forming finish grades at junctions of drainage ways .
lnum the first row of sod shall be laid in a straight line with subsequent rows placed parallel to and tightly against each other .
lateralvertical joints shall be staggered by a minimum of num inches to promote uniform growth and strength .
only full size sod strips shall be used unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
care shall be exercised to insure that the sod is not stretched or overlapped and that all joints are butted tight .
immediately after the sod is placed it shall be pressed firmly into contact with the sod bed by tamping hand rolling or by other methods approved by the engineer .
this procedure shall not displace or deform the sod .
the contractor shall cut the sod to the line indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
l.num pegging .
sods shall be held in place by approved pegs in all drainage ways on all slopes num or steeper and elsewhere as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
this shall be completed immediately following rolling .
at least one peg shall secure each such sod strip but in no case shall pegs be more than num feet apart .
pegs shall have a flat side parallel to the slope and be driven flush with the root crown .
l.num watering .
immediately following installation sodded areas shall be thoroughly watered .
a .
first week .
watering shall be performed daily during the first week unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
the watering rate shall be num gallons per square yard num gallons per acre .
b .
second through fourth week .
water sod every third day or as directed by engineer .
the watering rate shall be num gallons per square yard num gallons per acre .
l.num joint dressing .
as soon as practical following the initial watering but in every case prior to the second watering the entire area shall be examined by the contractor for open joints or other signs of surface imperfection .
all open joints or other voids shall be carefully filled with loam or plantable soil .
l.num care during construction .
the contractor shall maintain the sodded areas including watering and mowing until all newly sodded areas have been accepted .
prior to acceptance of the work any damaged areas shall be reshaped refertilized resodded or repaired according to these specifications to the satisfaction of the engineer with no additional compensation to be made therefore .
a. mowing .
mowing shall be performed when the grass has obtained a height of num inches and shall be maintained at a numinch height until accepted .
each cutting shall result in a stand of evenly mowed grass num inches tall immediately following the cutting .
neat trimming shall be necessary around all poles trees ledges delineators curbs piers abutments and other structures falling within the seeded areas this trimming will be conducted simultaneously with the mowing during each cutting operation .
all curbs shall be trimmed and exposed all gutters will be left free of all grass clippings .
lnum b .
failure to perform care during construction .
if the engineer decides that the care during construction tasks as specified in the contract have not been performed the daily charge set forth in special provision code l.num will be deducted from monies due the contractor as a charge for failure to comply with this specification .
the daily charge will continue each consecutive calendar day until the deficiencies noted have been corrected to the satisfaction of the engineer .
l.num method of measurement .
sodding will be measured by the number of square yards actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
l.num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of sodding will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for preparation of sod beds for furnishing and applying all lime fertilizer pegs sod raking mowing watering care during construction and for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
eightyfive percent of the total contract price will be paid at the time of the sod installation .
the remainder num percent will be paid when the newly sodded areas have been accepted .
if sodding is done at a time other than specified sodding dates the entire payment for sodding will be withheld until a uniform acceptable stand of turf as determined by the engineer has been obtained .
payment will not be made for work performed when the engineer is not present .
section l.num refertilization of seeded sodded and grassed areas l.num description .
this work consists of a second application of fertilizer to newly seeded and newly sodded areas andor the application of fertilizer to existing grassed areas in accordance with these specifications or as directed by the engineer .
l.num materials .
the fertilizer applied under this item shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num landscaping materials .
l.num construction methods .
the contractor shall allow one growing season between the first application of fertilizer to newly seeded areas as required under section l.num and newly sodded areas as required under section l.num of these specifications .
the second application is described below lnum l.num seeded areas .
the refertilization of seeded areas shall be spread at the following rates type num and num eight hundredfifty pounds num lbs .
per acre .
type num no refertilization is required .
type num two hundredfifty pounds num lbs .
per acre .
type num no refertilization is required .
type num seventyfive pounds num lbs .
per acre .
l.num sodded areas .
the refertilization of sodded areas shall be spread at the rate of num pounds per acre .
l.num existing grassed areas .
the application of fertilizer to existing grassed areas shall be spread at the rate of num pounds per acre .
l.num method of measurement .
refertilization of seeded sodded and grassed areas will be measured by the number of acres actually fertilized in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
l.num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of refertilization of seeded sodded and grassed areas will be paid for at the contract unit price per acre as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section l.num seed stabilizers l.num description .
this work consists of furnishing and placing seed stabilizers over seeded areas at locations indicated on the plans in accordance with these specifications or as directed by the engineer .
l.num materials .
seed stabilizers shall consist of jute mesh excelsior matting erosion control blankets adhesive mulch stabilizer and straw mulch .
each such material shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num landscaping materials .
l.num construction methods .
l.num jute mesh .
a .
general .
jute mesh shall be applied immediately after seeding .
the mesh shall be installed loosely but smoothly to fit the contour of the finished grade parallel to and in the same direction as the surface flow of storm water .
lnum b. anchor slots and junction slots .
the upslope end of each separate strip or piece of jute mesh shall be buried in a numinch minimum vertical anchor slot or junction slot with the soil tamped firmly against the mesh .
the engineer may require that any edge likely to be exposed to greater than normal flow be buried in a similar manner .
c. check slots .
check slots shall be spaced so that at least one such slot or junction slot or anchor slot of the jute mesh occurs in each num feet on gradients of less than num percent and in each num feet on gradients of more than num percent .
on slope drains a check slot or an end shall occur every num feet .
check slots shall be formed by folding num foot of the jute into a numinch vertical slot at right angles to the flow of water .
jute is to be stapled into place and the surrounding soil is to be firmly tamped at each check slot .
d. overlap .
where more than one width of material is required edges shall overlap a minimum of num inches ends at junction slots shall overlap a minimum of num inches and the upslope section of mesh will be on top .
e. terminal folds .
downhill ends of the jute mesh shall be folded under approximately num inches and stapled in place .
f. stapling .
staples will be inserted through the mesh along edges overlaps and in the center of all jute mesh strips at intervals not greater than num feet .
all anchor slots junction slots check slots and terminal folds shall have five staples spaced not more than num inches on center across their widths .
g. overseeding .
after the jute mesh has been secured in place and immediately prior to rolling all areas disturbed by installation of the jute mesh shall be overseeded using the appropriate seed mixture .
h. maintenance and repair .
the contractor shall maintain the areas of jute mesh until all work on the project is completed and accepted .
prior to acceptance of the work if staples have become loosened or raised or if jute mesh has become loose torn or undermined by any cause the damaged areas shall be reshaped refertilized reseeded and the jute mesh shall be repaired or replaced according to these specifications to the satisfaction of the engineer and with no additional compensation .
l.num excelsior matting .
a .
general .
the areas to receive excelsior matting shall be brought up to the lines and grades indicated with a smooth surface free of depressions and eroded areas that would allow water to collect or flow under the matting .
applications will be made immediately after seeding matting shall be applied evenly without stretching and must lie smoothly to fit the contour of the finished grade parallel to and in the same direction as the surface flow of storm water .
b. abutting ends .
the adjoining ends shall be butted and where more than one width of material is required they are to be laid parallel to one another with the edges butted snugly .
lnum c. stapling .
the matting shall be held in place by means of staples driven vertically into the soil .
staples shall be spaced not more than num feet in three rows for each strip with one row along each edge and one row spaced num inches apart across their width .
d. maintenance and repair .
the contractor shall maintain the excelsior matted areas until all work on the entire contract has been completed and accepted .
maintenance shall consist of the repair of areas damaged by erosion wind fire or other causes .
damaged areas shall be repaired to reestablish the condition and grade of the soil prior to application of the matting and shall be reshaped refertilized reseeded and the excelsior matting shall be repaired or replaced according to these specifications to the satisfaction of the engineer and with no additional compensation to be made therefore .
l.num erosion control blankets .
the contractor shall place erosion control blankets in accordance with subsection l.num above .
l.num adhesive mulch stabilizer .
a .
preparation .
mixing shall be performed in a tank with a minimum capacity of num gallons with a builtin continuous agitation or recirculation system of sufficient operating capacity to produce a homogeneous slurry of adhesive mulch stabilizer and water or adhesive mulch stabilizer seed fertilizer cellulose fiber mulch and water in the designated unit proportions .
with the agitation system working at half speed water shall be added to the tank at the same time as the adhesive mulch stabilizer and good recirculation shall be established .
adhesive mulch stabilizer shall be mixed in the proportion of num gallon of stabilizer to num½ gallons of water .
a resulting mix of num gallons of adhesive mulch stabilizer to num gallons of water shall be applied per acre or in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
if the manufacturers recommendations are followed the contractor shall provide them to the engineer for approval prior to mixing and application .
when applicable seed and fertilizer shall be added when the tank is twothirds full and shall be batched in accordance with manufacturers guidelines .
application of the slurry shall commence immediately when the tank is full .
b .
application .
the slurry shall be applied in a sweeping motion at the above specified rate and at which rate which will provide the designated amounts of adhesive mulch stabilizer and when applicable seed fertilizer and cellulose fiber mulch per acre in a continuous uniform and even coat .
the nozzle shall produce a spray that does not concentrate nor wash down the material .
l.num straw mulch .
straw shall be applied to seeded areas by hand or blower at the rate of num to num pounds per square yard num½ to num tons per acre .
the contractor shall be careful not to distribute straw on to new or existing plant material pavement surfaces driveways roads or sidewalks or other areas not designated on the plans to receive straw .
straw placed on areas not designated andor directed by the engineer shall be removed immediately by the contractor .
l.num method of measurement .
l.num jute mesh .
jute mesh will be measured by the number of square yards installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
lnum l.num excelsior matting .
excelsior matting will be measured by the number of square yards installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
l.num erosion control blanket .
erosion control blanket will be measured by the number of square yards installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
l.num adhesive mulch stabilizer .
adhesive mulch stabilizer will be measured by the number of acres installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
l.num straw mulch .
straw mulch will be measured by the number of acres installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
l.num basis of payment .
l.num jute mesh .
the accepted quantity of jute mesh will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
l.num excelsior matting .
the accepted quantity of excelsior matting will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
l.num erosion control blanket .
the accepted quantity of erosion control blanket will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
l.num adhesive mulch stabilizer .
the accepted quantity of adhesive mulch stabilizer will be paid for at the contract unit price per acre as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
l.num straw mulch .
the accepted quantity of straw mulch will be paid for at the contract unit price per acre as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section l.num planting l.num description .
this work consists of furnishing planting watering mulching staking and guying trees shrubs vines perennials ornamental grasses ground covers and bulbs of the type and size as indicated on the plans in accordance with these specifications or as directed by the engineer .
lnum l.num materials .
plant materials antidesiccant loam fertilizer bone meal mulch water stakes guy webbing fabric and herbicide shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num landscaping materials .
l.num construction methods .
l.num general .
should the contractor disturb or damage any areas not shown on the plans or designated by the engineer payment will be withheld until all damaged andor disturbed areas are repaired with materials equal to or better than that which was existing .
this shall include all previously seeded andor sodded areas .
all work shall be performed under the direct supervision of the engineer .
no payment will be made for work performed when the engineer is not present .
all persons performing planting or pruning operations shall possess a current rhode island arborist license or be directly supervised by an individual who does .
herbicides shall be applied by only those individuals who possess a current rhode island commercial applicators license .
l.num planting dates .
all plant material shall be planted during the spring or fall planting season as indicated below .
no planting shall be performed in frozen ground or when snow covers the ground .
the engineer may suspend work when heshe determines soil or weather conditions are unsuitable for planting operations .
the contractor may resume work when directed by the engineer .
a. balled and burlapped and container materialdeciduous spring march num to june num fall september num to december num b. balled and burlapped and container material evergreen broadleaf and needled spring april num to may num fall august num to october num planting at other than the above time will be allowed only with the written permission of the engineer .
the engineer may suspend work when heshe determines that the soil or weather conditions are unsuitable for planting .
the contractor may resume work when directed by the engineer .
those species known to be fall digging hazards shall be dug during the spring season only .
fall planting of these species shall be permitted only with certification from the nursery of the time of digging and shall be at the discretion of the engineer .
l.num selection tagging shipment and storage .
the engineer shall inspect and tag at the nursery all plants proposed for a specific contract .
the contractor shall give numdays notice to the engineer prior to any tagging operations .
all plant material shall meet the american association of nurseryman standards for nursery stock latest edition and its amendments .
only plants which are hardy to zone num or lower as determined by the usda shall be accepted .
lnum approval of plants in the nursery row does not guarantee final acceptance if the plant is badly dug damaged in transit poorly planted inadequately maintained or for any reason is in poor condition at the time of delivery to the contract site .
all plant material inspections and tagging will be made at the expense of the contractor .
all plant materials shall be dug and handled in accordance with the american association of nurserymans standards for nursery stock latest editions and its amendments .
all shipments of plant materials by the contractor shall comply with all nursery inspection and plant quarantine regulations of the states of origin and of destination as well as with the federal regulations governing the interstate movement of nursery stock .
a certificate of inspection shall accompany each package bale box or carload lot shipped or otherwise delivered .
when more than one variety of a species or more than one species of a genus is required for a project each plant or bundle of plants shall be tagged as to variety andor species prior to delivery to the job site .
a certificate of compliance for any or all plant materials shall be required at the time of delivery to the job site .
plants received by the contractor shall be kept moist fresh and protected against exposure to sun wind and freezing temperatures whether in the receiving yard in transit while being handled or in temporary storage on the job site awaiting planting .
balled and burlapped plants shall have their rootballs covered by earth wood chips cloth straw or other suitable material which shall be kept moist .
plant material shall be covered with a suitable tarpaulin while in transit .
damage to plant material prior to its acceptance on the job site by the engineer shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
l.num substitution .
no substitutes in kinds and size of plant materials will be made without the express written consent of the department .
the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing regarding requests for plant material substitutions .
the department reserves the right to request the contractor to submit one letter from each of four different supply sources for plant materials three sources are to be of the contractors selection one source is to be of the departments selection .
letters must clearly outline the original plant materials the substitute plant materials and why the substitution is necessary .
l.num layout and excavation of plant holes .
plant material locations and bed outlines shall be staked on the project site in accordance with the plans by the contractor before any plant pits or beds are excavated .
the contractor shall notify the engineer at least num hours excluding weekends and holidays prior to the starting date of layout operations .
all staked locations shall be approved by the engineer prior to the excavation of plant holes .
excavation for planting beds and individual trees shall conform to the approved staked locations and outlines .
holes dug for planting shall in all cases be large enough to include the complete root system of the plant or tree to be received and also sufficient amounts of approved backfill around the periphery of the root ball .
all sod weeds roots cobbles and stones and other objectionable material excavated from the plant holes which is unsuitable for backfill shall be removed from the site immediately and legally disposed of .
the minimum plant hole size unless otherwise specified shown on the plans or directed by the engineer shall be as follows lnum a .
all trees and shrubs deciduous and evergreen .
the planting hole shall be twice the diameter of the rootball in width and no deeper than num inches less than the distance from the bottom of the rootball to the root collar i.e .
a numinch distance between the root collar and bottom of the rootball will require a numinch deep hole .
any excavation in excess of that required shall be replaced and compacted to num percent of maximum density .
b. vines perennials ornamental grass and ground cover .
the planting hole shall be three times the diameter of the rootball in width and equal to the depth from the bottom of the rootball to the level at which it was grown in the nursery .
any excavation in excess of that required shall be replaced and compacted to num percent of maximum density .
c. bulbs .
the depth of planting bed for bulbs shall be num times the bulbs diameter at its widest point or in accordance with the suppliers guidelines for individual bulbs species .
the width of planting beds shall be as indicated on the plans or at the direction of the engineer .
any rocks or underground obstructions shall be removed to a depth necessary for planting as specified unless alternate locations for the plantings are approved by the engineer .
if removal of obstructions results in a deeper hole than needed for planting backfill material shall be added and compacted to num percent of maximum density to the correct depth .
l.num planting and backfilling .
all plant material shall be brought to the planting site in a well watered condition .
any dry or dehydrated plant material will not be accepted for planting .
all plant material shall be set plumb and at such a level as specified in subsection l.num above .
all watering of plant material during the backfilling process shall be completed regardless of weather conditions and shall be waived only with the approval of the engineer .
the contractor shall at all times during the planting operation have a watering truck on site and prepared for watering activities .
a. balled and burlapped trees and shrubs .
plants shall be handled in such a manner that the soil of the ball will not be loosened from the roots .
carefully place plant into the prepared pits and fill in around the ball to onehalf the depth of the hole with loam .
thoroughly tamp the loam to num percent of maximum density .
fill remaining area of hole with water .
once water has completely drained loosen burlap and peel down at least the top one third .
if wire baskets are used cut and bend down top third of basket .
roots that have been wrapped around the ball within the burlap shall be made to lay in as natural a manner as possible .
fill remaining area of hole with loam and thoroughly tamp to num percent of maximum density .
form a saucer around the edge of the backfilled hole by constructing a berm .
the finish height of the compacted berm shall be num inches .
no excess soil other than the berm will be allowed to remain within the plant saucer .
fill saucer area with water .
b .
container grown trees and shrubs .
carefully remove the tree andor shrubs from the container .
over the prepared hole gently loosen the soil from around the root mass .
roots that are wrapped around the ball within the container shall be made to lay in as natural a manner as possible .
spread root mass out in bottom of prepared hole and sift loam around the root mass to onehalf the depth of the hole .
thoroughly tamp the loam to num percent of maximum density .
lnum fill the remaining area of hole with water .
once water has completely drained fill remaining area of hole with loam and thoroughly tamp to num percent of maximum density .
form a saucer around the edge of the backfilled hole by constructing a berm .
the finish height of the compacted berm shall be num inches .
no excess soil including the berm will be allowed to remain within the plant saucer .
fill the saucer area with water .
c. vines perennials ornamental grasses and ground cover .
carefully remove plant from container .
over the prepared hole gently loosen the soil from around the root mass .
spread root mass out in bottom of the prepared hole and sift loam around the root mass to one half the depth of the hole .
thoroughly tamp the loam to num percent of maximum density .
fill the remaining area of hole with water .
once water has completely drained fill the remaining area of hole with loam and thoroughly tamp to num percent of maximum density .
form a saucer around the edge of the backfilled hole by constructing a berm .
the finished height of the compacted berm shall be num inches .
no excess soil will be allowed to remain within the plant saucer .
fill the saucer area with water .
d. bulbs .
place bulbs with the correct side up into planting bed .
fill around individual bulbs so that loam covers the bottom half of the bulbs .
spread by hand bone meal over entire bulb planting bed to a rate not to exceed ½pound per num square feet .
fill the remaining area of the planting bed with loam .
thoroughly tamp the loam to num percent of maximum density .
form a saucer around the edge of the backfilled planting bed by constructing a berm .
the finish height of the compacted berm shall be num inches .
no excess soil including the berm will be allowed to remain within the plant saucer .
fill saucer area with water .
once the water has completely drained refill the saucer area with water .
l.num watering .
all plant material shall be watered as described in subsection l.num planting and backfilling and again within num hours .
one additional watering may be needed and will be performed at the direction of the engineer .
all watering shall be completed unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
at each watering the soil around each plant shall be thoroughly saturated .
the following is a guide for minimum requirements trees num½ caliper and less fifteen num gallons each .
num to num caliper twenty num gallons each .
num½ caliper and above twentyfive num gallons each .
shrubs num and less six num gallons each .
more than num ten num gallons each .
vines perennials and ornamental grasses three num gallons each .
groundcovers and bulbs two num gallons per square foot .
water shall be applied at a controlled rate and in such a manner to insure that the water reaches the root zone saucer of the plant or plant bed and does not run off to or flood adjacent areas .
watering shall be completed in a manner which does not dislodge plants erode soil or mulch or cause damage to the saucer berm .
each saucer of individual plants on planting bed lnum shall be completely saturated before moving on to the next site .
the overhead hydroseeder spray nozzles shall not be used as watering devices .
the hydroseeder can be used to transport and store water for watering operations and when a hose and nozzle are properly attached and approved by the engineer can be used for watering operations .
l.num mulching .
mulch shall be applied after the first watering and no later than one week after planting .
all areas to be mulched shall be free of weeds stones and other extraneous material .
prior to the placement of mulch the contractor shall apply a preemergent weed control around all individual trees shrubs and shrub beds and around all plant material to be mulched .
preemergent weed control shall be applied by a rhode island licensed commercial applicator at a rate in accordance with the manufacturers instruction and as approved by the engineer .
mulch material shall be furnished and placed over all saucer areas of individual trees and shrubs and over the entire area of planting beds as indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
all mulch material shall be placed spread and raked to an even finish surface .
where mulch abuts seeded or sodded areas the edge of the planting area for both individual trees and shrubs and bed areas shall be cut smooth and clean .
mulch shall be placed carefully so as not to spill into adjacent areas .
any excess or spilled mulch shall be immediately removed .
a. pine bark mulch .
pine bark mulch shall be placed to a depth of num inches and shall be no closer than num inches to the trunk of individual trees and shrubs in accordance with the plans and these specifications .
b. woodchips .
woodchips shall only be used if expressly outlined on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
woodchips shall be placed to a depth of num inches and shall be no closer than num inches to the trunk of individual trees and shrubs in accordance with the plans and these specifications .
prior to the application of woodchip mulch the contractor shall top dress all saucer areas for individual trees and shrubs all shrub and vine beds all perennials and ornamental grass beds with a num granular fertilizer at a rate of num ounces per square foot .
c. mulching vines perennials and ornamental grass .
all mulch placed around vines perennials and ornamental grass shall be in accordance with the plans and these specifications with the exception of its depth .
all mulch material pine bark and woodchips shall be placed to a depth of num inches .
d. mulching bulbs .
all mulch placed over bulb beds shall be in accordance with the plans and these specifications with the exception of its depth .
all mulch material pine bark and woodchips shall be placed to a depth of num inches and shall cover the entire bulb planting bed .
l.num staking and guying .
all stakes shall be set plumb and driven firmly num feet into the ground .
the above ground stake height shall be no more than num inches above the point of attachment of the guy webbing .
two stakes shall be equally spaced around the tree and shall be located outside of the planting pit in undisturbed soil .
guy webbing shall be attached to both stakes and intertwined at the tree trunk .
the guy webbing shall lay flat against the tree trunk all kinks or wrinkles shall be removed prior to final lnum attachment .
the guy webbing shall be tight enough to remove slack but shall not cause deflection or strain to the plant .
all trees deciduous and evergreen shall be staked unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
the guy webbing shall be attached at a point no higher than onehalf the height of the tree or lower than onethird the height of the tree .
additional staking may be required and shall be at the discretion of the engineer .
the guy webbing shall be attached to the stake in a manner that the finish level of the webbing shall be parallel to the ground .
stakes and guy webbing shall present a uniform appearance when installation is complete .
stakes and guy webbing shall be removed within one year of the installation of the plants unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
l.num pruning .
pruning of all plants shall be performed by or under the direct supervision of a rhode island licensed arborist skilled in this work and in accordance with currently accepted horticultural practice .
only broken dead or injured branches shall be removed .
all cuts shall be made parallel to and as close to the branch or stem collar as possible .
all cuts shall be made in a manner which prevents damage to the bark .
broken roots shall be pruned on the plant side of the break .
the foregoing shall be performed at the time of planting .
die back shall be pruned before final acceptance .
pruning shall not deform nor destroy the typical shape or symmetry of the plant .
the leader of the tree shall not be cut unless directed by the engineer .
all pruning tools shall be disinfected sharp and approved by the engineer .
tree paint shall not be used on any cuts except on quercus species with a cut of num inch and greater .
l.num cleanup .
all areas disturbed by planting operations shall be left in a clean and orderly condition .
excess soil and rubbish shall be disposed of in a legal off site location .
all grasses or sodded areas disturbed shall be restored to a condition satisfactory to the engineer but shall be no less than the condition prior to the planting operation .
all reseeding or sodding shall be in accordance with sections l.num and l.num respectively of these specifications .
l.num antidesiccant application .
antidesiccant shall be applied to plant material as specified and under the following conditions a .
spring applications .
all evergreen and deciduous plant material trees shrubs and vines planted during the spring season on exposed andor windy site or as directed by the engineer shall receive an application of antidesiccant within ten days after the planting operation .
antidesiccant shall not be applied during periods when the temperature is numof or hotter .
b .
fall applications .
all evergreen plant material trees shrubs and vines regardless of time of planting or planted location shall receive an application of antidesiccant between november num and december num .
lnum all antidesiccant applications shall be in accordance with the manufacturer direction for mixture and temperature range and shall not be applied in the rain .
antidesiccant application shall cover all sides of the leaf or needle .
l.num oneyear establishment period .
all plant material shall receive a oneyear establishment guarantee period .
during this time the contractor shall employ currently accepted horticultural practices to keep all plant material installed in a living healthy condition up to the date of final acceptance which shall be one full calendar year following the satisfactory completion of the planting activities as confirmed in writing by the engineer .
during this period the contractor shall water weed cultivate prune mulch and repair replace or readjust guy webbing and stakes as may be required or as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall reshape plant saucers repair wash outs and gullies replace lost mulch keep all planting sites free from weeds and do other work necessary to maintain the plant material in a healthy growing condition .
all dead dying or rejected plant material as determined by the engineer shall be promptly removed from the project during the period of establishment and shall be replaced by the contractor in kind quantity and size as originally specified with live healthy specimens selected and planted in accordance with these specifications .
all replacement plant material shall from the time of installation receive a oneyear establishment period in accordance with this subsection .
a .
failure to perform oneyear establishment period .
if the engineer decides that the oneyear establishment period tasks in the contract have not been adequately performed as specified the daily charge set forth in special provision code l.num will be deducted from monies due the contractor as a charge for failure to comply with this specification .
moreover the stated daily charge will continue each consecutive calendar day thereafter until the deficiencies noted have been corrected to the complete satisfaction of the engineer .
l.num method of measurement .
planting will be measured by the number of each tree shrub vine perennial ornamental grass groundcover or bulb of the specified kinds and sizes actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
l.num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of planting of the various types will be paid for at the contract unit price per each such type as listed in the proposal .
the price so stated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment including the oneyear establishment period and all other incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section l.num extended establishment period l.num description .
this work will supersede the requirements of subsection l.num oneyear establishment period of these specifications .
it consists of performing currently accepted horticultural practices to keep all plant material installed in a living healthy condition up lnum until the date of final acceptance which date shall be three full calendar years following the satisfactory completion of the planting activities as confirmed in writing by the engineer .
any horticultural andor arboricultural techniques not specified herein must be approved by the engineer .
all persons acting as forepersons to the landscape establishment crews must have a current rhode island arborist license and commercial applicators license and shall be on site at all times during work activities .
l.num materials .
water fertilizer preemergent herbicide mulch antidesiccants stakes guy webbing and plant material shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num landscaping materials .
l.num construction methods .
l.num general .
this work shall consist of the establishment of previously planted trees shrubs vines perennials ornamental grasses ground covers bulbs and wildflowers as shown on the plans in accordance with these specifications andor at the direction of the engineer .
establishment tasks shall include but shall not be limited to watering weeding mulching fertilization pruning mowing and replacement of dead dying or rejected plant material .
a. submittal .
the contractor shall submit to the engineer at the start of each year a schedule of work for establishment activities for that year .
b .
landscape establishment crew .
the contractor shall employ one or more landscape establishment crews during the contract period .
all crews shall be under the direct supervision of a person who shall possess a current rhode island arborist license .
individual crew members shall be trained in current horticultural practices .
landscape establishment crews shall be responsible for manual andor mechanical weed control pruning inspection and removal of dead or damaged plant material planting watering mulching and fertilization .
l.num watering .
watering of all plant material shall be performed once every two weeks for a total of thirteen times during each contract year from june num through october num .
wildflower areas shall be watered once a month during each contract year from june num through october num for a total of five waterings .
at each watering the soil around each plant shall be thoroughly saturated .
the following is a general guide for minimum water requirements trees num½ caliper and less fifteen num gallons each .
num to num caliper twenty num gallons each .
num½ caliper and above twentyfive num gallons each .
shrubs num and less six num gallons each .
more than num ten num gallons each .
lnum vines perennials ornamental grasses three num gallons each .
bulbs and ground covers two num gallons per square foot .
wildflower areas one num gallon per square foot .
water shall be applied at a controlled rate and in such a manner to insure that the water reaches to root zone saucer of the plant or plant bed and does not run off to nor flood adjacent areas .
watering shall not dislodge plants erode soil or mulch or cause damage to the saucer berm .
each saucer or planting bed shall be completely saturated before moving on to the next site .
the overhead hydroseeder spray nozzles shall not be used as a watering device .
the hydroseeder can be used to transport and store water for watering operations and when a hose and nozzle are properly attached and approved by the engineer can be used for watering operations .
all watering shall be completed regardless of weather conditions unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
l.num mulching .
mulch shall be placed during the second year of the establishment period on all individual plants and plant beds or as directed by the engineer .
prior to placement all weeds stones and other extraneous material shall be removed .
the contractor shall apply pre emergent weed control around all individual plants and plant beds to be mulched .
preemergent weed control shall be applied by licensed rhode island commercial applicator and at a rate in accordance with manufacturers instructions .
the type of mulch pine bark or woodchips shall be as specified on the plans and in accordance with the requirements of paras .
a and b of subsection l.num of these specifications .
the amount of new mulch shall result in a finish depth of num inches of mulch old and new or as directed by the engineer .
wildflower areas shall not be mulched .
l.num fertilization .
fertilizer shall be applied during the first and third year of the establishment period on all individual plants and plant beds or as directed by the engineer .
fertilization shall occur between april num and june num only .
fertilizer shall be broadcast over all individual plants and plant beds at a rate of num ounce per square foot .
wildflower areas shall not be fertilized .
l.num weed control .
the landscape establishment crew shall manually remove all weed growth including grass and litter from individual plants and planting beds .
woody growth vines and other undesirable volunteers shall be removed and legally disposed of .
the contractor shall remove all woody growth vines and litter from wildflower areas .
weed control activities shall be performed in such a manner not to disturb or destroy plant material or mulched areas .
l.num pruning .
pruning of all plants shall be performed in accordance with subsection l.num of these specifications .
l.num insect and disease control .
periodic inspection of all plantings by trained personnel is necessary to detect problems during early stages of insect infestations or disease infections .
application of all chemicals including insecticides and fungicides shall be carried out in lnum accordance with rhode island state laws and only by individuals with current rhode island pesticide applicators license and shall be approved of by the engineer prior to application .
l.num stake and guy inspection and removal .
during the first year any broken stakes andor guy webbing shall be replaced or repaired .
after the first year the contractor shall remove all stakes and guy webbing .
the engineer shall determine individual plants which will have stakes and guy webbing remaining beyond the first year .
the contractor shall remove these stakes and guy webbing only at the request of the engineer .
l.num inspection removal and replacement of dead or damaged plant material .
the contractor shall remove all dead or damaged plant material as determined by the engineer .
removed material shall be replaced by the contractor in kind quantity and size as originally specified with live healthy specimens selected and planted in accordance with section l.num planting .
all replaced plant material shall be subject to the requirements of this section l.num up to and until the end of this activity .
l.num failure to perform extended establishment period .
if the engineer decides that the extended establishment period tasks in the contract have not been adequately performed as specified the daily charge set forth in special provision code l.num will be deducted from monies due the contractor as a charge for failure to comply with this specification .
moreover the stated daily charge will continue each consecutive calendar day thereafter until the deficiencies noted have been corrected to the complete satisfaction of the engineer .
l.num method of measurement .
l.num extended establishment period .
the extended establishment period shall be measured for payment per month for eight months during the work season in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
l.num watering .
watering shall be measured for payment per gallon actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
l.num basis of payment .
l.num extended establishment period .
the extended establishment period shall be paid for at the contract unit price per month for eight months during the work season as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipments and for all incidentals required to finish the work completed and accepted by the engineer .
l.num watering .
watering shall be paid for at the contract unit price per gallon as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
lnum section l.num tree and shrub trimming l.num description .
l.num tree and shrub trimming .
this work consists of removing and disposing of all dead wood stubs broken or damaged branches and stems undesirable branches and stems from existing trees and shrubs as indicated on the plans in accordance with these specifications or as directed by the engineer .
l.num tree trimming for utilities .
this work consists of removing and disposing of all dead wood stubs broken or damaged branches and stems undesirable branches and stems from existing trees for the sole purpose of utility relocation as indicated on the plans andor as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
l.num materials .
all materials shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num landscaping materials .
l.num construction methods .
all tree and shrub trimming and the trimming for utilities shall be performed in accordance with currently accepted horticultural practice .
all trimming shall be performed by or under the direct supervision of a rhode island licensed arborist .
this work consists of removing and disposing of all dead wood stubs broken or damaged branches and stems undesirable branches and stems from existing trees and shrubs as shown on the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
any and all branches interfering with or hindering the healthy growth of the tree or shrubs shall be removed and disposed of .
any branches which may be partially dead yet has a healthy lateral branch at least onethird the diameter of the parent branch shall be removed only beyond the healthy branch .
all branches interfering with overhead clearance of vehicles or with lines of sight shall be removed as directed .
all cuts shall be made parallel to and as close to the branch or stem collar as possible .
all cuts shall be made in a manner which prevents damage to the bark .
pruning shall not deform nor destroy the typical shape or symmetry of the tree or shrub .
all cuts shall be made with disinfected sharp tools which shall be approved by the engineer .
tree paint shall not be used on any cuts .
the use of climbing irons or other equipment injurious to trees shall not be permitted .
l.num method of measurement .
l.num tree and shrub trimming .
tree and shrub trimming will be measured by the number of manhours actually employed in trimming in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
lnum l.num tree trimming for utilities .
tree trimming for utilities will be measured by the number of crewhours actually employed in trimming in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
l.num basis of payment .
l.num tree and shrub trimming .
the accepted quantity of tree and shrub trimming will be paid for at the contract unit price per manhour as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
l.num tree trimming for utilities .
the accepted quantity of tree trimming for utilities will be paid for at the contract unit price per crewhour as listed in the proposal .
the price so stated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section l.num selective clearing l.num description .
this work consists of the removal and legal disposal of trees shrubs vines and stumps within the area shown on the plans in accordance with these specifications or as directed by the engineer .
l.num materials .
herbicides shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num landscaping materials .
l.num construction methods .
all trees shrubs vines and other plant materials to remain shall be designated in the field by the engineer .
the remaining trees shrubs vines and stumps shall be cut off flush with ground .
trunks and branches over num inches in caliber shall be stacked as cordwood in numfoot lengths or disposed of according to subsection num clearing and grubbing of these specifications .
small branches leaves and other refuse shall be removed and legally disposed of .
all poison ivy bull briar or other noxious weeds remaining in these areas shall receive a foliar spray of a nonselective herbicide .
application shall be carried out in accordance with the rhode island state laws .
nonselective herbicides shall be applied by a licensed rhode island commercial applicator in accordance with manufacturers instructions and shall be approved by the engineer .
all dead trees shall be removed from the area .
work shall be performed in a manner directed at enhancing the area and the remaining natural growth shall be left undisturbed .
lnum l.num method of measurement .
selective clearing will be measured by the number of acres and fractions thereof actually cleared and cleaned up in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
the bounds for such acreage shall be established on the ground by flagging or as otherwise directed by the engineer .
in no case shall an area designated as a clearing and grubbing area be included in measurements for payment under this item .
l.num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of selective clearing will be paid for at the contract unit price per acre as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section l.num tree and shrub root pruning l.num description .
this work consists of both mechanical and manual pruning of existing tree and shrub roots in order to allow for the installation of new roadway and roadway features without causing extensive damage to the root systems of nearby plant materials .
pruning work shall be as performed at the locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
l.num materials .
all materials shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num landscaping materials .
l.num construction methods .
the contractor shall notify the engineer num hours prior to commencement of this work .
all work shall take place in the presence of the engineer .
l.num pruning dates .
mechanical and manual tree and shrub pruning shall take place between august num and june num of the following year .
l.num mechanical root pruning .
this work shall proceed prior to any excavation work within the project limits .
roots which are found during excavation outside the designated mechanical root pruning area may require hand pruning at the discretion of the engineer .
the machinery to be used shall be a vermeer crlnum rockwheel the vermeer vnuma root cutter or an approved equal .
trencher equipment shall not be permitted .
all hand equipment must be disinfected sharp and be approved by the engineer .
mechanical root pruning shall take place num to num inches from the edge of any proposed excavation or as designated on the plans .
the areas to be pruned will be field located prior to commencement of this item by the contractor and the engineer .
lnum the cut made by the specified machinery shall be num to num inches wide and num to num inches deep .
the length shall be as delineated on the plans .
paint shall not be used on wounds caused by pruning .
l.num manual root pruning .
this work shall proceed prior to any excavation work within the project limits .
manual root pruning shall be delineated in the field by the engineer prior to commencement .
however manual root pruning limits may be extended to other areas at the discretion of the engineer .
manual root pruning shall be performed with hand equipment that is disinfected sharp and approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall carefully hand dig the soil from the delineated area taking care not to rip or otherwise damage the roots during the excavation process .
once located the roots shall be completely exposed by hand and cleanly cut using hand pruning equipment .
pruning shall be performed immediately following the exposure of roots .
after pruning the exposed roots shall be covered with existing soil and lightly tamped to remove air pockets .
no roots shall be exposed longer than one hour .
l.num method of measurement .
mechanical tree and shrub root pruning and manual tree and shrub root pruning will be measured by the number of linear feet of each item actually pruned in accordance with the plans or as directed by the engineer .
l.num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of mechanical tree and shrub root pruning and manual tree and shrub root pruning will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
no payment will be made for work performed when the engineer is not present .
section l.num tree and shrub protection device l.num description .
l.num tree protection device .
this work consists of applying wood framing around the trunk or trunks of the tree from the ground level to the height of num feet as indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
l.num shrub protection device .
this work consists of applying standardized snow fencing around shrubs in a circumferential manner as indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
lnum l.num dripline tree protection device .
this work shall consist of applying standardized snow fencing around the dripline of trees in a circumferential manner as indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
l.num materials .
l.num tree protection device .
wood framing shall consist of nominal lumber num feet in length the width and thickness shall vary from num x num to num x num depending on trunk diameter .
binding material shall consist of single strand numgauge wire or numinch strapping .
l.num shrub protection device .
fencing shall consist of standardized snow fencing .
the contractor shall utilize standard steel posts in maintaining the position of the fencing .
the steel post shall be a minimum of num feet in length .
l.num dripline tree protection device .
materials shall be as indicated above in subsection l.num for shrub protection devices .
l.num construction methods .
l.num tree protection device .
the wood framing shall be placed around the trunk in sufficient quantity to protect the trunk from mechanical damage wood framing members shall not be spaced greater than num inches apart .
the binding material shall be tight to prevent the wood from moving .
the binding material shall not come in contact with the trunk or any portion of the tree .
under no circumstance shall nails or any other type of fastener enter the tree .
the wood framing shall be removed and legally disposed of when all mechanical work within the surrounding area has been completed .
l.num shrub protection device .
the snow fencing shall be placed around the shrub in a circumferential manner assuring a numfoot clearance between the face of the fence and outer face of the shrub .
if a numfoot clearance is not possible the fence shall be located as close to the shrub as needed without touching the shrub .
the fence shall not be secured to the shrub in any manner .
the contractor shall utilize standard steel posts to support the snow fence .
at no time shall restraining lines be secured to the shrub or to surrounding vegetative growth .
the fencing shall be removed when all mechanical work within the surrounding areas has been completed .
l.num dripline tree protection device .
the snow fencing shall be placed around the drip line of the tree in the same manner as indicated above in subsection l.num for shrub protection devices .
l.num method of measurement .
l.num tree protection device .
tree protection device will be measured by the number of each such unit actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
lnum l.num shrub protection device .
shrub protection device will be measured by the number of linear feet actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
l.num dripline tree protection device .
dripline tree protection device will be measured by the number of linear feet actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
l.num basis of payment .
l.num tree protection device .
the accepted quantity of tree protection device will be paid for at the contract unit price per each such unit as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment removal and disposal and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
l.num shrub protection device .
the accepted quantity of shrub protection device will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment removal and disposal and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
l.num dripline tree protection device .
the accepted quantity of dripline tree protection device will be paid at the contract unit price per linear foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment removal and disposal and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
section l.num tree cutout paving l.num description .
this work consists of furnishing and installing paving materials cut granite granite cobbles concrete pavers and brick pavers in tree cutouts around existing or new trees as indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
l.num materials .
paving material cut granite granite cobbles concrete pavers brick pavers landscape filter fabric and stone fines shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num landscaping materials .
l.num construction methods .
l.num preparation .
prior to the installation of the landscape filter fabric the contractor shall insure that the subbase is at the required depth to accommodate the landscape filter fabric stone lnum fines bedding and proposed paver material to meet the finish grade .
the subgrade shall be compacted to num percent of maximum density as set forth in subsection num compaction general of these specifications .
subgrade irregularities humps or depressions greater than numinch in the line and grade shall be corrected during the installation of the stone fines bedding or by adjusting the subgrade with additional backfill mix .
l.num installation .
the contractor shall install in two pieces the landscape filter fabric over the entire tree cutout area .
each piece shall be cut to allow for the tree trunk .
all joints shall overlap by num inches .
the landscape filter fabric shall be installed in such a manner that the edges on all sides shall extend vertically around the perimeter of the tree cutout to num inch of the finish grade .
the stone fines setting bed shall be placed and compacted to a finished thickness of num inch .
compaction shall be by a mechanical vibrator resulting in a compaction of num percent of maximum density .
once compacted the top numinch shall be loosened with a hand rake .
the contractor shall place the paving material as shown on the plans .
pavers shall be tamped firmly into the stone fine bedding and shall meet the required finish grade .
pavers shall be spaced a minimum of numinch and a maximum of numinch apart .
where the geometry of paving area does not allow receiving full size units or pavers require fitting against the edges the paver shall be cut .
all pavers shall be saw cut to straight and even surfaces without chipping .
pavers with chips cracks andor irregularities as a result of saw cutting shall not be permitted .
once the tree cutout has been paved the contractor shall spread a thin layer of stone fine bedding over the paver surface .
the stone fine material shall be hosed andor broomed into the joints between pavers and pavers and trees .
once all joints have been filled the contractor shall sweep clean all pavers and surrounding surfaces .
l.num method of measurement .
tree cutout paving will be measured by the number of square feet of such paving actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
l.num basis of payment .
the accepted quantity of tree cutout paving will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
pavers with chips cracks voids or other defects shall not be accepted and shall be replaced at the expense of the contractor .
lnum section l.num tree wells and tree walls l.num description .
this work consists of constructing tree wells in areas where the existing grade is to be filled and tree walls in areas where the existing grade is to be cut .
tree wells andor tree walls shall be constructed in accordance with the lines and grades shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer all in accordance with these specifications .
l.num materials .
stone shall conform to the requirements for stone rubble as set forth in section m.num stone for masonry of these specifications .
the following additions shall also apply all new face stones shall match the shape color size texture and geological composition of stones found in adjacent or adjoining walls .
gravel borrow backfill shall conform to the applicable requirements of section m.num borrow and aggregates of these specifications .
mortar shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
weep hole pipe shall be schedule num perforated pvc pipe color gray .
l.num construction methods .
l.num tree walls .
the location of the face of the tree wall shall be measured from the trunk of the tree .
this measurement shall be equal to onethird the distance from the tree trunk to the trees dripline or as directed by the engineer .
once the tree wall location has been approved by the engineer the contractor shall prune the trees root .
the location of the root pruning operation shall be equal to the width of the tree wall footing plus num foot .
root pruning limits shall be between the wall and tree trunk and shall extend the entire length of the wall .
the depth of the root pruning shall be num to num inches .
all root pruning operations shall be performed in accordance with section l.num of these specifications .
l.num tree wells .
the location of the face of the tree well shall be measured from the trunk of the tree and shall be a minimum of num feet .
excavation for the tree well footing shall be no deeper than num inches .
the width of excavation shall be equal to the width of the footing plus num inches measured from the face of the tree well .
l.num wall construction .
tree walls and tree wells shall be constructed in accordance with section num stone masonry walls with the following additions lnum the contractor shall lay stones in a manner which matches the character of the adjacent or adjoining walls .
mortar joints shall be deep raked to num inches measured from the face of the wall .
weep holes for tree wells shall be located num feet on center and num inches above the existing grade .
weep holes for tree walls shall be num feet on center and num inches above the proposed grade at the face of the wall .
l.num method of measurement .
tree wells and tree walls shall be measured by the number of cubic yards of each item actually installed in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
l.num basis of payment .
the accepted quantities of tree wells and tree walls will be paid for at their respective contract unit prices per cubic yard as listed in the proposal .
the prices sostated constitute full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
root pruning shall be measured and paid for in accordance with the requirements of section l.num tree and shrub root pruning .
section l.num herbicide l.num description .
l.num preemergent herbicide application in mulch areas .
this work consists of the application of a preemergent herbicide on areas to be mulched as part of new planting operations or previously mulched areas to prevent new weed growth within the limits of the contract all in accordance with these specifications .
l.num nonselective and preemergent herbicide application .
this work consists of the application of either a nonselective herbicide or a preemergent herbicide or both herbicides to any areas where weeds are to be killed within the limits of the project all in accordance with these specifications .
l.num materials .
nonselective and preemergent herbicides applied shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection m.num herbicides .
l.num construction methods .
l.num preemergent herbicide application in mulch areas .
after the completion of mulching operations the contractor shall apply a preemergent herbicide on all mulch areas as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
lnum the rate of application shall be in accordance with manufacturers guidelines and approved by the engineer .
all work under this item must be performed by or under the direct supervision of a rhode island licensed commercial applicator .
l.num nonselective and preemergent herbicide application .
the contractor shall apply these two herbicides to any area where weeds are to be killed within the limits of the project .
the chemicals can be applied in either separate applications or in one combined application .
the rate of application for each chemical will be in accordance with manufacturers directions and approved by the engineer .
all work under this item must be performed by or under the direct supervision of a rhode island licensed commercial applicator .
l.num method of measurement .
l.num preemergent herbicide application in mulch areas .
preemergent herbicide application in mulch areas for previously mulched areas will be measured by the number of square yards actually applied in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
a .
new planting operations .
preemergent herbicide applications in mulch areas for new planting operations will not be measured separately but shall be included in the measurement for the individual plant material .
l.num nonselective and preemergent herbicide application .
nonselective and pre emergent herbicide application will be measured by the number of square yards actually applied in accordance with the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
l.num basis of payment .
l.num preemergent herbicide application in mulch areas .
the accepted quantity of preemergent herbicide application in mulch areas for previously mulched areas will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
l.num nonselective and preemergent herbicide application .
the accepted quantity of nonselective and preemergent herbicide application will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as listed in the proposal .
the price sostated constitutes full and complete compensation for all labor materials and equipment and for all incidentals required to finish the work complete and accepted by the engineer .
mnum division iii part m materials section m.num borrow and aggregates m.num common borrow .
common borrow shall be gravelly in nature and shall conform to the minimum test data as specified below .
num .
boulders retained on a numinch sieve up to num inches in diameter and not exceeding threequarters of the thickness of horizontal layers placed after compaction as specified in subsection num para .
c are included for use in construction .
however these sizes are not included in the analysis for gradation .
num .
the material shall contain not more than num percent by weight passing the no .
num sieve .
m.num gravel borrow .
gravel borrow shall consist of bank run sand and gravel or plant processed crushed or uncrushed gravel with fine aggregate added as filler .
alternatively gravel borrow may consist of selected materials which have been reclaimed from within project limits are proportioned and processed to produce granular material for reuse as gravel borrow within the source project limits .
gravel borrow whether consisting of bank run or plant processed sand and gravel or reclaimed and processed granular material shall consist of sound durable particles free from loam clay organic soil vegetative matter soft and elongate particles .
m.num bank run or plantprocessed sand and gravel .
bank run or plantprocessed sand and gravel proposed for gravel borrow shall be wellgraded and meet the gradation requirements specified in column ia table i in subsection m.num .
in addition the maximum particle size shall not exceed num inches or threefourths of the loose lift thickness whichever is smaller .
m.num reclaimed and processed granular material .
gravel borrow may be produced by reclamation of selected materials available within project limits or other sources as approved by the engineer which are suitably proportioned and processed to produce a mixture of granular particles meeting the gradation requirements specified herein .
suitable materials may include natural granular soils boulders or rock roadway subbase base and asphalt or concrete pavement and other concrete stone brick or cinder block recovered from existing foundations buildings or selected utilities .
materials not allowed for reclamation shall include but are not limited to rubber plastic glass wood reinforcing steel or other metallic materials building materials which may be sources of lead or asbestos components of septic leaching bed and sanitary sewer systems mnum including soils pipes and structural concrete soils or other materials contaminated by synthetic organic or inorganic compounds metals or petroleum hydrocarbon products .
processing shall crush or pulverize and break down asphalt concrete conglomerations such that only bituminous coatings remain on aggregates .
all materials suitable for reuse shall be broken down such that the processed mixture shall meet the gradation requirements specified in column ib table i in subsection m.num .
m.num pervious fill .
pervious fill shall be clean naturally occurring granular bank run or plant processed soil materials .
pervious fill shall meet the gradation requirements of column iv table i in subsection m.num .
the minimum permeability coefficient k of pervious fill shall be num x num c.p.s .
as determined by a constant head permeometer aashto tnum .
m.num bedding material .
except as otherwise provided for in the special provisions andor on the plans bedding material shall consist of gravel borrow or crushed stone or crushed or screened gravel .
gravel borrow bedding material shall conform to the gradation requirements of column i table i in subsection m.num except that num percent by weight shall pass the num½inch sieve .
crushed stone and crushed or screened gravel bedding shall consist of the following gradation num percent shall pass the num½inch sieve and zerotonum percent shall pass the num sieve .
m.num coarse aggregate for bituminous concrete and portland cement concrete .
m.num general requirements .
aggregates accepted for state project use shall meet the applicable requirements of the department and aashto mnum mnum mnum specifications except where amended or noted herein .
crushed quarry rock and processed crushed andor screened gravel aggregates shall be durable and shall not be weathered such that they degrade with handling and working and shall be kept free of deleterious or organic matter .
coarse aggregates shall meet the particular los angeles abrasion and crushing criteria specified in table ii subsection m.num for use in asphalt or portland cement concrete and shall meet the criteria for soundness in subsection m.num as measured by sodium sulfate loss .
aggregates shall be resistant to degradation by freeze and thaw and resistant to acid attack .
if lithology or physical character indicate that aggregates may be susceptible to degradation by freezethaw or acid attack or potentially adversely reactive with portland cement the department may require additional appropriate laboratory testing be performed to demonstrate that the aggregate is suitable for the intended use .
mnum at least once a year the department shall test and evaluate each singlesource aggre gate to be provided by all producers supplying state contracts .
m.num singlesource requirements and blending policy .
each aggregate supply submitted for use in bituminous or portland cement concrete mixes shall have been produced from either quarry rock or natural gravel obtained from one distinct quarry source or natural gravel source whose location and boundaries are defined .
blends of gravel aggregates from more than one source blends of crushed quarry rock from more than one source or blends of gravel with crushed rock which are produced by mixing these materials at the crusher feed shall not be acceptable for use on state projects .
controlled blending of approved aggregates at the asphalt or concrete production plants of different aggregate types andor aggregates from different sources will be allowed provided that each aggregate type from each separate source is stockpiled in a separate bin at the production plant and the los angeles abrasion and soundness values of each aggregate type from each source meets the criteria established for that type and for the intended asphalt pavement application or concrete use .
the department would require submittal of a separate mix design for each proposed coarse aggregate blend for review prior to approval .
m.num definitions of quarry rock and gravel sources .
a .
quarry rock source .
a quarry rock source shall mean a distinct stated location at which extensive intact consolidated bedrock of igneous metamorphic or sedimentary type is or may be exposed by clearing and removal of overlying soil and boulder cover material and from which exposed bedrock is then extracted by blasting or other mechanical means from a working face bench or floor level and reduced in size for final crushing and processing for the production of crushed quarry rock aggregates .
b. gravel source .
a gravel source shall mean a distinct stated location at which clay to bouldersized materials which may occur as mixedsize or stratified natural deposits are or may be exposed by clearing stripping and removal of vegetation topsoil and organic soils and are then excavated using conventional mechanical excavating equipment for the production of crushed andor screened gravel aggregates .
m.num definitions of aggregate types .
coarse aggregate shall be classified as crushed quarry rock or processed gravel as defined below .
a .
crushed quarry rock .
crushed quarry rock shall be coarse aggregate consisting of num percent crushed bedrock produced by crushing bedrock extracted from a singlesource quarry location .
crushed quarry rock aggregate shall be processed separately from overburden soil deposits shall not contain crushed or uncrushed gravel and shall be free of deleterious material or soft friable particles .
b .
processed gravel .
processed gravel shall be coarse aggregate produced by crushing andor screening naturally occurring boulder cobble and gravelsized materials extracted from a single source location .
processed gravel shall be free of deleterious material or soft friable particles .
mnum m.num keystone .
keystone or chipstone used for keying bases and pavements and cover stone for seal coats shall consist of crushed quarry rock or crushed gravel and shall conform to the gradation requirements of either column iii or vi table i subsection m.num gradation of aggregates .
abrasion and soundness shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsections m.num and m.num respectively .
keystone shall consist of at least num percent crushed particles cover stone shall consist of num percent crushed particles .
m.num filter stone .
filter stone for underdrains shall conform to the gradation require ments of column v table i subsection m.num .
soundness shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection m.num .
m.num fine aggregate .
fine aggregate used for asphalt or portland cement concrete shall meet the general requirements of subsections m.num and m.num para .
b of these specifications and shall conform to the requirements for singlesource origin production and blending as described above in subsection m.num .
fine aggregate used for filler or seal coat cover shall consist of clean hard durable particles that meet the requirements of aashto mnum .
m.num gradation of aggregates .
aggregates for use in base and subbase courses and other applications shall conform to the gradation requirements indicated in the following table i .
table i gradation percent passing i ii iii iv v vi gravel borrow crushed ia ib stone bank run reclaimed or sieve proc sand processed crushed pervious filter cover size gravel material gravel keystone fill stone stone num num num num num¼ num num num num½ num num num¼ num num num num num num num num num num ½ num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num mnum m.num abrasion and crushing requirements for coarse aggregates .
coarse aggregate to be used for asphalt or portland cement concrete may be either crushed quarry rock or processed gravel meeting the abrasion and crushed particlefracture face criteria in table ii on the following page .
abrasion resistance shall be determined by los angeles abrasion test aashto tnum .
table ii los angeles abrasion criteria portland cement concrete applications crushed quarry rock num max .
loss processed gravel num max .
loss crushing not required bituminous applications bituminous seal coats basebinder bituminous surface keystone aggregate type courses friction courses cover stone quarry rock num max.loss num max.loss num max.loss processed gravel num max.loss num max.loss num max.loss notes num num num notes crushing requirements for processed gravel for asphalt num base and binder courses num percent by weight particles with one or more fracture faces .
num surface and friction courses num percent by weight particles with at least one fracture face and num percent by weight particles with at least two fracture faces .
num keystone num percent crushed particles cover stone num percent crushed particles .
m.num soundness sodium sulfate .
aggregate materials shall have a maximum percentage loss of num percent as determined by the sodium sulfate test aashto tnum .
mnum section m.num portland cement concrete m.num hydraulic cement m.num portland cement .
portland cement shall conform both to the chemical and physical requirements of aashto mnum and be listed on the departments approved materials list .
in addition the cement shall conform to the following requirements num .
the cement shall not contain more than num percent by weight of alkalies calculated as the percentage of nanumo plus num times the percentage of knumo when determined by either direct intensity flame photometry or by the atomic absorption method .
the instrument and procedure used shall be qualified as to precision and accuracy in accordance with the requirements of astm cnum .
the engineer may raise the maximum alkali content of the cement to num percent for concrete that uses nonexpansive aggregate or aggregate considered innocuous based upon acceptable values for test methods astm cnum or aashto tnum .
test results must be submitted and approved by the engineer before this is permitted .
to propose an increase to maximum alkalies the contractor must submit an independent testing laboratory results of astm cnum potential alkali reactivity of aggregates mortar bar method or aashto tnum accelerated detection of potentially deleterious expansion of mortar bars due to alkalisilica reaction .
for either test mean expansion of the test specimens of less than num percent at num days from casting will suffice to indicate that the aggregate is nonreactive and will validate the use of a cement which has an alkali content not to exceed num percent by weight of alkalies .
if the astm cnum or aashto tnum test results do not indicate that the aggregate is non reactive or are inconclusive the contractor may submit to the engineer results of astm cnum potential alkalisilica reactivity of aggregates chemical method astm cnum potential alkali reactivity of cementaggregate combinations mortar bar method and astm cnum petrographic examination of aggregates for concrete .
petrographic analysis in accordance with astm cnum shall identify the constituents of the fine and coarse aggregate .
fine and coarse aggregate containing more than the following quantities of constituents shall be considered potentially reactive optically strained microfractured or microcrystalline quartz exceeding num percent a common constituent of granite and granite gneiss .
chert or chalcedony exceeding num percent .
tridymite or cristobalite exceeding num percent .
opal exceeding num percent .
natural volcanic glass in volcanic rocks exceeding num percent .
mnum mortar bar expansion measurements astm cnum are to be made at three months and at six months and the results shall be submitted to the engineer at those times .
the guidelines in the appendix to astm cnum standard specification for concrete aggregates will be followed to determine whether an aggregate is nonexpansive or innocuous .
the guidelines state that expansion will be considered excessive at three months if it exceeds num percent but that an expansion greater than num percent at three months will not be considered excessive if the six month expansion remains below num percent .
the petrographic examination cnum chemical method cnum and the sixmonth mortar bar expansion cnum will be definitive .
however interim acceptability based on the petrographic analysis the chemical method and the threemonth mortar bar expansion will be considered until the sixmonth test is complete .
such interim acceptance will be granted only when the previous years sixmonth mortar bar expansion results were satisfactory .
documentation from an independent laboratory certifying that the aggregate is non expansive and innocuous must be submitted to the engineer annually .
an acceptable independent testing laboratory shall conduct each test .
analysis to document alkali content and conformance to aashto mnum must be included on all mill test reports submitted to this office .
num .
the autoclave expansion shall not exceed num percent when tested in accordance with aashto tnum .
m.num blended hydraulic cements .
blended hydraulic cements shall both conform to the chemical and physical requirements of aashto mnum and be listed on the departments approved materials list .
m.num masonry cement .
masonry cement shall both conform to astm cnum and be listed on the departments approved materials list .
m.num fine aggregate for concrete .
fine aggregate for concrete shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum and shall consist of natural sand manufactured sand produced from larger aggregate or a combination thereof .
manufactured sand shall be graded with a minimum percentage of flat elongated particles .
all fine sand shall consist of hard strong durable particles which are free from coatings or any injurious materials and injurious amount of clay loam or other deleterious substances .
in addition the fine aggregate shall not contain substances which when mixed in portland cement concrete produce an unacceptable level of chloride ions in the final product .
substances that produce chloride ions shall be considered deleterious material .
any fine aggregate may be rejected if it is determined by the engineer to contain sufficient amounts of unsound or deleterious material to be harmful .
m.num fine aggregate for mortar .
fine aggregate for mortar shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum .
m.num coarse aggregate for concrete .
coarse aggregate shall consist of screened gravel crushed gravel or crushed quarry rock .
coarse aggregate for concrete shall conform to the mnum requirements of aashto mnum with the exception that grading shall conform to the requirements in the following tabulation gradation of coarse aggregate in terms of amounts finer than each laboratory sieve percent by weight sieve sizes _________________________________________________________________ aggregate num num½ num num ½ num no.num no.num no .
num size num½ num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ½ num num num num num num num num num num num coarse aggregate for portland cement concrete shall have a percent loss of not more than the following amounts as determined by aashto tnum los angeles abrasion test .
type of coarse aggregate percent loss max .
crushed quarry rock num screened or crushed gravel num m.num curing materials .
curing materials shall conform to the following requirements .
m.num burlap cloth .
burlap cloth made from jute or kenaf shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum class num or num .
burlap shall be clean and free from cuts tears uneven weaving and contaminants .
m.num sheet materials for curing concrete .
the use of waterproof paper is not allowed as a curing medium for portland cement concrete .
polyethylene film .
polyethylene film clear or white opaque shall conform to the test requirements of astm cnum .
plastic coated fiber blankets .
white plastic coated fiber blankets or white plastic coated absorbent synthetic fabric blankets shall conform to the test requirements of aashto mnum table num for whiteburlap polyethylene sheets for moisture loss and reflectance .
m.num liquid membrane curing compounds .
liquid membrane curing compounds shall be nonpigmentedchlorinated rubber baseclear and shall conform to aashto mnum .
curing compounds must be selected from the departments approved materials list .
the loss of water when tested as specified shall be not more than num kilograms per square meter in num hours nor more than num kilograms per square meter in num hours .
mnum m.num chemical admixtures .
calcium chloride in any form shall not be used in any portland cement concrete .
no chemical admixtures shall be used in the work unless they are approved by the engineer .
chemical admixtures shall be those listed on the departments approved materials list and shall conform to the requirements below chemical admixtures aashto mnum airentraining admixtures aashto mnum m.num mineral additives .
mineral additives shall be on the departments approved materials list and shall conform to the requirements indicated below .
m.num fly ash .
fly ash for replacement of portland cement shall conform to the chemical and physical requirements of aashto mnum class c or f except for the loss on ignition which is a maximum of num percent .
m.num silica fume .
silica fume shall conform to the chemical and physical requirements of aashto mnum .
m.num ground granulated blast furnace slag .
ground granulated blast furnace slag shall conform to the chemical and physical requirements of astm cnum grades num or num .
m.num water .
water used in mixing and curing of concrete shall be subject to approval and shall be reasonably clean and free of oil salt acid alkali sugar vegetable or other substance injurious to the finished project .
water shall be tested in accordance with aashto tnum .
water known to be of potable quality may be used without test .
where the source of water is relatively shallow the intake shall be so enclosed as to exclude silt mud grass or other foreign materials .
when comparative compressive tests are made in conformance with aashto tnum any indication of unsoundness marked change in time of setting or a reduction of more than num percent in mortar strength shall be sufficient cause for rejection of the water under test .
in all concrete work except for prestressed and posttensioned concrete the water shall not contain more than num parts per million of chlorides as cl nor more than num parts per million of sulfates as sonum .
in prestressed concrete work the water shall not contain more than num parts per million of chlorides as cl nor more than num parts per million of sulfates as sonum .
in no case shall the water contain an amount of impurities that will cause a change in the setting of portland cement .
mnum in addition to the above requirements water for curing concrete shall not contain any impurities in sufficient amounts to cause discoloration of the concrete or produce etching of the surface .
in addition to the foregoing requirements of this section such water shall not contain coloring agents or more than num parts per million of alkalies nanumknum as determined on the filtrate .
the specific gravity of such water mixture shall not exceed num and shall not vary more than num during any days operations .
m.num latex emulsion admixture .
formulated latex admixture shall be a nonhazardous film forming polymeric emulsion in water to which all stabilizers have been added at the point of manufacture and shall be homogeneous and uniform in composition .
the admixture shall have less than num ppm of total chloride ions .
only one brand shall be supplied .
a. latex .
the physical properties of the latex modifier shall conform to the following requirements polymer type styrene butadiene stabilizer a latex nonionic surfactants b portland cement composition poly dimethyl siloxane percent solids num num weight per gallon num lbs .
at numoc color white m.num concrete pavement joints .
m.num transverse and longitudinal joints .
these joints shall consist of load transfer devices poured joint seal and expansion joint filler .
expansion joint filler shall be preformed joint filler .
tie bars shall be deformed conforming to the requirements of aashto mnum or mnum except that rail steel shall not be used for bars that are to be bent and restraightened during construction .
dowel bars shall be plain round bars conforming to aashto mnum and mnum and shall be free from burring or other deformation restricting slippage in the concrete .
onehalf the length of each bar shall be treated with a bondbreaker material .
the sleeves for dowel bars shall be metal of an approved design to cover num inches plus or minus numinch of the dowel with a closed end and with a suitable stop to hold the end of the sleeve at least num inch from the end of the dowel bar .
mnum m.num joint materials for concrete pavements .
m.num preformed joint filler .
preformed joint filler shall conform to aashto mnum type ii expanded rubber specification astm dnum type numcnum or aashto mnum and mnum .
m.num poured joint sealer .
poured joint sealer shall be a rubber compound of the hot poured type conforming to the requirements of aashto mnum unless otherwise noted on the plans or special provisions .
m.num preformed neoprene compression seals and lubricant adhesive .
a. neoprene seals .
seals shall be preformed and manufactured using polychloroprene as the only base polymer .
the seal shall be free of curling pin holes and uncured areas and shall be uniform in all dimensions .
the accepted width and height of the seal shall not be less than the dimensions designated by the seal manufacturer and shall be known as the nominal width and nominal height .
the actual width of the seal shall not exceed the nominal width by more than num inch for seals up to num inches num inch for seals num to num inches .
in addition the actual height of a seal shall not exceed the nominal by more than num inch for seals num inches and less and num inch for larger seals .
the preformed compression seal shall be of adequate design and strength to prevent the intrusion of debris into a sealed joint through repeated cycles of expansion and contraction .
it shall function properly at all temperatures between numof and numof and shall collapse downward symmetrically along the vertical center plane of the seal design .
when the seal is in a compressed condition misalignment of the walls shall not exceed num inch for seals of nominal width num inches and less and num inch for seals of nominal width greater than num inches .
seals shall meet all physical requirements of aashto mnum astm dnum preformed polychloroprene elastomeric joint seals for concrete pavements except that seals of nominal width greater than num inches shall have a tensile strength of not less than num psi .
the compression deflection characteristics of the fabricated seal shall be determined using astm dnum method a .
test specimens shall be num inches in length for seals num inches and less in nominal width and num inches for seals of nominal width greater than num inches .
seals shall be conditioned through six complete cycles of compression and all readings taken on the seventh cycle .
at num percent compression of the nominal width seals num inches and less shall exert a stress of not less than num pounds per linear inch per inch height of seal and have a safe compressibility of num percent or less of the nominal width .
seals of nominal width greater than num inches shall exert a stress of not less than num pounds per linear inch per inch height of seal at num percent compression and have a safe compressibility of num percent or less of the nominal width .
the maximum safe compressibility is that point in compression where the air voids are closed and the elastometer itself is in compression .
the maximum safe compressibility shall not exceed num pounds per linear inch per inch height of seal at the above stated safe compressibility levels .
the compressiondeflection characteristic of the seal will be used to classify the seal according to movements of num num num and num inches .
no tolerance on movement classification will be permitted .
the movement of the seal as determined above shall exceed or be equal to its classification .
mnum each seal will be qualified for only one movement and will not be used for other movements .
b. lubricant adhesive .
a lubricant adhesive to aid in seal installation shall be approved by the engineer .
the lubricant adhesive shall be single component neoprene polymer with only necessary antioxidants and acid acceptors and shall be in a hydrocarbon solvent .
it shall remain fluid at temperatures between numof and numof and shall contain not less than num percent total solids by weight as determined by astm dnum .
the peel strength of the lubricant adhesive as determined by astm dnum shall be not more than num psi .
the lubricant adhesive shall be compatible with the preformed compression seals concrete asphalt sealing compounds and shall not be affected by moisture .
the lubricant shall have a minimum shelf life of nine months .
m.num silicone highway joint sealant .
the silicone joint sealant shall be a onepart silicone material that readily extrudes over a wide temperature range and cures to produce a durable flexible low modulus silicone rubber joint seal .
it shall have an extension recovery of num percent and a compression recovery of num percent of the original joint width .
the silicone sealant shall meet the requirements of federal specifications ttsnum a class a onepart silicone sealants and ttsnum c class a one component sealants .
limitations .
silicone sealant is not intended for continuous water immersion and it should not be applied in totally confined spaces where the sealant is not exposed to atmospheric moisture .
the sealant should never be applied to wet or damp surfaces nor should it be installed during inclement weather .
it shall be applied not thicker than ½inch and no thinner than numinch an approximate width to depth ratio of numtonum .
m.num joint materials for bridge structures .
the expansion contraction and construction joints in concrete and masonry construction shall be made with or without joint filler and sealed as shown on the plans .
m.num preformed expansion joint filler .
a. bituminous type .
this type of joint filler shall consist of preformed strips of a composition which shall conform to aashto mnum .
b. nonextruding and resilient type .
cork joint material shall conform to aashto mnum type ii or iii .
expanded rubber joint filler shall be preformed strips in the thickness as shown on the plans of durable elastic expanded rubber gray in color containing no reclaimed rubber or factice .
the expanded rubber joint filler shall conform with astm dnum type numcnum .
c. preformed polyethylene foam joint filler .
the preformed joint filler shall be a closed cell polyethylene foam material recommended for use in sealing expansion joints in concrete .
it shall be chemically resistant and capable of being used in conjunction with cold applied polymer sealants such as silicones polyurethanes and polysulfides .
the material shall be waterproof and shall remain flexible in cold weather .
mnum m.num joint seal poured and caulked types .
the grooves for joint seals shall be formed when the concrete is placed shall be wire brushed clean all dust blown free with compressed air shall be surface dry primed and filled with a poured or caulked joint seal as specified on the plans .
joint sealer shall be an approved poured or caulk type placed in accordance with the manufac turers recommendations .
a. silicone bridge joint sealant .
the requirements for silicone joint sealant for bridges is identical as that set forth for highways in subsection m.num of these specifications .
m.num mastic joint sealer .
mastic sealer shall conform to the following specifications a. primer .
the primer shall be a solution of gilsonite and petroleum asphalts and non oxidizing resinous plasticizers .
it shall neither contain tar nor be an emulsion .
it shall form a vapor resistant film when dry .
b. sealer .
the mastic extruded rope joint sealer shall be a material of uniform stiff consistency and shall contain no solvents .
the mastic shall when installed tenaciously adhere to primed concrete surfaces and shall remain permanently mastic and not contaminate potable water .
the material shall be of a type that will when properly installed effectively and permanently seal joints subject to movement in concrete .
m.num poured neoprene sealant type g. poured neoprene sealant shall be a two compound coldapplied selfleveling neoprene sealant .
m.num polyurethane joint sealant .
the polyurethane joint sealant shall be a onecomponent moisturecured highperformance premiumgrade nonsag elastomeric sealant .
it shall be designed for an extension and compression recovery of num percent maximum .
the polyurethane joint sealant shall meet the requirements of federal specifications ttsnumc type ii class a .
the color of the polyurethane joint sealant shall be limestone aluminum gray or precast at the discretion of the engineer .
m.num polyurethane elastomeric joint sealant .
the polyurethane elastomeric joint sealant shall be a twocomponent chemicallycured highperformance premiumgrade nonsag elastomeric sealant .
it shall be designed for an extension and compression recovery of num percent maximum .
the polyurethane elastomeric joint sealant shall meet the requirements of federal specifications ttsnume .
the color of the polyurethane elastomeric joint sealant shall be limestone aluminum gray or precast at the discretion of the engineer .
section m.num bituminous pavements m.num bituminous concrete pavement .
coarse and fine aggregates mineral filler and asphalt cement shall be combined to produce bituminous concrete pavements in accordance with the gradation requirements physical properties and test limits indicated in the following table .
surface courses friction courses sieve base binder bridge class inum size course course binder class inum or sidewalk dense ramp gradation percent passing by weight num¼ num num num num num num num num num num ½ num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num asphalt by weight num num num num num num num num num num num num num num marshall stability lbs.min .
num num num num num num num voids num num num num num num num num num num num min .
num min .
vfa num num num num num num num num flow numin num num num num num num num num num num num num mixing temp.of num num num num num num num compac tion blows at ea .
end .
num num num num num num num mnum mnum m.num materials .
m.num performancegraded asphalt cement .
a .
scope .
this specification covers performance graded asphalt cement for use in pavement construction .
b .
manufacture .
the asphalt cement shall be prepared from crude petroleum by suitable methods .
the supplier shall conform to the requirements of aashto rnum standard practice for certifying suppliers of performance graded asphalt binders and shall submit annually a quality control plan conforming to rnum .
approved temperatureviscosity charts and test data shall be provided by the supplier in accordance with these specifications .
c. requirements .
the asphalt cement shall be homogeneous free from water and shall not foam when heated to numoc numof .
the asphalt cement shall be sampled and tested in accordance with and meet all the requirements of aashto mpnuma for pg num binder .
m.num aggregate for bituminous pavements .
a. coarse aggregate .
coarse aggregate retained on the no .
num sieve shall be crushed stone or crushed gravel and unless otherwise stipulated shall conform to the respective requirements of subsections m.num m.num and m.num of these specifications .
b .
fine aggregate .
fine aggregate shall consist of sand stone screenings or a mixture of sand and stone screenings .
stone screenings and sands shall be free from dirt clay organic matter excess fines or other deleterious materials .
fine aggregates shall conform to the quality requirements of aashto mnum .
fine aggregate shall be of such gradation that when proportionally combined with other required aggregate fractions the resultant mixture will meet the gradation required under the composition of mixture for the specified class .
m.num filler .
filler material for use in asphalt mixtures shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum .
m.num bituminous material .
m.num asphalt cement shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num performance graded asphalt cement .
m.num medium curing cutback asphalt shall conform the requirements of aashto mnum .
m.num rapid curing cutback asphalt shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum .
mnum m.num emulsified asphalt shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum .
m.num high performance cold patching material .
m.num general requirements .
this material shall be a plant mixed high performance cold patching material composed of mineral aggregates a modified bituminous material and capable of storage in a stockpile for a minimum of one year .
the material shall be capable of being placed in all conditions including wet snow conditions with no pothole preparation and a minimum of labor including the shoveling of the material into the pothole and compacting with a truck tire .
m.num aggregates .
aggregates shall be obtained from a source approved by the department and shall satisfy all requirements of the manufacturer of the bituminous material who shall attest to the same .
a. coarse aggregate .
coarse aggregate shall be either crushed ledge crushed granite or crushed gravel and shall meet requirements of section m.num of these specifications for surface course aggregates .
b .
fine aggregate .
fine aggregate if used shall be natural sand stone screening or a blend of the two .
c. mineral filler .
mineral filler if used shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num filler .
m.num bituminous material .
the bituminous material shall be on the departments approved materials list for high performance cold patch .
m.num mixture .
a. proportioning .
the manufacturer of the bituminous material shall submit a master range and jobmix formula for the aggregate to be used .
in no case shall the tolerance for the percent passing a sieve exceed the following no .
num and larger num no .
num to no .
num num no .
num num b .
mix design .
the mix including the determination of the optimum bituminous material content shall be designed in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer of the bituminous material .
c. verification of mixture and mix design .
the contractor shall be required to submit samples of the following at least three weeks before production for verification testing num kg sample of the high performance cold patching mixture .
num kg sample of the coarse aggregate .
num kg sample of the fine aggregate if used .
num kg sample of the mineral filler if used .
num quart sample of the modified bituminous material .
mnum note the num kg sample of high performance cold patching mixture may be from a lab batch or a plant mix .
the contractor shall also submit at least three weeks before production copies of the bituminous material manufacturers results of the following tests num .
mixture static immersion aashto tnum boiling water immersion a num gram sample of completely coated mixture is immersed for num minutes in a beaker of boiling distilled water .
the sample is stirred at a rate of one revolution per second throughout the immersion period .
at the conclusion of this period the sample is drained and the percent of aggregate surface that remains coated is recorded .
there shall be a minimum numhour curing period from the time of mixing until this test is performed .
num .
coarse aggregate specific gravity and absorption aashto tnum sieve analysis aashto tnum washed sieve analysis aashto tnum los angeles abrasion aashto tnum sulfate soundness aashto tnum percent fractured particles based on a one fracture face b two or more fracture faces .
num .
fine aggregate if used specific gravity and absorption aashto tnum sieve analysis aashto tnum washed sieve analysis aashto tnum num .
mineral filler if used sieve analysis aashto tnum num .
bituminous material viscosity saybolt aashto tnum or kinematic aashto tnum d. mixture performance requirements .
num .
the aggregate shall be completely coated with bituminous material .
num .
the extracted gradation and bituminous material content shall conform to the requirements of the approved mix design .
num .
the retained coating shall be at least num percent when the mixture is tested for stripping by a static immersion aashto tnum b boiling water immersion above .
mnum m.num production methods .
production may commence only after the engineers acceptance and approval of the above required submittals .
the contractor shall be required to give the department two days notice prior to commencement of production .
a .
process control .
prior to and during production the contractor shall have at the mix production plant a qualified technical representative of the manufacturer of the bituminous material who in conjunction with the contractor shall be responsible for the process control during production .
in addition this representative in conjunction with the contractor shall be responsible for all production quality control .
this shall include but not be limited to the performance of all necessary tests checks and verifications on the aggregate bituminous components and mixture to insure product compliance .
furthermore it is imperative that only specified and approved materials shall be used and that the production process recommended by the manufacturer of the bituminous material shall be followed .
the process control of the bituminous material manufacturer shall include providing written instructions in conformance with his product literature for the proper production handling storage placement and utilization of the high performance cold patching material .
in addition a qualified technical representative of the bituminous material manufacturer shall be available for at least one day to instruct the applicator in the handling of the material and to observe placement of the same .
b .
acceptance testing .
acceptance testing will be performed by the engineer .
based on the acceptance tests and performance of the mixture the engineer shall accept or reject the mixture produced .
note acceptance of the material by the department will be undertaken only after satisfactory acceptance testing and performance of the mixture .
c. manufacture .
the mix shall be produced in an approved plant and in accordance with the relevant and applicable provisions of section num of these specifications and in strict accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
d. stockpiling .
the contractor shall stockpile the material in a manner and method that is not injurious to the mixture or its performance as a patching material .
the stockpile shall be kept free from all contamination .
stockpiling shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations with the exception that the material shall be able to be stockpiled either indoors or outdoors under naturally prevailing weather conditions .
section m.num drainage m.num concrete clay fiber and plastic pipe .
m.num nonreinforced concrete pipe .
pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum and section num of these specifications for the specified diameters and strength classes .
mnum m.num reinforced concrete pipe .
pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum and section num of these specifications for the specified diameters and strength classes .
elliptical pipe shall also conform to the requirements of aashto mnum .
unless otherwise specified pipe wall design and use of elliptical reinforcement in circular pipe are optional .
precast reinforced concrete end sections shall conform to the requirements of the cited specifications to the extent to which they apply .
m.num perforated concrete pipe .
pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum and section num of these specifications for the specified diameters and strength classes .
m.num concrete and clay drain tile .
pipe shall conform to the requirements of section num of these specifications and aashto mnum or mnum for the specified material diameters and quality classes .
when specified the pipe spigot shall have integral spacer lugs to provide for an annular opening and selfcentering feature .
m.num porous concrete pipe .
pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum and section num of these specifications for the specified diameters .
m.num vitrified clay lined reinforced concrete pipe .
designs for fully lined or half lined pipes of the specified strength classes shall be submitted by the manufacturer for approval .
the applicable requirements of section num aashto mnum and mnum shall govern .
liner or liner elements shall be vitrified clay of first quality sound thoroughly and perfectly burned without warps cracks or other imperfections and fully and smoothly salt glazed .. m.num clay pipe .
pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum for pipe with full circular cross section for the specified diameter and strength class .
when specified the bell shall have integral spacer lugs to provide for an annular opening and selfcentering feature .
m.num vitrified clay pipe .
pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum for the specified diameters and strength classes for circular unperforated pipe .
when so specified the bell shall have integral spacer lugs to provide for an annular opening and selfcentering feature .
m.num cradle invert clay pipe .
pipe shall conform to the applicable requirements of aashto mnum .
m.num plastic sewer pipe .
plastic sewer pipe to be used as pipe culvert shall conform to the applicable requirements of wwpnum gsafss and the following additional stipulations .
a .
purpose .
the purpose of this specification is to provide a standard for large diameter plastic sewer pipe jointed by means of solvent welding .
mnum b .
pipe sizes and dimensions .
num .
pipe shall be furnished in the following diameter size nominal o.d .
maximum wall nominal wall num num num num num .
standard length of plastic sewer pipe shall be num feet .
num .
pipe sections shall be furnished with a plastic sleeve coupling which may be solvent welded to the one end of the pipe section .
c. physical and chemical properties .
num .
crushing strength .
crushing strength of the finished pipe shall be a minimum of num pounds per linear foot as determined by astm cnum sand bearing method section num .
num .
straightness .
the maximum ordinate as measured from the concave side of the pipe must not exceed numinch per foot of pipe length .
num .
quality and appearance .
pipe shall be free from defects bubbles and other imperfections in accordance with accepted commercial practice .
num .
joint tightness .
solvent welded connections shall be capable of standing an internal pressure of num psi for a period of num hours without leakage .
m.num perforated corrugated polyethylene drainage pipe .
this classification of pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum and mnum .
m.num perforated and unperforated polyvinyl chloride pipe .
this classification of pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum .
m.num metal pipe .
m.num ductile iron pipe .
this pipe shall conform to the requirements of astm anum for the specified diameters and strength classes .
unless otherwise specified either smooth corrugated or ribbed pipe may be furnished .
pipe of diameter in excess of num inches shall conform to the usasi standard for cast iron pit cast pipe for the specified diameter and strength class .
m.num corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches .
these conduits and the coupling bands shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum for the specified sectional dimensions and gauges .
shopformed elliptical pipe and shopstrutted pipe shall be furnished where specified .
special sections such as elbows and flared end sections for these conduits shall be of the same gauge as the conduit to which they are joined and shall conform to the applicable requirements of aashto mnum .
mnum m.num bituminous coated corrugated metal pipe and pipe arches .
these conduits and the coupling bands shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum for the specified sectional dimensions gauges and type of bituminous coating .
coupling bands shall be fully coated with bituminous material .
shopformed elliptical pipe and shopstrutted pipe shall be furnished where specified .
special sections such as elbows and flared end sections for these conduits shall be of the same gauge as the conduit to which they are joined and shall conform to the applicable requirements of aashto mnum .
coating and invert paving shall be of the type specified .
m.num perforated corrugated steel pipe for underdrains .
pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum type iii for the specified diameters .
unless otherwise specified any one of four types may be furnished .
m.num bituminous coated perforated corrugated metal pipe for underdrains .
pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum and shall be coated with a type a coating installed on aashto mnum type iii pipe .
coupling bands shall be fully covered .
m.num corrugated aluminum pipe .
pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum and mnum .
special sections such as elbows and flared end sections for these conduits shall be of the same gauge as the conduit to which they are joined and shall conform to the applicable requirements of aashto mnum and mnum .
m.num perforated corrugated aluminum alloy pipe for underdrains .
pipe shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum and mnum .
special sections such as elbows and flared end sections for these conduits shall be of the same gauge as the conduit to which they are joined and shall conform to the applicable requirements of aashto mnum and mnum .
m.num smoothlined corrugated metal pipe .
smoothlined corrugated metal pipe shall be manufactured with a smooth metal interior liner and a corrugated exterior core helically wound and lockseamed to form a strong integrated mechanical bond .
liner and culvert are fabricated from aluminum or galvanized steel and may be asphalt coated or uncoated as shown on the plans .
the gauge of the outer core shall conform to aashto mnum for galvanized metal pipe and aastho mnum for aluminum alloy pipe .
special sections such as elbows and flared end sections for these conduits shall be of the same gauge as the conduit to which they are joined and shall conform to the applicable requirements of aashto mnum and mnum .
m.num cast iron soil pipe .
cast iron soil pipe shall conform to astm anum .
m.num pipe joints .
a .
joint mortar .
pipe joint mortar shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of this section .
mnum b .
rubber gaskets .
the ring gaskets shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum .
c. oakum .
oakum for joints shall be made of hemp line thoroughly corded and finished and free from lumps and dirt .
d. bituminous joint materials .
bituminous joint materials shall conform to subsection m.num of these specifications .
m.num catch basins manholes drop inlets paved waterways and miscella neous small structures .
the materials used for the construction of catch basins manholes drop inlets and paved waterways shall conform to the following requirements .
m.num clay brick .
brick shall conform to the requirements of one of the following specifications sewer brick aashto mnum grade ss or sm .
building brick aashto mnum grade sw. m.num bituminous concrete for paved waterways .
this material shall conform to the mix requirements for type inum pavement specified in subsection m.num of these specifications .
m.num concrete masonry blocks .
concrete masonry blocks may be rectangular or segmented and when specified shall have ends shaped to provide interlock at vertical joints .
the blocks shall conform to the requirements of astm cnum .
dimensions and tolerances shall be as individually specified .
m.num hydrated lime .
hydrated lime shall conform to the latest requirements of astm cnum type n. m.num mortar .
mortar shall consist of one num part masonry cement type n two num parts sand and if required by the engineer hydrated lime not to exceed num percent by volume of the cement used .
mortar sand shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum .
mortar shall be used within num minutes after its preparation .
m.num frames grates and covers and ladder rungs .
metal units shall conform to the plan dimensions and to the following specification requirements for the designated materials .
a .
gray iron castings shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum .
strength class shall be optional unless otherwise designated .
b. carbonsteel castings shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum .
grade shall be optional unless otherwise designated .
c. structural steel shall conform to the requirements of astm anum grade b or better .
mnum d. galvanizing where specified for these units shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum .
e. malleable iron castings shall conform to the requirements of astm anum .
grade shall be optional unless otherwise designated .
m.num concrete and steel reinforcing .
these materials shall conform to the requirements specified herein under section m.num portland cement concrete and section m.num metals .
section m.num metals mill test reports .
the contractor shall furnish certified copies in quadruplicate of mill test reports of metals used in the work .
the finished metal products shall be properly marked and identified for easy correlation with the mill test reports .
the chemical and physical properties of each heat of steel used shall conform to all the requirements of the relevant aashto or astm specifications .
m.num bar reinforcement .
all reinforcement shall be furnished as indicated on the plans .
reinforcing bars shall be deformed except that plain bars may be used for spirals and ties .
they shall be fabricated from new billet steel and shall conform to aashto mnum astm anum .
the grade shall be num unless otherwise shown on the plans .
m.num wire reinforcement .
m.num wire fabric .
all steel wire fabric shall conform to either aashto mnum astm anum or aashto mnum astm anum for plain and deformed wire fabric respectively .
m.num .
spiral wire .
spiral wire reinforcement shall conform to aashto mnum astm anum .
m.num prestressing steel .
prestressing steel shall be highstrength steel wire high strength sevenwire strand or highstrength alloy bars of the grade and type called for on the plans or in the special provisions .
m.num products .
a .
wire shall be highstrength stress relieved uncoated steel wire conforming to aashto mnum astm anum .
b. strand shall be highstrength sevenwire low relaxation uncoated strand conforming to the requirements of aashto mnum astm anum .
mnum c. bars shall be highstrength uncoated alloy bars conforming to aashto mnum astm anum .
m.num structural steel .
all steels for use in main load carrying member components subject to tensile stress shall conform to the applicable charpy vnotch impact test requirements of aashto mnum astm anum .
m.num products .
a .
carbon steel and foundation pilings shall conform to aashto mnum astm anum grade num. b. highstrength lowalloy steel shall conform to aashto mnum astm anum grade num or grade numw .
c. highstrength lowalloy structural steel plate quenched and tempered shall conform to aashto mnum astm anum grade numw .
d. highyield strength quenched and tempered lowalloy steel plate shall conform to aashto mnum astm anum grades num or numw .
m.num steels for pins rollers and expansion rockers .
a .
steel bars carbon cold finished standard quality shall conform to aashto mnum astm anum grades num to num inclusive for sizes num inches in diameter or less .
b .
steel forgings carbon and alloy for general industrial use shall conform to aashto mnum astm anum class f for sizes to num inches in diameter and classes c d and g for sizes to num inches in diameter .
m.num structural tubing shall be either cold formed welded or seamless tubing conforming to astm anum grade b or hotformed welded or seamless tubing conform to astm anum .
m.num fasteners bolts .
a. carbonsteel bolts shall conform to astm anum .
b .
high strength bolts for structural steel joints shall conform to either aashto mnum astm anum or aashto mnum astm anum .
when high strength bolts are used with unpainted weathering grades of steel the bolts shall be type num .
the supplier shall provide a lot number appearing on the shipping package and a certification noting when and where all testing was done including rotational capacity tests and zinc thickness when galvanized bolts and nuts are used .
the maximum hardness for aashto mnum astm anum bolts num inch or less in diameter shall be num hrc .
mnum num .
proof load tests astm fnum method num are required for the bolts .
wedge tests of full size bolts are required in accordance with section num of aashto mnum .
galvanized bolts shall be wedge tested after galvanizing .
proof load tests aashto mnum are required for the nuts .
the proof load tests for nuts to be used with galvanized bolts shall be performed after galvanizing over tapping and lubricating .
except as noted below nuts for aashto mnum astm anum bolts shall conform to aashto mnum astm anum grades dh dhnum c cnum and d or aashto mnum astm anum grades num and numh .
nuts for aashto mnumastm anum bolts shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum astm anum grades dh and dhnum or aashto mnum astm anum grade numh .
nuts to be galvanized hotdip or mechanically galvanized shall be heat treated grade numh dh or dhnum .
plain ungalvanized nuts shall have a minimum hardness of num hrb .
nuts to be used with aashto mnum astm anum type num bolts shall be of grade cnum or dhnum .
nuts to be used with aashto mnum astm anum bolts shall be of grade dhnum .
all galvanized nuts shall be lubricated with a lubricant containing a visible dye .
black bolts must be oily to touch when delivered and installed .
washers shall be hardened steel washers conforming to the requirements of aashto mnum astm fnum .
num .
identifying marks .
aashto mnum astm anum for bolts and the specifications referenced therein for nuts require that bolts and nuts manufactured to the specification be identified by specific markings on the top of the bolt head and on one face of the nut .
head markings must identify the grade by the symbol a num the manufacturer and the type if type num or num .
nut markings must identify the grade the manufacturer and if type num the type .
markings on direct tension indicators must identify the manufacturer and type num .
other washer markings must identify the manufacturer and if type num the type .
aashto mnum astm anum for bolts and the specifications referenced therein for nuts require that bolts and nuts manufactured to the specifications be identified by specific markings on the top of the bolt head and on one face of the nut .
head markings must identify the grade by the symbol a num the manufacturer and the type if type num or num .
nut markings must identify the grade the manufacturer and if type num the type .
markings on direct tension indicators must identify the manufacturer and type num .
other washer markings must identify the manufacturer and if type num the type .
num .
dimensions .
bolt and nut dimensions shall conform to the requirements for heavy hexagon structural bolts and for heavy semifinished hexagon nuts given in ansi standard bnum and bnum respectively .
d. galvanized highstrength fasteners .
when fasteners are galvanized they shall be specified to be hotdip galvanized in accordance with aashto m num astm anum class c or mechanically galvanized in accordance with aashto mnum astm bnum class num .
bolts to be galvanized shall be either aashto mnum astm anum type num or type num except that type num bolts shall only be mechanically galvanized .
galvanized bolts shall be tension tested after galvanizing .
mnum washers nuts and bolts of any assembly shall be galvanized by the same process .
the nuts should be overtapped to the minimum amount required for the fastener assembly and shall be lubricated with a lubricant containing a visible dye so a visual check can be made for the lubricant at the time of field installation .
aashto mnum astm anum bolts shall not be galvanized .
e. alternative fasteners .
other fasteners or fastener assemblies which meet the materials manufacturing and chemical composition requirements of aashto m num astm anum or aashto mnum astm anum and which meet the mechanical property requirements of the same specification in fullsize tests and which have body diameter and bearing areas under the head and nut or their equivalent not less than those provided by a bolt and nut of the same nominal dimensions prescribed in para .
b.num of this subsection m.num may be used subject to the approval of the engineer .
such alternate fasteners may differ in other dimensions from those of the specified bolts and nuts .
subject to the approval of the engineer highstrength steel lockpin and collar fasteners may be used as an alternate for high strength bolts as shown on the plans .
the shank and head of highstrength steel lockpin and collar fasteners shall meet the requirements of para .
b.num of this subsection m.num .
each fastener shall provide a solid shank body of sufficient diameter to provide tensile and shear strength equivalent to or greater than that of the bolt specified shall have a cold forged head on one end of type and dimensions as approved by the engineer a shank length suitable for material thickness fastened locking grooves breakneck groove and pull grooves all annular grooves on the opposite end .
each fastener shall provide a steel locking collar of proper size for shank diameter used which by means of suitable installation tools is cold swaged into the locking grooves forming head for the grooved end of the fastener after the pull groove section has been removed .
the steel locking collar shall be a standard product of an established manufacturer of lockpin and collar fasteners as approved by the engineer .
m.num weld metal shall conform to the current requirements of the ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
m.num shear connectors .
shear connector studs shall conform to the requirements of the specification for cold finished carbon steel bars and shafting aashto mnum astm anum cold drawn bar grade num or grade num either semi or fullykilled .
if fluxretaining caps are used the steel for the caps shall be of a low carbon grade suitable for welding and shall comply with coldrolled carbon steel strip astm anum .
tensile properties as determined by tests of bar stock after drawing or of finished studs shall conform to the following requirements tensile strength min .
num psi yield strength min .
num psi elongation min .
num percent in num inches reduction of area min .
num percent as determined by a num percent offset method .
tensile properties shall be determined in accordance with the applicable sections of astm anum mechanical testing of steel products .
tensile tests of finished studs shall be made on studs mnum welded to test plates using a test fixture similar to that shown in figure num of the current ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code .
if fracture occurs outside of the middle half of the gauge length the test shall be repeated .
finished studs shall be of uniform quality and condition free from injurious laps fins seams cracks twists bends or other defects .
finish shall be as produced by cold drawing cold rolling or machining .
a .
certification .
the manufacturer shall certify that the studs as delivered are in accordance with the material requirements of this section .
certified copies of inplant quality control test reports shall be furnished to the engineer upon request .
b .
independent assurance samples .
the engineer may select at the contractors expense studs of each type and size used under the contract as necessary for checking the requirements of this section .
m.num low alloy nickel copper steel pipe corrosion resistant .
this pipe shall be manufactured subject to the requirements of astm anum welded and seamless steel pipe with the following modifications carbon num maximum manganese num maximum phosphorous num maximum sulphur num maximum copper num to num nickel num to num m.num steel forging and steel shafting .
a .
steel forgings shall conform to the specification for steel forgings carbon and alloy for general use aashto mnum astm anum class c d f or g. b .
cold finished carbon steel shafting shall conform to aashto mnum astm anum grade num inclusive unless otherwise specified .
m.num steel castings and iron castings .
a .
steel castings for use in highway bridge components shall conform to aashto mnum astm anum .
carbonsteel castings for general applications shall conform to aashto mnum astm anum class num or grade num steel respectively unless otherwise designated .
b. chromium alloysteel castings shall conform to the specification for corrosion resistant iron chromium ironchromiumnickel and nickelbased alloy castings for general applications aashto mnum astm anum grade ca num unless otherwise specified .
c. grayiron castings shall conform to the specification for grayiron castings aashto mnum class no .
num unless specified otherwise .
mnum d. ductile iron castings for scupper grates shall conform to the requirements of astm anum .
e. malleable iron castings shall conform to the specification for malleable iron castings aashto m num .
the grade to be furnished shall be number num unless otherwise specified .
f. iron castings shall be true to pattern in form and dimensions free from pouring faults sponginess cracks blow holes and other defects in position affecting their strength and value for the service intended .
castings shall be boldly filleted at angles and the arrises shall be sharp and perfect .
g. all castings must be blastcleaned or otherwise effectively cleaned of scale and sand so as to present a smooth clean and uniform surface .
m.num bronze or copperalloy .
a .
bronze castings shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum astm bnum .
b. copperalloys num or num or copperalloy plates shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum astm bnum .
m.num aluminum materials .
aluminum materials for structures signs sign and signal supports lighting hardware and welding materials shall conform to the specifications listed as follows a .
sheet and plate aluminum shall conform to astm bnum alloy nummnum for thicknesses from num inch to num inches .
b .
plate aluminum shall conform to astm bnum alloy nummnum for thicknesses from num inch to num inches .
c. extruded aluminum bars rods shapes and tubes for all thicknesses shall conform to astm bnum .
d. aluminum bars rods and wire for pins rollers and expansion rockers .
when aluminum is used for pins rollers or expansion rockers it shall conform to the requirements of astm bnum alloy numtnum .
e. fasteners rivets and bolts .
fasteners for aluminum connectors may be coated carbon steel bolts astm anum power driven aluminum rivets astm bnum alloy numtnum conforming to the requirements of milrnumf coated high strength steel bolts aashto mnum astm anum or stainless steel bolts astm fnum group num num or num. f. weld metal .
weld metal shall conform to the requirements of american welding societys aws d num structural welding code aluminum .
g. aluminum castings .
aluminum permanent mold castings shall conform to the requirements of astm bnum alloy a numtnum .
sand castings shall conform to astm bnum .
mnum h. aluminum forgings .
aluminum forgings and forging stock shall conform to the requirements of astm bnum alloy numtnum .
i. seamless pipe and seamless extruded tube shall conform to the requirements of astm bnum .
j .
aluminum for standard structural shapes shall conform to the requirements of astm bnum .
k. extruded structural pipe and tubing shall conform to the requirements of astm bnum .
m.num structural materials for corrugated metal structures .
materials shall conform to the following specifications a .
corrugated metal pipe and pipe arches shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum astm anum aashto mnum astm anum or aashto mnum for steel and aashto mnum astm bnum for aluminum .
b. spiral rib metal pipe shall conform to the same requirements as corrugated metal pipe .
c. structural plate pipe .
structural plate pipe pipe arches and arch structures or culverts shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum astm anum for steel and aashto mnum astm bnum for aluminum .
m.num hardware for timber construction .
the term hardware shall include all metal fastenings required for timber connections or for connecting timber to concrete or steel work .
the following items will be considered as hardware bolts tie rods turnbuckles washers nuts drift bolts steel dowels nails spikes and lag screws for timber connections steel plates used as washers metal timber connectors of various designs metal shear developers for composite timber and concrete structures and anchor plates or clips for plank floors and sidewalks .
a .
steel components .
rods plates eyebars and shapes shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum structural steel for bridges grade num unless otherwise specified in the special provisions .
b .
hardware .
bolts nuts drift bolts dowels and washers may be fabricated of mild carbon steel unless otherwise specified in the special provisions .
washers may be cast iron or malleable iron castings .
c. timber connectors .
split rings as manufactured in num½inch and numinch diameters shall be fabricated of hotrolled carbon steel that conforms to the requirements of society of automotive engineers specification saenum .
shear plates shall be fabricated of hotrolled carbon steel that conforms to the requirements of saenum for numeinch diameter plates .
shear plates shall be fabricated of malleable cast iron grade num in accordance with astm anum for numinch diameter plates .
mnum spike grid connectors shall be fabricated of malleable cast iron grade num in accordance with astm anum .
d. miscellaneous requirements .
bolts shall have either standard square hexagonal or dome heads or economy type washer heads .
unless otherwise specified bolts shall conform to astm anum specification for carbon steel bolts and studs num psi tensile .
they shall have coarse threads class num tolerance that conform to ansi standard specifications .
nails shall be cut or round wire of standard forms .
spikes shall be cut or wire spikes or boat spikes as specified in the special provisions .
e. galvanizing .
unless otherwise specified in the special provisions all hardware and steel components shall be galvanized .
hardware shall be galvanized in accordance with aashto mnum zinc coating hotdip on iron and steel hardware .
other steel components shall be galvanized in accordance with aashto mnum zinc hotgalvanized coatings on products fabricated from rolled pressed and forged steel shapes plates bars and strip .
m.num epoxy coating for bar reinforcement .
epoxy coatings shall conform to aashto mnum astm dnum .
m.num galvanizing .
structural steel shall be galvanized in accordance with the specifications for zinc hotdipgalvanized coatings on iron and steel products aashto mnum astm anum .
fasteners and hardware items shall be galvanized in accordance with the specifications for zinc coating hotdip on iron and steel hardware aashto mnum astm anum except that high strength fasteners may also be galvanized mechanically in accordance with aashto mnum astm bnum class num .
m.num metalizing .
structural steel shall be metalized in accordance with cnum recom mended practices for metalizing with aluminum and zinc for protection of iron and steel of the american welding society .
m.num materials .
all materials shall conform to the following requirements all coating shall meet current voc emission requirements of the epa clean air act of num .
m.num blast abrasive .
material shall be fresh dry and sharp .
the grain size shall be such as to provide a surface profile of num to num mils approximately num to num mesh .
in no case may round soft sand be used .
samples of the abrasive shall be submitted to and approved by the engineer prior to the commencement of any work .
m.num wire .
the wire used for spraying required herein shall be pure zinc or an alloy consisting of num percent zinc num percent aluminum by weight drawn to manufacturers recommenda tion for compatibility with equipment being used .
for chemical composition see military specification milwnum .
mnum section m.num paint m.num general .
all paints shall be factory mixed to comply with the specification formula for the type of paint ordered shall be well ground to a uniform consistency and smooth texture shall be free from dirt water and other foreign matter and shall dry within the specified period without running streaking or sagging .
any paint which prior to shipment shall have livered or in any way hardened or thickened in the container or in which the pigment shall have settled out so that it can not be readily broken up with a paddle to a smooth uniform paint of a proper consistency shall be rejected .
there shall be no significant difference in color between batches of paint used on an individual structure .
the volatile organic content voc shall comply with prevailing regulations .
m.num literature .
product data sheets shall be supplied with each of the products and shall include but not be limited to the following information a .
selection data generic type general properties recommended use chemical resistance guide temperature resistance flexibility weathering abrasion resistance substrates topcoats required and compatibility with other coating .
b. specification data solids by volume of the mixed materials recommended thickness per coat theoretical coverage per mixed gallon shelf life special notes colors and gloss .
c. ordering information shipping weights of the product thinners and flash points of each .
d. application instructions surface preparation for appropriate substrates mixing instructions pot life for catalyzed materials application temperatures instructions for application by spray including equipment recommendations instructions for application by brush and roller if applicable drying times cleanup recommendations and storage conditions .
e. compositional data sheets shall be provided which list the percent pigment by weight of mixed material and percent by weight of the vehicle nonvolatile portion of the vehicle .
this sheet shall also categorize the solvent according to type and whether they are photo reactive .
f. solvent identification sheets shall indicate a listing of the volatile portions of vehicle and categorize solvents by type and photochemical reactivity .
g. product certification shall be provided on materials used to meet state department of transportation specifications .
h. material safety data sheets msds shall be provided to the contractor and engineer with all materials and shall accompany the material when shipped so the person receiving the material is aware of the hazards presented by the product and of appropriate storage requirements mnum for these materials .
additional copies of the msds shall be available upon request .
m.num shipping and delivery .
all paint shall be delivered to the shop or jobsite in their original containers unopened and with labels intact .
all paints shall be supplied by the same manufacturer .
the contractorfabricator shall insure that sufficient quantities of paint are ordered .
the top coat shall be applied with paint that is entirely from the same lot or batch number .
unless otherwise specified all paint furnished shall be delivered in metal containers minimum num u.s. standard gallons each except for small quantities when onegallon containers may be used .
all containers shall be labeled in accordance with ansi standard znum precautionary the following information shall be listed in clear legible type on the label of each container for each product manufacturers name and complete address .
product name including component type if applicable .
color name or number of the particular product or component .
the lot andor batch number of the product and components .
the date of manufacture of the product and components .
identification of any toxic substances contained in the product .
m.num sampling .
whenever possible inspection and sampling shall be made at point of manufacture .
manufacturer shall furnish all necessary assistance and opportunity to sample the paint .
the plant sample shall be termed the batch sample which shall become the base fingerprint to which the field samples will be compared .
field samples shall be taken from the paint that is on the project .
no paint shall be applied until it has been approved by the department .
paint which has not been used within num months after its approval date shall be retested prior to use .
paint in storage shall not be exposed to temperatures lower than those recommended by the paint manufacturer .
paint exposed to temperatures lower than specified is subject to rejection or retesting .
any paint which is rejected as a result of field evaluation shall be removed from the project before any painting operations can continue .
m.num paint systems .
the paint shall be selected from either the departments approved materials list or as specified in special provision code num .
before proceeding with painting the contractor shall submit samples chemical analysis color or paint to be used and plan of painting to be followed or other data as the engineer may direct to enable him to grant approval .
mnum section m.num sheet piling and piles m.num untreated timber sheet piling .
timber sheeting shall be sound spruce douglas fir white or yellow lodgepole or ponderosa pine or western hemlock plank planed on one side and either tongue and grooved or splined .
timber sheeting shall not be less than nominal num inches thick .
the properties of timber sheeting shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum structural timber lumber and piling .
m.num treated timber sheet piling .
treated timber sheet piling shall conform to the requirements for untreated sheet piling as set forth above in subsection m.num .
in addition treated sheet piling shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum and current epa and ridem regulations .
m.num precast concrete sheet piling .
concrete sheet piling shall conform to the applicable requirements of sections num and num portland cement concrete and precastprestressed structure concrete masonry respectively of these specifications .
m.num steel sheet piling .
steel sheet piling shall be rolled steel sections and shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum grade num unless otherwise specified .
m.num untreated timber piles .
m.num general .
timber piles shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum and shall be cut from sound and live trees preferable during the winter season .
piles shall be free from any defects which will impair their strength or usefulness for the purpose intended or that will prevent proper driving .
unless otherwise specified untreated timber piles shall have the bark unpeeled .
treated timber piles shall be cleanpeeled so that all of the outer bark and at least num percent of the inner bark well distributed over the outer surface of the pile shall be removed .
in order to obtain proper preservative treatment no strips of inner bark wider than ½inch shall remain .
all piles shall be cut above the ground swell shall have a uniform taper from butt to tip end and shall be free from short kinks .
knots or blemishes shall be trimmed off close and even with the body of the pile .
a line from the center of the butt to the center of the tip must lie wholly within the body of the pile .
m.num inspection .
all piles will be subject to inspection before or after shipment to the site or both at the option of the engineer .
any pile that does not conform to all the requirements will be rejected .
mnum m.num specific requirements .
untreated piles shall be new spruce oak douglas fir yellow pine or any other species subject to the approval of the engineer which will withstand the specified driving without injury .
butt and tip dimension for various lengths of piles shall be as set forth in the following table minimum minimum dimension tip length num feet from butt dimension up to num feet num inches num inches num feet and up to num feet num inches num inches num feet and over num inches num inches for all piles the maximum dimension num feet from the butt shall be num inches .
measurements are under the bark in all cases .
where the piles are to support a concrete cap the maximum butt dimensions shall be num inches less than the designated width of the concrete cap .
where piles are to be in line in a bent all piles in the bent shall be of uniform size to permit the proper fastening of the bracing .
cutting of piles to accommodate the bracing will not be permitted .
m.num treated timber piles .
treated timber piles shall conform to the requirements as set forth above in subsections m.num and m.num .
m.num specific requirements .
timber to be used for treated piles will be southern yellow pine or douglas fir and shall be treated in accordance with awpa standard cnum for c.c.a .
all piles for which treatment is specified shall have not less than num inch of sapwood at the butt end for douglas fir and a numinch ring of sapwood at the butt end for southern pine .
preservative treatment shall conform to the requirement of aashto mnum and the method of treatment shall conform to american wood preservers association standards cnum cnum and cnum .
m.num precastprestressed concrete piles .
unless specified otherwise precast prestressed concrete piles shall be standard numinch square piles designed and manufactured in accordance with the joint aashto and pci committee recommendations .
precastprestressed concrete piles shall also conform to the applicable requirements of sections num and num portland cement concrete and precastprestressed structure concrete masonry respectively of these specifications .
m.num concretefilled shell piles .
this subsection covers steel shell type piles where the shell is not considered as a permanent load carrying member .
m.num steel shells .
steel shells shall be of sufficient strength and rigidity to permit driving and to prevent distortion caused by soil pressures or the driving of adjacent piles until filled with concrete .
the shells shall be sufficiently watertight to exclude water during the placing of concrete .
mnum steel shells shall have a uniform taper or a combination of uniform sections of increasing diameter or a combination of uniform sections of equal length that increase progressively not more than twice the thickness of the shell at each change in diameter or a uniform section throughout but only one type shall be used for the contract .
the tip shall be of steel fully welded to tightly close the bottom of the pile to make a watertight closure .
care must be exercised to avoid the use of more than one short section at the butt end when necessary to extend the pile length .
if steel shells consisting of a succession of cylindrical sections of increasing diameter are used all sections shall be of equal length and increasing in diameter by not more than one inch between adjoining sections from the section at the tip to the section at the butt of the pile .
the minimum tip diameter shall be num inches .
the minimum butt diameter at the point of cut off shall be num inches when the specified loading is num tons or less or shall be num inches when the specified loading is over num tons and less than num tons .
m.num concrete .
concrete for concretefilled shell piles shall be class aae and shall otherwise conform to the applicable requirements of section num portland cement concrete of these specifications .
reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num bar reinforcement of these specifications .
m.num steel hpiles .
steel hpiles shall be rolled structural shapes conforming to the requirements of aashto mnum grade num unless otherwise specified .
m.num steel pipe piles .
this subsection covers steel piles where the casing is considered a permanent loadcarrying member .
steel for pipe piles shall conform to the standard specifica tions for welded and seamless steel pipe piles astm a num grade num .
m.num pile points and drive shoes shall be carbonsteel castings that conform to the requirements of aashto mnum astm anum class num or grade num .
m.num closure plates and caps shall be mild carbon steel that conforms to the requirements of aashto mnum astm anum grade num .
section m.num fence and guardrail m.num barbed wire .
barbed wire shall conform to the requirements of astm anum .
mnum m.num chain link fence .
chain link fence and required fittings and hardware shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum for the kind of metal coating sizes of wire and mesh specified .
m.num fence woven wire rightofway .
rightofway wire fencing shall conform to aashto mnum class num grade num .
m.num metal beam rail .
the rail elements shall be corrugated sheet steel beams conforming to the requirements of aashto mnum class a type ii .
m.num timber rail .
the timber rail shall be cut from the specified grade for dry well seasoned and dressed spruce or fir which shall meet the applicable requirements of aashto mnum .
where preservative treatment is specified this shall conform to the requirements for preservative treatments for timber of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
timber preservatives shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum .
m.num wire cable .
the wire cable for guardrail shall conform to the requirements of aashto m num for the specified diameter and strength class .
flexible rail elements composed of multiple wires in any arrangement other than cable form shall conform in all respects to the plan details and dimensions and to the strength requirements on the specifications for the item .
m.num fence posts .
wood posts shall conform to the details and dimensions indicated on the plans .
all wood posts shall be of sound seasoned chestnut or cedar peeled and with ends cut square or as indicated on the plans .
posts shall conform to aashto mnum .
the posts shall be straight and all knots trimmed flush with the surface .
where treated posts are called for the kind and type of treatment shall conform to aashto mnum .
all dimension timber and lumber required for fences or gates shall be sound straight and free from knots splits and shakes and shall conform to aashto mnum .
it shall be of the species and grades indicated on the plans and shall be dressed and finished on four sides .
steel posts shall be galvanized in accordance with aashto m num .
fittings hardware and other appurtenances not specifically covered by the plans and specifications shall be standard commercial grade and in accord with current standard practice .
m.num guardrail posts .
railing posts shall be of either wood steel or concrete as may be specified or shown .
m.num wood posts .
wood posts shall be fabricated from an approved or specified timber species and shall be of the quality diameter or section and length as specified or as shown on the plans .
when treated posts are specified they shall be fabricated before treatment .
timber mnum preservatives and preservative treatment shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num .
m.num steel posts .
steel posts shall be of the section and length specified or as shown on the plans .
they shall be of copper bearing steel when so specified .
steel shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum for the grade specified or for new railroad rail posts of astm anum for the unit weight of rail specified .
the posts shall be galvanized to conform with aashto mnum .
m.num precast reinforced concrete posts shall be of a section and length as specified or as shown on the plans .
concrete shall be class xxae and shall conform to the applicable requirements of both sections num and m.num portland cement concrete of these specifications .
bar reinforcement shall conform to subsection m.num of these specifications .
m.num concrete deadmen for end anchorages shall be as specified or as shown on the plans .
concrete shall be class xxae and shall conform to the applicable requirements of both sections num and m.num portland cement concrete of these specifications .
bar reinforcement shall conform to subsection m.num of these specifications .
m.num guardrail hardware .
offset brackets of the resilient and nonresilient types shall be of the type specified or as shown on the plans and shall meet the strength requirements specified .
splices and end connections shall be of the type and design specified or shown on the plans and shall be of such strength as to develop the full design strength of the rail elements .
end spring assemblies when specified shall be positive and of a type and design coinciding with the intent design and strength of the railing structure and shall be as specified or as shown on the plans .
end anchor rods and accessories shall be as specified or as shown on the plans and shall be of such size and strength as to develop the full design strength of the rail elements .
unless otherwise specified all fittings bolts washers and other accessories shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of aashto mnum .
all galvanizing shall be done after fabrication .
steel beam guardrail reflectorized triangular delineators shall be of the type specified on the plans .
all triangular delineators shall be approved by the departments product evaluation committee and shall be one of those products contained in the departments approved materials list .
the washers of the delineator shall conform to the requirements for astm bnum alloy num hnum .
mnum section m.num curbing m.num granite curb for roadways .
granite shall conform to astm cnum .
the stone shall be sound durable and free from seams they shall be straight lined without wind and free from bunches or depressions and shall not be taken from the surface of the quarry .
the top of the stone shall be sawed to an approximately true plane with no projections or depressions greater than numinch in any one piece .
the front and back arris lines shall be pitched straight and true .
there shall be no projections on the back face for num inches down from the top greater than numinch .
circular curb to be set on a radius of num feet or less shall be cut to the lengths and radii shown on the plans and shall conform in every respect to the requirements of these specifications .
the top surface of curbing shall be free from drill holes and shall be scabble dressed to an approximately true plane with no projections or depressions greater than ½inch .
the front arris line shall be such that when a straightedge is applied to the full length of the curb stone there shall be no depressions under the straightedge greater than ½inch .
the front face shall be at right angles to the plane of the top and shall be smooth quarry split free from drill holes which are longer than num½inches plus or minus numinch and deeper than ½inch and with no projections greater than numinch or depressions greater than ½inch measured from the vertical plane of the face through the top arris line for a distance of num inches down from the top .
the ends of all curbing shall be jointed square with the planes of the top and face and so finished that when stones are placed end to end as closely as possible no space greater than num inch will show in the joint for the full width of the top or down on the face for num inches after which the end may break back no more than num inches .
the arris line formed by the intersection of the plane of the joint with the planes of the top and exposed faces shall have no variations from the plane of the top and exposed faces greater than numinch .
m.num granite slope curbing for roadways .
granite shall conform to astm cnum .
the curbstone shall be of hard and durable granite of a uniformly light grayish white color and satisfactory to the engineer free from seams which would impair its structural integrity and of a good smooth splitting appearance .
the straight slope curbing shall be in lengths of not less than num feet or more than num feet .
when the slope curbing is used on a curve of num feet radius or less the length shall be as directed by the engineer except that when the edging is to be set on a radius of num feet or less the maximum length shall be num foot .
the curbing shall have a minimum thickness of num inches and a maximum thickness of num inches .
when the slope curbing is set the width of the face of the curbing shall be num inches with a tolerance of plus or minus num inch .
the exposed face of all curbing shall be smooth quarry split to an approximate true plane and shall have no projections or depressions which will cause over num inch to show between a numfoot straightedge and the face when the straightedge is placed as closely as possible on any part of the face .
if projections on the face are more than that specified they shall be dressed off .
the top and bottom lines of the face shall be pitched off to a straight line mnum and shall not show over numinch between stone and straightedge when straightedge is placed along the entire length of top and bottom lines when viewed from a direction at right angles to the plane of the face and for the top line only not over numinch when viewed from a direction in the plane of the face .
the ends shall be square to the plane of the face and so finished that when the stones are placed end to end as closely as possible no space more than num½inches shall show in the joint for the full width of the face except that where the edging is to be used on a curve having a radius of num feet or less the ends of the stone shall be cut so as to provide a finished joint for the full width of the face of not more than numinch .
the arris lines at the ends shall be pitched with no variation from the plane of the face more than numinch .
drill holes not more than num½inches or ½inch in depth will be permitted .
the sides shall not be under the square more than num inches or over the square at the back more than num inch .
m.num precast concrete curbing .
the curbing shall conform to the dimensions indicated on the plans .
the concrete shall conform to the requirements of section num portland cement concrete .
forms for the curbing shall be of wood or metal or approved sand molds preformed with suitable moulding sand .
sand molds shall be constructed as directed by the engineer and shall conform to the dimensions as specified on the plans .
all surfaces shall be clean cut free from blow holes or pitted areas .
sand molds shall be sprayed with approved wax solution if required by the engineer .
when sand molds are used the curbing shall be removed from the sand forms as directed by the engineer .
with the slope faced curbing the top slope and vertical faces shall be floated smooth and the edges rounded to remove the sharp corners while the curb is still soft .
caution shall be used to remove only the sharp edges .
the curbing shall then be finished as indicated on the plans or in the proposal .
slope faced curbing with white faced top and slope shall be poured in two courses as indicated on the plans .
the second course shall be poured immediately after completion of pouring the first course in order that a sufficient bond between the num courses shall be obtained .
the use of a standard white portland cement will be required for the upper portion of the slope and top faces of the curbing .
manipulation and finishing shall be as indicated in these specifications and as indicated on the plans or in the proposal .
dogholes shall be moulded in sections as shown on the plans .
m.num reinforcement .
reinforcing materials if and as called for shall conform to the requirements specified under subsection m.num bar reinforcement .
m.num joint fillers .
preformed and poured joint fillers if and as called for shall conform to the requirements specified under subsection m.num joint materials .
m.num bituminous curbing .
bituminous concrete curbing shall conform to both the applicable requirements of section m.num and the gradation requirements physical properties and test limits indicated in the following table mnum sieve gradation size percent by weight ½ num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ___________________________________________________ asphalt percent by weight num ____________________________________________________ marshall stability lbs .
min .
num blow num ____________________________________________________ percent voids num ____________________________________________________ flow in .
.num m.num granite curb for bridges .
granite shall conform to astm cnum .
m.num general .
the stone for bridge curb shall be hard durable granite of a uniform grayish white color free from seams which impair its structural integrity and shall be satisfactory to the engineer .
natural color variations characteristic of granite at the source quarry will be permitted .
m.num dimensions .
unless otherwise shown on the plans straight curb shall be furnished in lengths of not less than num feet or preferably more than num feet but in no case more than num feet and shall be of approximately equal lengths in any run between two consecutive joints .
detailed cutting plans shall be submitted and approved before the cutting of stone is started .
curb to be set on a radius of num feet or less shall be cut to the curve required .
curb which is to be set on a radius between num feet and num feet may be furnished straight if furnished in lengths not to exceed num feet .
m.num vertical face granite curb finish .
the top surface shall be sawed or tooled to an approximately true plane with no projections or depressions greater than numinch .
the bottom surface shall be sawed or split to a dimensional tolerance of num to numinch .
the front and back arris lines shall be pitched straight and true and there shall be no projections on the back surface for num inches down from the top which would exceed ½inch .
the remainder of the back may fall away by not more than num½inches .
the front face shall be at right angles to the planes of the top and ends and shall be sawed or tooled to an approximately true plane with no projections or mnum depressions of more than numinch measured from the vertical plane of the face through the arris or pitch line .
the ends of all stones shall be cut square with the planes of the top and face .
ends of stones at joints where they are to be in contact with preformed joint filler must be held full for their entire depth and finished by sawing with a maximum variation of numinch .
ends of stones at intermediate joints shall be held full for num inches from all exposed surfaces with a permitted variation of numinch .
beyond this area the joint may fall away a maximum of num inches .
m.num slope face granite curb finish .
the top face and slope face shall be sawed or tooled to an approximately true plane with no variations greater than numinch .
the bottom surface shall be sawed or split to a dimensional tolerance of num to numinch .
the face and back arris lines shall be pitched straight with no variation greater than numinch .
there shall be no projections on the back surface for num inches down from the top which would exceed ½inch .
the remainder of the back may fall away not more than num½inches .
the front face shall be at right angles to the planes of the top and ends and shall be sawed or tooled to an approximately true plane with no projections or depressions greater than numinch measured from the vertical plane of the face through the arris or pitch line .
the ends of all stones shall be cut square with the planes of the top and face .
ends of stones at joints where they are to be in contact with preformed joint filler must be held full for their entire depth and finished by sawing or tooling with a maximum variation of numinch .
ends of stones at intermediate joints shall be held full for num inches from all exposed surfaces with a permitted variation of numinch .
beyond this area the joint may fall away a maximum of num inches .
m.num special sloped face granite curb for bridge railings .
the top surface shall be sawn or dressed equivalent to an approximately true plane with no projections or depressions greater than numinch .
the bottom surface shall be sawn or dressed to an approximately true plane with not more than a dimensional tolerance in curb rise of num to numinch .
the front arris lines at the top and bottom of the slope shall be straight and true with no variation greater than numinch .
the sloped surface and the front vertical surface shall be sawn or dressed to a numinch tolerance .
the back of the curb shall be either scabbled or quarry split and shall not fall away from the vertical more than num inches toward the front or have any projections exceeding ½inch .
the ends of all stones shall be cut square with the planes of the top and face .
ends of stones at joints where they are to be in contact with preformed joint filler must be held full for their entire depth and finished by sawing or tooling with a maximum variation of numinch .
ends of stones at intermediate joints shall be held full for num inches from all exposed surfaces with a permitted variation of numinch .
beyond this area the joint may fall away a maximum of num inches .
m.num anchors .
anchors shall be no .
num reinforcing bars to the dimensions shown on the plans .
at least num anchors shall be furnished and installed in each stone .
m.num mortar .
mortar for joints shall be composed of num part portland cement to num parts clean sand with sufficient water to form a workable mixture .
mortar shall be used within num minutes after its preparation .
mnum section m.num dust control riprap stone walls cobblestones flagstones highway bounds m.num open m.num calcium chloride .
calcium chloride shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum .
m.num riprap .
riprap shall consist of broken stone produced from sound ledge or large boulders with at least three fractured faces on each particle and shall be free from overburden spoil shale or organic material .
the stone shall have a minimum density of num pounds per cubic foot .
it shall be angular in shape with its minimum dimension not less than one third of the maximum dimension .
stone for placed riprap shall have one flat face and shall be roughly square or rectangular to facilitate laying up .
m.num bedding for riprap .
bedding stone as shown on the plans shall conform to the quality requirements of this subsection m.num and shall conform to one of the following designations filter stone num national stone association size inches square openings modified nsa no .
num passing num passing num passing fsnum ½ no .
num no .
num fsnum num no .
num no .
num fsnum num½ num no .
num note num reference national stone association manual quarried stone for erosion and sediment control dated num .
m.num stone for riprap .
stone for riprap as shown on the plans shall meet the quality requirements of this subsection m.num and shall conform to one of the following designations .
in addition such stone shall be well graded within the size specified .
mnum graded riprap stonenum national stone association size inches square openings modified nsa no .
num passing num passing num passing rnum num num no .
num rnum num num num rnum num num num rnum num num num rnum num num num rnum num num num rnum num num num rnum num num num note num reference national stone association manual quarried stone for erosion and sediment control dated num .
m.num stone walls .
stones for this work shall be natural field stone of a quality suitable to the engineer and shall be roughly rectangular in shape with at least one fairly even face .
m.num cobblestones .
stones shall be hard durable cobbles not less than num inches nor more than num inches long by num inches wide and shall have a uniform thickness of not less than num inches .
m.num flagstones .
flagstone shall be clean even grain stone finished with a rock face top and chisel edges .
the face edge of tread shall not vary more than numinch from a line throughout its length .
stone for use in walks shall have a uniform thickness of not less than num inches .
stone for use as treads shall have a uniform thickness of not less than num½inches .
m.num highway bounds .
m.num granite bounds .
granite bounds shall be of the dimensions shown on the plans and shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num granite curb for roadways of these specifications .
m.num reinforced concrete bounds .
materials for reinforced concrete bounds shall conform to the applicable requirements of section num portland cement concrete and mnum subsection m.num bar reinforcement of these specifications .
m.num bronze rods .
bronze for highway markers shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum .
section m.num timber m.num sawn lumber .
all timber used for construction shall be sawn lumber that meets both the classification and grading requirements for stress graded structural species and the following special requirements .
m.num structural grades shall conform to astm dnum practice for establishing structural grades and related allowable properties for visually graded lumber .
m.num mechanical properties shall conform to astm dnum method for establishing clear wood strength values .
m.num allowable stresses for sawn structural lumber shall be as designated by the contract design criteria as noted on the plans or in the special provisions .
m.num structural lumber shall be american standard lumber manufactured and graded in accordance with the latest edition of the als ps num .
all such lumber shall be grademarked in accordance with both the requirements of that standard and the applicable grading rules agency .
m.num sawn lumber and timber shall conform to aashto mnum standard specification for wood products .
m.num structural glued laminated timber .
structural glued laminated timber shall conform to the american national standard institutes publication ansiaitc anum wood products structural glued laminated timber .
m.num working stresses shall be determined according to astm dnum test method for establishing stresses for structural glued laminated timber .
m.num allowable stresses shall be as designated by the contract design criteria as noted on the plans or in the special provisions .
m.num other requirements of subsection m.num sawn lumber of these specifications shall also apply .
m.num preservative treatment .
the preparation process amount and type of preservative treatments shall conform to the requirements of section num division ii of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
these requirements shall apply to both the wood preservatives and the preservative treatments of dimensional lumber timber posts beams stringer and laminated members indicated on the plans or in the special provisions .
mnum the preservative treatment of structural timber and lumber shall be provided by the pressure process and unless otherwise provided by the special provisions shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum standard specification for preservatives and pressure treatment process for timber the standards of the american wood preservers association and astm dnum pressure treatment of timber products .
the preservative retention requirements and treatment process shall be as designated on the plans or in the special provision .
section m.num waterproofing dampproofing and sealers concrete protective systems m.num dampproofing .
m.num primer shall be a cutback solvent type conforming to astm dnum .
m.num mop coats shall conform to astm dnum .
m.num waterproofing .
m.num hot applied liquid membrane .
a .
surface conditioner shall be a cutback solvent type conforming to astm dnum .
b. waterproof membrane shall be a single component hotapplied rubberized asphalt capable of being applied at a uniform thickness at an application temperature of numof numof .
after cooling it shall form a tough monolithic flexible membrane continuously bonded to all concrete surfaces and meeting the following physical properties .
test method required results flash point open cup numof numoc water vapor astm enum vapor trans at numof numoc transmission mitted in num hrs .
num gr.num g grhr sq .
ft. at numof numoc ghr sq .
m num gr .
num g water vapor astm enum num perms max .
permeability num m perms water resistance astm dnum no blistering submerged num hours no emulsification at numof numoc no deterioration mnum test method required results water absorption change of mass of max loss num gr .
coating numxnum in .
num g numxnum mm max gain num gr .
applied to glass num g substrate immersed in water at numof numoc for num hours penetration by astm tnum at numof numoc standard cone less than num num mm at numof numoc less than num nummm at numof numoc less than num nummm flow aashto tnum at numof numoc none coating bent numo at numof numoc exposed for num hours num num mm max .
low temperature num num cm coating no delamination flexibility on alum .
bent num over no cracking num dia .
mandrel at numof numoc adhesion num num cm coating no adhesion failure on alum .
bent num over at numof numoc num dia .
mandrel heat aging wt .
loss in num days less than num at numof numoc elasticity reaction to sudden min .
toughness of elongation num in.lbs .
num cmkg num inmin num cmmin toughness joules aashto tnum not less than num ratio of toughness ratio of toughness ft lbs num j to peak load ft lbs joules to peak not less than num load pounds newtons crack bridging num nummm thick film no cracking capability tested at numoc no splitting with a crack opening no loss adhesion of num nummm opening rate of num nummmh for num cycles heat stability held for num hours at shall meet penetration recommended appli flow low temperature cation temperature flexibility and vis cosity requirement viscosity heated to recommended range num to num sec .
application temperature c. protective covering shall be rolled asphalt sheets conforming to astm dnum type ii except provisions pertaining to the roofing application are waived .
the protective sheets shall be free from visible external defects such as holes ragged or untrue edges breaks cracks tears mnum protuberances or indentations .
m.num preformed membranes .
the waterproofing membrane shall be provided in rolled sheet form .
one face of the membrane shall be adhesive and protected with an easily removable coated backing paper to prevent adhesion of the membrane to itself .
the membrane shall be composed of rubberized or polymer modified asphalt reinforced with a fiberglass or polypropylene mesh .
a. primer shall either conform to astm dnum or be as specified by the membrane manufacturer .
b .
sheet membrane shall conform to the following specifications .
test method required results thickness num mils num mils tensile strength per astm dnum num lbs.in .
num ncm num elongation min pliability per astm dnum no cracks or splits at numof numoc with num num mm mandrel puncture resistance astm enum num lbs .
num n min .
permeance astm enum num perms .num m perms max .
m.num cold applied liquid membrane .
this membrane shall be used when any one of the following conditions apply grade greater than five percent high braking areas i.e .
intersections super elevated decks greater than num in.ft .
low radius curves less than or equal to num feet or history of asphalt shoving .
a. primer shall be a numpercent solventfree reactive acrylicbased twocomponent resin .
b. membrane shall consist of an acrylic resin based two coat numpercent solventfree reactive twocomponent elastomeric membrane .
each coat shall be num mils num mm thick and differentially pigmented for quality control .
in addition the membrane shall meet or exceed the following properties backed by a certificate of conformity as related to laboratory prepared samples tested at numof numoc and a numhour cure where applicable .
test method required results cure time na num minutes water vapor astm enum num gr.ftnumhr transmission num gmnumhr adhesion to concrete astm dnum num psi num mpa adhesion to steel astm dnum num psi num mpa mnum test method required results tensile strength astm dnum method a num psi num mpa die c min .
elongation at break astm dnum method a num die c low temperature num num mm mandrel pass numof numoc crack bridging astm cnum pass num cycles num in numof num mm numoc m.num concrete protective sealers .
all material is subject to the approval of the engineer shall have been tested and approved by the department prior to the start of application and shall conform to the following requirements .
a. shall meet all current federal and state environmental regulations .
b. shall not contain oxidizing ingredients such as marine oils stearates and vegetable oils .
c. shall reduce the chloride intrusion into concrete by num percent when tested in accordance with aashto tnum resistance of concrete to chloride ion penetration or by num percent when tested in accordance with ridot materials laboratory test chloride penetration resistance of concrete sealers as described in research report fhwarirdnum laboratory evaluation of concrete sealers for vertical highway structures .
d. shall reduce the net moisture weight gain of concrete after drying to num percent or less as tested in accordance with ridot materials laboratory test water absorption and water vapor transmission of concrete sealers as described in ridot research report fhwarirdnum laboratory evaluation of concrete sealers for vertical highway structures .
e. shall provide effective freezethaw protection to the underlying concrete as tested in accordance with astm cnum resistance of concrete to rapid freezing and thawing as modified by ridot for coated specimens as described in ridot research report fhwarirdnum num laboratory evaluation of concrete sealers for vertical highway structures .
f. shall be applied in a minimum of two coats or as recommended by the manufacturer .
g. shall be used as supplied by the manufacturer .
it shall not be diluted or altered in any way .
h. at least num weeks prior to the start of application a one gallon sample of the product and all pertinent information including but not limited to manufacturers protective coating test results shall be submitted to the department by the manufacturer .
m.num film forming sealers shall form a durable impermeable surface coat over the concrete substrate and shall conform to the following .
mnum a. shall be a formulation which when set is weatherproof waterproof resistant to most chemicals inhibits the intrusion of chloride salts and has exceptionally strong adhesive qualities .
b. shall in the case of twocomponent coatings be shipped in new containers identified part a and part b and shall be proportioned in each container to provide the manufacturers specified mixing ratio .
c. shall be applied to concrete median barriers in alternating coats of light gray and white with the top coat being white .
for structural concrete the material shall be applied in alternating coats of white and light gray with the top coat being light gray .
the material shall be applied so that it completely covers the underlying coat .
m.num penetrant class sealers shall penetrate the surface of the concrete substrate and leave no visible trace of its presence .
section m.num bridge bearings m.num elastomeric bearings .
m.num elastomer .
the raw elastomer shall be virgin neoprene polychloroprene .
the elastomer compound shall be classified as being of low temperature grade num num num num or num as defined by the testing requirements in table numa in section num of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges fifteenth edition .
m.num steel laminates .
steel laminates used for reinforcement shall be fabricated from rolled mild steel conforming to the requirements of astm anum or anum unless otherwise specified by the engineer .
the steel laminates shall have a minimum nominal thickness of num gauges .
holes in plates for manufacturing purposes will not be permitted unless they have been accounted for in design and indicated as such on the plans .
m.num fabric reinforcement .
fabric reinforcement shall be woven from num percent glass fibers of e type yarn with continuous fibers .
the minimum thread count in either direction shall be num threads per inch .
the fabric shall have either a crowfoot or an num hardness satin weave .
each ply of fabric shall have a minimum breaking strength of num lb.in .
of width in each thread direction .
holes in the fabric will not be permitted .
m.num bond .
the vulcanized bond between fabric and reinforcement shall have a minimum peel strength of num lb.in .
steel laminated bearings shall develop a minimum peel strength of num lb.in .
peel strength tests shall be performed by astm dnum method b. m.num pot and disc bearings .
all materials used in the manufacture of pot and disc bearings shall be new and unused .
no reclaimed materials shall be incorporated in the finished bearings .
all pot and disc bearings required for the contract shall be fabricated by a single manufacturer .
mnum materials including the elastomeric rotational element sealant sealing rings steel stainless steel and tfe sheet shall conform to the requirements of subsection num of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges fifteenth edition .
m.num sliding bearings .
m.num carbon steel .
sole pivot and masonry plates shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum grade num .
m.num stainless steel .
stainless steel shall conform to the requirements of astm anum type num or astm anum type num .
m.num polytetrafluoroethylene tfe .
tfe resin shall be virgin material not reprocessed conforming to the requirements of astm dnum .
specific gravity shall be between num and num .
the melting point shall be numof numo .
m.num bedding of masonry plates .
a. preformed fabric pads used as bedding shall be composed of multiple layers of num ounce cotton duck impregnated and bonded with high quality natural rubber or of equivalent and equally suitable materials compressed into resilient pads of uniform thickness .
the number of plies shall be such as to produce the specified thickness after compression and vulcanizing .
the finished pads shall withstand compression loads perpendicular to the plane of the laminations of not less than num pounds per square inch without detrimental reduction in thickness or extrusion .
b .
sheet lead used as bedding shall be common desilverized lead conforming to astm bnum .
the sheets shall be of uniform thickness and shall be free from cracks seams slivers scale and other defects .
unless otherwise specified lead sheets shall be numinch in thickness with a permissible tolerance of numinch plus or minus .
m.num anchor bolts including nuts and washers shall be galvanized and shall conform to the applicable requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
section m.num stone for masonry m.num stones .
the stone shall be of a kind specified on the plans .
the stone shall be of approved quality sound and durable resistant to weathering action reasonably uniform in color unless otherwise specified free from seams cracks laminations and minerals which by weathering would cause discoloration or deterioration .
stone unless otherwise specified shall be from a quarry the product of which is known to be of satisfactory quality .
stone shall be properly seasoned and of such character that it can be wrought to such lines and surfaces whether curved or plane as may be required .
the stone shall be kept free from dirt oil and any other injurious material which may prevent the proper adhesion of the mortar and concrete backing or detract from the appearance of the exposed surfaces .
samples of the stone to be used shall be submitted when mnum requested by the engineer .
when seam faced stones or a variety of distributed sizes colors and textures is desired the stone shall be obtained from more than one source if necessary .
all granite shall conform to astm cnum .
m.num sizes and dimensions .
a .
cut stone dressed or tooled .
all dimensions shall conform to those shown on the plans unless changes are ordered in writing by the engineer .
where the width of bed is not shown it shall be not less than num¼ times the rise with a minimum width of num inches .
the length of headers shall be not less than the width of the bed of the widest adjacent stone plus num inches .
stretchers shall have a length of not less than num½ times their thickness nor less than num feet and not more than num½ times their thickness .
the contractor shall before any stone is delivered prepare course layout plans with sufficient detail of individual stones to permit cutting in the quarry .
stone shall be cut to lie on the natural beds with tops and bottoms parallel except where otherwise shown .
the contact area of the beds shall be free from large depressions and cuppings which might impair the stability of the work and shall be dressed for at least num inches back of the pitch line .
the vertical joints shall be dressed at right angles to the face for at least num inches back from the face at which point they may fall away not more than num inch .
the beds and joints for caps copings and special units shall be dressed a corresponding distance from all exposed faces .
b. splitface .
the dimensions and proportions of stone shall be substantially as shown on the plans but may be varied as directed by the engineer to produce the desired effect .
unless otherwise specified stone facing may vary from num to num inches in thickness with occasional deeper stones for header purposes .
square units shall be avoided as far as possible .
stone for capping shall conform to section dimensions and reasonably conform to the lengths shown by scale on the drawings .
c. rubble .
the stones to be used for this type of masonry shall consist of irregular quarry stones without other preparation than the removal of very acute angles and excessive projections from the general surface .
stone removed from existing structures within project limits or stones from other approved sources may be used .
no stone less than num inches in thickness shall be used unless otherwise specified .
m.num surface finish .
a .
cut stone dressed or tooled .
for the purpose of this specification the surface finishes of cut stone are defined as follows smoothfinished having a surface in which the variations from the pitch line do not exceed numinch .
finefinished having a surface in which the variations from the pitch line do not exceed numinch .
roughfinished having a surface in which the variations from the pitch line do not exceed ½inch .
mnum scabbled having a surface in which the variations from the pitch line do not exceed num inch .
rockfaced having an irregular projecting face without indications of tool marks .
the projections beyond the pitch line shall not exceed num inches and no part of the face shall recede back of the pitch line .
b. splitface .
stone in exposed surfaces shall be splitfaced unless otherwise specified and the maximum projection shall be num inch at the base of walls and shall taper off to about ½inch adjacent to concrete copings or caps .
concave faces shall be avoided and the top surface of capping shall be slightly crowned to shed water .
c. rubble .
stones shall be selected and laid so as to present faces that will reasonably conform to the general plane of the wall surface avoiding conspicuous projections extending over num inches from the face line or depressions more than num inch deep .
section m.num traffic control systems m.num ground rods .
ground rods shall be a numinch diameter by numfoot long rod of copper clad steel and shall be equipped with a copperclad clamp of sufficient size to receive the ground wire .
m.num wire and cable .
m.num wire for highway lighting .
a .
general .
wire and cables shall be single conductor except where otherwise specified or indicated on the plans .
conductors of sizes no .
num awg and larger shall be stranded .
wires of sizes smaller than num awg shall be solid .
the conductors shall be factory identified by printing the size and type of insulation .
each conductor shall be colored in accordance with the national electric code .
insulation color shall be constant throughout the length of the conductor and shall not otherwise need to be taped or tagged for identification .
the color of the insulation of the neutral conductor shall be white .
the remaining conductors shall not be white but shall be of dissimilar colors for identification .
b. conductors .
wire conductors shall be annealed copper conforming to the following specifications as applicable .
mnum american society for testing materials astm bnum specification for annealed copper wire .
astm bnum specification for concentriclaystandard copper conductor hard medium hard or soft .
astm bnum specification for tinned soft or annealed copper wire for electrical purposes .
c. insulation .
insulation shall be indicated and shall conform to the following specifications as applicable .
american society for testing materials astm dnum thw and thwn specification for polyethylene insulated wire and cable astm dnum xhhwnum specification for crosslink thermosetting polyethylene insulation for wire and cable num to num volts .
all wire below finish grade shall be xhhwnum .
thw or thwn may be used between the handhole and fixture if the percent of wire above ground is greater than the percent below ground .
d. cable jacket .
insulation shall be jacketed and have an outer covering as specified in the national electric code table num conductor applications and insulations .
when specified by the national electric code the neoprene jacket shall conform to astm dnum .
e. insulation and jacket thickness .
the minimum thickness of insulation and jacket thickness shall be as follows insulation thickness jacket thickness conductor size in numths in inches num thru num awg num .num num thru num awg num .num num thru num awg num .num num thru num mcm num .num num thru num mcm num .num m.num ground wire .
ground wire shall be seven strand no .
num awg soft drawn copper and shall conform to the requirements of para .
b of subsection m.num .
m.num service conductors .
service conductors shall be no .
num awg national electrical code type thhn or twh and shall meet the requirements of paras .
a through e of subsection m.num .
m.num traffic signal cable .
traffic signal cable or wire shall conform to imsa specification num or num .
mnum m.num loop detector wire .
wire for inductance loop detectors shall consist of no .
num awg meeting the requirements of imsa specification num .
a roadway loop embedding sealer approved by the engineer shall be used to encapsulate traffic signal loop wires embedded in highway materials .
the sealer shall be cold applied and may be a one or twocomponent system the viscosity of which shall be sufficient to allow the material to be either poured or placed under pressure and fully encapsulate the loop wires .
the sealer shall be curable at temperatures of numof and above and when bonded to common paving materials it shall have sufficient strength and resiliency to withstand stresses due to vibrations and differences in expansion and contraction as a result of temperature changes or traffic conditions .
the sealer shall be compatible with the sheathing and covering of loop inductance wire and shall be resistant to most chemicals and solvents including salts acids hydrocarbons etc .
m.num loop detector leadin cable .
loop detector leadin cable shall meet the requirements of imsa specification num .
m.num inline disconnect device .
each unfused disconnecting device shall consist of a copper pin and a copper receptacle of at least num percent conductivity to be crimped to the cable .
the receptacle shall establish contact pressure with the pin through the use of a copper beryllium sleeve spring and shall be equipped with a disposable mounting pin .
the receptacle shall be fully annealed .
both the copper pin and receptacle shall have a centrally located recessed locking area adaptor to be complimentarily filled and retained by the rubber housing .
the fused disconnecting device shall consist of a spring loaded num percent minimum conductivity contact suitable for gripping the specified cartridge fuse .
these contacts shall be fully annealed and adapted to be crimped to the cable and shall be adapted to be retained securely in the proper position within the rubber housing .
the disconnect device housing shall consist of water resisting synthetic rubber capable of being buried in the ground .
each housing shall provide a section to form a water seal around the cable have an interior pin or fuse contacts and a section to provide a water seal between the two housings at the point of disconnection .
each housing shall be permanently marked load side or line side .
fuse for the disconnecting devices shall be rated num volts num ampere interrupting capacity and shall be numinch diameter num½inches long with a melamine glassfiber tube and sand filler surrounding the links .
m.num twoway splice .
a .
copper compression lugs and connectors .
lugs and connectors shall be copper compressed with industry tooling .
the lugs and connectors must have a current carrying capacity equal to the conductors for which they are rated and must also meet the requirement as listed in ul num. b .
heat shrinkable tubing .
this material shall be suitable for urd submersible or direct buried installation .
the tubing shall be ul approved and suitable for application on systems up to num volts numoc rating and shall be precoated with thermoplastic adhesive sealant .
when heated the internal coating shall melt and seal the connection from moisture and dirt and adhere to the insulation material on the cable .
m.num semipermanent numway splice kits .
splice material shall consist of compressed feeder lugs and compressed tap lug enclosed in a feeder housing and shall be y type with electrical rating of numv num amp copper .
mnum all housings shall be made of water resistant synthetic rubber suitable for burial in ground or exposure to sunlight .
each housing shall form a watertight seal around the cable and between the insert body and enveloping y housing .
m.num handholes and pull boxes .
m.num precast handholes and pull boxes .
precast type a handholes precast type h heavy duty handholes and precast type b pull boxes shall be designed and manufactured in accordance with astm cnum precast concrete manhole sections with the additional stipulation that the concrete mix design shall be class xx ae as set forth in section num of these specifications .
cast iron frames and covers shall conform to the relevant provision of subsection m.num or as indicated on the drawings .
covers on traffic signal handholes shall have the word signal cast into them .
covers on telephone handholes shall have the word comm cast into them .
covers for electric pull boxes shall have the word electric cast into them .
steel reinforcing shall conform to the relevant requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
support grips shall be provided for each cable including ground wire in each handhole or pull box and shall be of the closed mesh type for permanent support with cable end made of stainless steel with capability of supporting num pounds complete with supporting hook .
m.num metal pull boxes .
pull boxes shall be galvanized steel thickness as indicated on the plans .
boxes shall be furnished complete with tapped hubs galvanized checkered plate covers as indicated and neoprene gaskets .
the cover shall be fastened to the frame with a minimum of four numinch diameter flat head brass screws set flush with the cover .
boxes shall be provided with mounting lugs .
pull boxes shall be listed by underwriters laboratories and shall be tested for submersible application .
tapped holes shall be provided for conduit entrances .
drainage including a numinch plastic drain pipe shall be provided as indicated on the plans .
m.num conduit and fittings .
m.num rigid steel conduit and fittings .
this conduit shall conform to federal specification wwcnum .
the latest revision of the underwriters laboratories inc .
publication ulnumstandard for rigid metallic conduit also forms a part of this specification .
in addition to the above requirements the exterior surface conduit including fittings shall be zinccoated and the interior coated with zinc enamel or other corrosion resisting coating .
the conduit shall be metalized galvanized hotdip galvanized or electrogalvanized .
threads and couplings shall conform to the provisions of appendix iii of astm anum basic threading data for pipe .
mnum m.num pvc plastic conduit .
plastic conduit and plastic fittings shall conform to the requirements of federal specification wcnum gsafss conduit and conduit fittings plastic rigid and the latest amendments .
m.num expansion couplings .
the fittings shall be designed to compensate for expansion in a horizontal line of conduit at expansion joints in a structure and shall be as detailed .
expansion fittings shall provide for a maximum of num inches longitudinal conduit movement num inches in either direction .
expansion fittings shall provide for transverse conduit movement as indicated where required by structural conditions .
expansion fittings shall be bonded with heavy duty two bolt ground fittings .
strap type clamps will not be acceptable .
m.num luminaires .
m.num luminaires with integral ballast and photo cell .
luminaires shall be multiple high pressure sodium type with numinch slip fitters .
each luminaire shall be constructed of a twopiece aluminum diecast housing .
latching assembly shall be a double action snap safety type .
the hinge pin and hinge plate shall be of stainless steel with complete sealed and tilted optical system .
the projected surface area of each luminaire shall not exceed num square feet excluding the photo electric control when called for .
the slip fitter shall be of an adjustable type accommodating num¼inch to numinch diameter pipe with four stud mounting bolts with two u brackets locking a full num½inch desirable num½inch minimum of bracket to sustain a num mph wind load .
the optical assembly shall include a specular alzak aluminum reflector removable without tools .
a refractor of prismatic heat resisting borosilicate glass shall be factory installed .
the lamp holder shall be of high grade porcelain enclosed type with both axial and vertical adjustment with visible marking .
the optical system shall be gasketed with heat resistant nonmoisture absorbing chemical treated polyester felt to provide a filtering action to filter out dirt and other foreign matter .
the luminaires shall be of the horizontal type for ies type iii medium fullcut off lateral light distribution or as otherwise indicated on the plans .
the ies distribution shall be accomplished by the use of nominal num for numwatt system or num for numwatt system initial lumen num for numwatt system or num for numwatt system mean numwatt or numwatt high pressure sodium lamp num rated hour .
lamps shall have a rating of not less than num percent power factor through the entire life of lamp .
the installation date shall be marked with an indelible marker on each lamp .
this marking shall not alter the light distribution .
luminaires shall be provided complete with lamps .
luminaires shall be provided with twist lock receptacles for individual photoelectric control .
provisions shall be made to orient the receptacles to the north .
receptacles shall be molded hard rubber and shall be installed with neoprene gasket and retaining ring .
mnum m.num ballast .
ballasts shall be integral with the luminaire and shall be regulated to operate at not less than num percent power factor have not more than num watts for a numwatt system or num watts for a numwatt system input and shall be suitable for operation at minus numof .
ballasts shall be multitype tap suitable for the operating range of the required voltage plus or minus num percent and shall hold the lampwatts constant within plus or minus num percent .
m.num photoelectric controls .
the controls shall be tubeless type suitable for numvolt operation with the multiple high pressure sodium luminaires specified above .
the photoelectric controls shall be rated num volts num cycles alternating current num voltamperes for high pressure sodium loads with peak currents not greater than num amperes and shall be rated with an inrush current rating of num amperes complete with singlepole doublethrow num watt relay .
controls shall have an adjustable turnon at num num footcandles .
the turnoff value shall be num footcandles maximum .
the operating level shall be from num num footcandles .
the temperature operating range shall be from minus numof to plus numof .
each photoelectric control shall consist of a dependable simple tubeless circuit including a hermetically sealed broad area cadmium sulfide photocell capable of controlling a relay without intermediate amplification .
the relay shall be deenergized during the night with normally closed contacts in the closed position and the luminaire energized .
during the day the relay shall be energized with contacts open and the luminaire deenergized .
failsafe features shall provide for the lighting load to remain turned on in the event of failure of the electric circuit .
directional design features and a time delay shall be incorporated in the photoelectric controls to prevent false turnoffs to headlights and other transient light sources .
the individual components of each photoelectric control shall be mounted on a bakelite chassis and protected by a weatherproof acrylic housing .
the photoelectric controls shall mount directly on the high pressure sodium luminaires and shall conform to eeinema standards for locking sealing and base dimensions .
m.num protective screen for understructure luminaire .
angle iron shall be num½ x num¼ x num pounds per foot .
angles shall be galvanized after welding corners and drilling .
wire mesh shall be galvanized chain link type num gauge with approximately numinch square openings .
m.num light standards and foundations .
m.num light standards .
poles are to be designed for a basic wind speed of num miles per hour with num gust factor with loading in accordance with the latest revision of the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
all luminaire structures on interstate or limited access type facilities must comply with fatigue category i requirements including galloping vortex shedding if applicable natural wind gusts and truck induced gusts .
the truck induced loading shall be based on num mph velocity .
mnum all luminaire structures on all other roadways must comply with fatigue category ii requirements including galloping vortex shedding if applicable natural winds gusts and truck induced gusts .
the truck induced loading shall be based on num mph velocity .
lighting structures that have tapes of num inch per foot or greater are not susceptible to vortex shedding .
structural components and their connections shall be designed to resist the worstcase fatigue loading upon evaluation of all applicable cases acting separately .
the design of anchor bolts shall result in a ductile steel failure prior to any sudden brittle failure of the concrete .
the breakaway support couplings shall meet the requirements of the latest revision of the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
design and fabrication of aluminum lighting standards for the support of high pressure sodium luminaires shall be similar and compatible in design and appearance with lighting standards installed on various sections of interstate highways in the state of rhode island except as otherwise noted or indicated on the plans .
the nominal luminaire mounting heights shall be num and num feet .
each shaft shall be tampered by a cold working process from a seamless extruded tube of numtnum or numtnum wroughtaluminum alloy .
the davit arm shall taper from num inches at the base to num inches at the tip .
a numinch diameter slip fitter num inches long shall be provided at the end of each davit arm .
all arms shall be curved on an approved radius through an angle within num degrees of the horizontal .
twin davit lighting standards shall be provided with approved type field joints .
the bottom of the bases shall be coated with bituminous paint after assembly .
the base shall be of numtnum permanent mold cast aluminum alloy .
the base shall be approximately num inches square at the bottom with a height of num½inches .
welding shall be performed by the inert gas shielding arc method and welds shall be free from cracks and porosity .
the base shall be capable of withstanding a load of num footpounds .
the base shall have slotted anchor bolt holes to allow mounting on numinch or numinch bolt circles .
bases shall be provided with cast aluminum bolt covers .
the aluminum after fabrication shall have a minimum yield of num pounds per square inch .
the shaft shall be capable of withstanding numpound horizontal load num inches down from the top without fracture or apparent permanent deformation after the load has been released .
the base shall be capable of withstanding the maximum allowable bending moment of the shaft .
when the arm is welded to the shaft the arm shall withstand a vertical load of num pounds and a horizontal load of num pounds applied at the end of the arm without fracture or apparent permanent deformation after the load has been removed .
mnum m.num light standard foundation .
a .
concrete .
light standard foundations may be cast in place or precast units .
castin place units shall be constructed of class aae cement concrete masonry .
precast units shall be constructed of class xxae cement concrete masonry .
cement concrete masonry shall conform to the applicable provisions of section num of these specifications .
b .
steel reinforcement .
steel reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num .
c. anchor bolts .
anchor bolts shall be high strength steel having a minimum yield of num psi .
they shall be num inch in diameter by num inches long with a numinch l bend on the unthreaded end .
each anchor bolt shall have cut or rolled thread num inches long .
these threads shall be one inchnum national coarse class num fit .
a hexagon nut and leveling washers shall be furnished with each bolt .
the anchor bolt washers and the hexagon nut shall be hot dipped galvanized conforming to astm anum .
anchor bolts for roadway lighting are to be provided and set according to templates furnished by the manufacturer .
anchor bolts for bridge lighting are to be furnished as detailed on structural drawings .
d. steel conduit .
steel conduit elbows and fittings shall conform to the provisions of subsection m.num of this section .
e. breakaway support couplings .
the breakaway support couplings shall be the same as those manufactured by transpoindustries inc. of new rochelle new york precision form of gettysburg pa manitoba safetbase of winnipeg canada or an approved equal .
m.num service pedestal .
service shall be at num or num volt single phase and num volt three phase four wire .
m.num enclosure .
exterior mounted weatherproof nema num type num stainless steel service enclosure with body stiffeners and mounting shall be provided on a concrete pad and shall conform to the general arrangement and dimensions indicated .
the enclosure walls and top shall be cast solid with one opening on the north wall .
this opening shall be covered with a lexan watertight window approximately num½inches by num inches long .
a numgauge steel back panel with white baked enamel finish shall be provided for mounting the panelboard photo control relay and contactor .
the back panel shall be drilled and tapped as required to mount equipment .
the enclosure shall be provided with stainless steel hinged bolted gasketed doors combination flush access handles hasp and brass padlock directory frame and two sets of keys .
the enclosure shall be anchored to the concrete base using four numinch anchor bolts embedded at least num inches into the concrete .
the service pedestal shall be provided with a numinch thick by numinch wide neoprene gasket continuous around the perimeter of the enclosure base .
joints or splices in gasket shall be vulcanized in an approved manner .
the entire installation shall be watertight .
the enclosure shall include space for all materials listed .
mnum the enclosure shall have a watertight air vent in the roof a num amp gfi receptacle a keyless light with numamp single pole switch and a numwatt pumphouse heater with controlling thermostat mounted inside at the base .
m.num panelboard .
a split panelboard shall be supplied with the enclosure in accordance with the schedule indicated on the drawing .
the panelboard shall be equipped with a main breaker of the size indicated on the plans and shall be designed for singlephase numwire num or num volts as specified on the plans alternating current and shall be suitable for mounting within the service enclosure .
the panelboard shall be of the dead front safety type with the capacities of breakers as indicated on the plans .
the circuit breaker mechanisms shall be quickmake quickbreak on manual as well as automatic and shall be tripfree from the handle so that the contacts can not be held closed against circuit faults or abnormal overloads .
the main circuit breaker shall be twopole rated at num volts .
the frame size shall be num amp num ampere trip setting or as otherwise indicated on the plans and shall have an interrupting rating of num amperes at rated voltage .
the onepole branch breakers shall be rated at num volts and twopole branch breakers shall be rated at num volts .
frame size and trip setting shall be as indicated on the plans and have interrupting ratings of num amperes symmetrical .
the mounting panel on which circuit breakers busses and bolts for making copper connections shall be equipped with lock washers to prevent loosening .
riveter bus connections will not be acceptable .
the busses shall be securely fastened to insulating bases and shall have copper based on num amperes per square inch copper density .
busses shall be drilled and tapped to permit future circuit changes without the necessity for additional machining .
panelboards shall be designed and assembled so any individual breaker may be removed without disturbing adjacent breakers or necessitating the removal or loosening of required insulation .
all terminal lugs shall be copper bronze or brass .
m.num service pedestal concrete mat .
the service cabinet concrete mat shall be constructed of class aae concrete in accordance with section num portland cement concrete of these specifications .
m.num photoelectric control .
photoelectric controls shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of this section and shall mount inside the service pedestal or as indicated on the plans .
m.num contactors .
contactors shall be rated for h.i.d .
lighting inductive loads num volts num pole continuous duty ampere as indicated and shall be mechanically held .
contacts shall be silver tungsten .
a separate num volt circuit shall be provided for coil operation with a handoff automatic selector switch .
m.num poles .
poles for temporary work shall conform to u.s.a.s.i .
class num .
poles shall be southern yellow pine treated in accordance with subsection m.num preservative treatment of these specifications .
m.num service units .
a .
disconnect switch .
disconnect switch shall be of the fusible type heavy duty num volt a.c. nema numr raintight and shall conform to federal specification wsnum .
mnum b. fuses .
fuses shall be dualelement and shall be capable of carrying num percent of the indicated rating for a minimum of num seconds shall have an interrupting rating of num rms amperes and shall have standard national electrical code dimensions .
m.num meter sockets .
meter sockets shall be provided at all service pedestals traffic signal controllers intersection control beacons and counter stations .
meter sockets for all of the above applications shall be numterminal duncan type and meet all requirements of the local utility company .
meter sockets for traffic signal controllers and service pedestals shall include a manual bypass .
the line side of the service conductors shall be encased in a watertight pvc conduit within the service enclosure or signal cabinet .
m.num pole line hardware .
all miscellaneous pole line hardware required to complete the project as planned shall be standard material manufactured for pole line construction .
all metal parts shall be hotdipped galvanized .
in addition to the above whenever secondary racks are required they shall be as classified heavy service secondary rack by the eeinema and shall have a minimum spacing of num inches between the insulators .
each rack shall be secured to the pole by not less than one through bolt and one lag bolt .
all pole hardware bolts plate rods hangers clips wire guards and pole bands shall be hot dipped galvanized in conformance with the requirements of astm anum .
m.num metals .
metals for light standards poles bases and hardware shall conform to the same specifications as set forth in subsection m.num except that design stresses may conform with ce paper num for numtnum aluminum as it may be modified by subsequent aashto publications .
m.num messenger cable fittings .
messenger cable shall be wire steel strand messenger cable conforming to astm anum extrahighstrength grade class a galvanized unless otherwise noted on the plans .
m.num traffic signal controller units and controller cabinets .
m.num numphase controller units .
a .
general .
controller units shall be completely digital solidstate capable of a minimum of sixteen phases which when connected to traffic detectors or other means of actuation or a combination thereof shall operate the electrical traffic signal system at one or more intersections .
the controller unit cu shall communicate with the malfunction management unit mmu via port num .
the controller unit shall be a type anum configuration conforming to section num of the latest edition of the nema standards publication tsnum traffic controller assemblies .
the cu shall utilize mnum an inputoutput interface conforming to subsection num of the nema tsnum standards for all inputoutput functions with the back panel terminals and facilities the malfunction management unit traffic detector racks and auxiliary devices .
num .
controller display .
controller units shall utilize liquid crystal displays and be internally illuminated for night viewing .
the display shall consist of a minimum of four lines of text with a minimum of num characters per line .
as a minimum the model number and software version level shall be displayed .
num .
controller security codes .
the controller unit shall provide for a userspecified code entry before allowing any data to be altered .
all parameters may however be viewed without entering a valid security code .
security code access shall be terminated at a fixed time after access was gained or a keystroke was made .
the cu may have the ability via keyboard to disable security code access allowing for constant access to parameter changes .
num .
battery backup .
controller units shall come with a backup for the realtime clock only .
the backup system shall be capable of maintaining the realtime clock for a period of num days .
all program timings are to be maintained in electronically erasable programmable readonly memory eeprom .
b. functional requirements .
local intersection controller units shall meet the following functional requirements num .
programming shall be accomplished by frontpanel menudriven keyboard entry .
num .
controller units shall provide a user programmable daylight savings time capability .
num .
controller units shall provide data uploading and downloading capability to both a remote central computer station and a direct link to a laptop computer .
a minimum numfoot laptop communications cable configured for the supplied equipment shall be provided in the controller cabinet .
num .
controller units shall have the capability of performing dynamic selfdiagnostic testing per nema tsnum standards section num .
num .
controller units and all auxiliary devices shall meet all environmental requirements as set forth in nema tsnum standards section num. c. additional requirements .
num .
controller coordination and preemption .
the controller unit shall be capable of both coordinated operation and preemption operation in accordance with the nema tsnum standards section num .
given split and cycle timings the controller unit shall provide a means of automatically calculating coordination yield points permissive periods and forceoffs .
num .
phase designations .
the phase data in the controller unit shall match the numbering scheme shown on the plans and operate in the same sequence as shown in the phase sequence mnum diagram on the plans .
changes to the phase numbering or phase sequence shown on the plans must be approved by the departments traffic design unit before being implemented .
num .
programmable field hardware documentation .
before the traffic signal is placed in operation each programmable field hardware component shall be completely programmed by the contractor to reflect timings or settings shown on the plans .
programming is defined as user programmable keyboard entries or switch settings .
programmable field devices include but are not limited to controller units closed loop system masters malfunction management units detector units modems radios preemption devices etc .
num .
controller guarantee .
the entire controller unit shall be warranted to be free from defects in workmanship and material for one year or for the greater length of time common to trade practice from the date of acceptance by the engineer .
any defective parts are to be replaced free of charge .
manufacturers warranties shall become the property of the state at the time of acceptance .
m.num controller cabinet .
a .
general .
controller cabinets shall conform to section num of the nema tsnum standards .
the minimum size controller cabinet to be supplied shall be a size nump cabinet unless shown otherwise on the plans .
the cabinet finish shall be unpainted natural aluminum degreased and free of scratches and blemishes .
the traffic signal number shall be stenciled on the inside and outside of the cabinet door on state owned signals in numinch block letters .
b .
concrete work pad .
in unpaved areas a num x num x num concrete work pad shall be installed in front of the cabinet door .
the pad shall be placed on num inches of gravel borrow subbase .
the concrete shall be class a concrete conforming to the requirements of section num portland cement concrete of these specifications .
c. shelves and document tray .
each cabinet shall be furnished with a minimum of two movable shelves suitable for placing the controller mmu detector racks modems radios or any other required equipment .
a slideout document tray shall be mounted below the bottom shelf .
the tray shall be of sufficient size to hold cabinet wiring diagrams and two manuals .
the tray shall operate by sliding out on nylon rollers or ball bearings and opening a hinged cover to remove documents .
the closed cover shall provide a suitable support for resting documents or a laptop computer .
all cables shall be tied away to allow the tray to be opened and closed smoothly without any obstructions .
d. electrical outlets .
in addition to the requirements of the nema tsnum standards section num local controller cabinets shall be furnished with a gfi receptacle on the cabinet door and a duplex outlet within the body of the cabinet .
cabinets which are to contain a closedloop system master controller a local controller and auxiliary communications equipment radios or modems shall have two duplex outlets in addition to the door mounted gfi receptacle .
e. interior lighting .
in addition to the requirements for an incandescent fixture in nema tsnum standards section num cabinets shall be provided with a goose neck lamp having a flexible arm and utilizing a num watt rnum bulb numvac .
the lamp shall be mounted at a location on the side panel approximately level with the load switchterminal panel for concentrated illumination of this area .
the lamp shall have its own onoff switch on the unit .
mnum f. controller cabinet documentation .
two sets of complete cabinet schematics and operating manuals for the controller unit loop detector units closed loop system master modem and any other programmable field hardware supplied shall be included as part of the cabinet documentation .
three hard copy sets of all programmed data shall be supplied to the department at the time the controller is installed in the field .
each set shall be bound and covered .
one set is to remain in the cabinet one set is to be delivered to traffic design and one set is to be delivered to traffic maintenance .
g. controller cabinet service switches .
all cabinet switches shall be clearly labeled to indicate the switchs function .
toggle switches shall indicate the state of each switch position .
num .
open door alarm .
a pushbutton switch shall be installed on a bracket in the top right of the controller cabinet door .
the output of the switch shall be connected to the alarm no .
num input as defined by the nema tsnum standards and record the opening of the cabinet door as a local alarm .
num .
police door switches .
police door switches shall have the following a an automanual switch that toggles between automatic operation and manual operation .
during manual operation an extendible handcontrol pushbutton shall utilize manual control enable and interval advance to control the intersection operation .
the handcontrol pushbutton shall be installed inside the police door .
the hand control pushbutton shall be rugged in construction with a weatherproof covering over the cords pushbutton switch .
the automanual switch shall be connected to alarm no .
num as defined by the nema tsnum standards .
when the switch is placed in the manual position it shall be recorded as a local alarm .
b a signalflash switch that toggles between automatic and flashing operation .
to insure the controller exits flash properly the controller external start input shall be active in the flash position and inactive in the signal automatic position .
activation of the flash switch shall be recorded as a local alarm .
c a signaloff switch that toggles power on and off to the controller assembly and signals .
each switch shall be permanently labeled to identify its function .
num .
main door switches .
all cabinets shall be provided with the following switches on the main door .
these switches shall be accessible only when the main door is open .
a momentary pushbutton switches providing calls to vehicle phases num through num any concurrent or exclusive pedestrian phases and calls to intersection preempt displays .
b a timer onoff toggle switch that turns power onoff to the controller only .
the mmu and other cabinet equipment shall not be affected by this switch .
mnum c a threeposition modem power switch on all controller assemblies containing modems .
this switch shall be labeled modem power and perform the following functions on when in this switch position constant power shall be supplied to the modem no matter what the user defined output is set for .
off when in this switch position no power shall be supplied to the modem no matter what the user defined output is set for .
t.o.d .
when in this switch position power shall be supplied to the modem as a function of the userdefined output controlled by timeofday programming .
each switch shall be permanently labeled to identify its function .
h. controller cabinet terminal strips .
all terminal connections shall be marked with a number and where appropriate the corresponding nema function .
all labels shall be silk screened or permanent labels .
i .
lightning protection .
num .
ac service protection .
the traffic signal control assembly shall be equipped with surge protection installed at the power distribution panel .
the surge protector shall be an edco acp num filtering surge protector or approved equal and shall meet or exceed the following electrical specifications a peak current num amps numxnum microseconds b clamp voltage numka num volts typ .
c response time voltage never exceeds num volts during surge d operating temperature num to num degrees c. num .
vehicle loop detector protection .
surge protection shall be installed on each loop detector circuit .
the surge protection shall be an edco sranumlca vehicle loop detection surge protection device or approved equal .
the device shall be configured with the type of mounting which best accommodates the type of loop detector leadin terminal block supplied .
it shall meet or exceed the following specifications a peak surge current differential mode num amps numxnum microseconds .
common mode num amps numxnum microseconds .
b estimated occurrences num num amps .
c response time num nanoseconds .
d input capacitance num picofarads .
e operating temperature num to num degrees c. mnum f clamp voltage num amps differential mode num volts max .
g clamp voltage num amps common mode num volts max .
j .
radio interference suppressors .
each cabinet shall be equipped with a radio interference suppressor meeting the requirements of section num of the nema tsnum standards .
k. cabinet wiring .
as a minimum cabinets shall be wired in accordance with the nema tsnum standards section num terminals and facilities as it applies to type num configuration num cabinets unless otherwise specified in these specifications .
any power supplies must be shielded with a nonconductive material to prevent accidental contact .
sealers or compounds that are not nonconductive will not be accepted .
a panel shall be provided suitable for terminating a minimum of num loop leadins rack power and ground detector call terminations and phase num num num and num pedestrian pushbuttons .
l. detector racks .
the cabinet shall provide for a minimum of num channels of detection fully wired for all channels .
detector channels shall be assigned as shown on the loop detector diagram included on the plans .
all loop detector units shall be rack mounted .
detector units and racks shall conform to the nema tsnum standards sections num num and num .
racks shall be of metal construction providing top and bottom guides for all slots .
racks shall be bolted to the top shelf of the cabinet using wing nuts to simplify their removal .
where an emergency vehicle priority system is being installed auxiliary rack positions may be used instead of a separate rack to accommodate the selector modules .
the contractor shall supply and install on the upper lefthand corner of the back of the cabinet door a laminated intersection graphic and table depicting the traffic detector relay channel assignments .
the diagram shall be a graphic of the intersection oriented similar to the plans showing the locations of each loop detector .
the diagram shall at a minimum include detector numbers street names north arrow oriented similar to plans and controller cabinet location .
the assignment information shall be included in a table which shall include at a minimum approach name detector number terminal numbers detector rack slot number relay number relay channel number and the phase associated with each detector .
all detector unit delay and extension timings called for on the plans shall be programmed in the controller unit not in the detector unit .
m. load switches and flash transfer relays .
in addition to the requirements of the nema tsnum standards section num auxiliary devices all load switches shall utilize optically isolated encapsulated modular solid state relays .
discrete components on circuit boards will not be accepted .
load switch indicator lights shall be led type and wired on the input side of the device .
the field electrical loading for flash operation shall be wired through the transfer relays such that the load on the numcircuit flasher is as balanced as possible within the limitations of the signal phasing .
mnum controller cabinets shall be furnished with a full complement of load switches and flash transfer relays .
this requires a load switch and a flash transfer relay for each back panel position even it the position is not used .
n. malfunction management unit mmu .
the mmu shall conform to the requirements of section num of the nema tsnum standards .
o .
master or local modem .
provisions for a telephone connection in the cabinet shall be provided at all master controller locations and at selected local controllers as specified on the plans .
at these locations a shelf mounted modem shall be supplied .
the modem shall provide a full duplex operation using a numwire dialup telephone line and comply with part num fcc docket num .
the modem shall support the communications rate of the system software and synchronous and asynchronous data transfer .
originate manual or auto answer operating modes shall be provided .
the modem shall provide an auto disconnect function that will disconnect the modem due to lack of carrier after num seconds .
the front diagnostic leds shall display at a minimum the operational status of the following modem ready terminal ready receive data send data off hook carrier detect auto answer high speed the modem shall be wired such that it is capable of being powered down and powered up via a userdefined controller output to automatically reset the modem .
the userdefined output shall utilize an interface relay in controlling power to the modem .
the userdefined output shall be initially programmed to be on at all times except for a one minute interval starting at num a.m. every day .
the modem reset shall be controlled by a switch on the cabinet door as described in subsection m.num para .
g.numc .
the modem shall include an easily accessible onoff switch operating with power supplied from a controller cabinet duplex outlet .
the modem shall have an operating temperature range of numec numef to numec numef .
care should be exercised in the organization and construction of the controller cabinet to insure that the opening and closing of the cabinet door does not interfere with the modems power cable .
p. bus interface unit biu .
the biu furnished shall be of the latest manufacture and meet all requirements of section num of the nema tsnum standards .
m.num detector relays loop .
all detector units shall be rack mounted and meet the provisions of subsection num inductive loop detectors of the nema standard publication no .
tsnum traffic controller assemblies .
all delay and extension settings shall be set in the controller unless otherwise directed on the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
m.num vehicular signal heads .
signal heads shall conform to the requirements of the equipment standard of the institute of transportation engineers latest edition .
all vehicular signal heads shall be light emitting diode l.e.d .
traffic signal modules .
they shall be num inches num mm in diameter unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
mnum the l.e.d .
signal module shall conform to the requirements of the purchase specifications of the institute of transportation engineers latest edition for light emitting diode l.e.d .
traffic signal modules .
an independent laboratory shall certify that the l.e.d .
signal module complies with section num quality assurance of the above referenced ite l.e.d .
purchase specification .
all l.e.d .
lamps shall have a uv stabilized clear lens .
all l.e.d .
signal modules shall be warranted against material defects workmanship and loss of luminous intensity for a period of num months from the time the units are placed in service .
lamps shall have a minimum of num l.e.d.s light emitting diodes .
the lamps shall be wired with parallel circuits such that one burned out l.e.d .
will not affect more than num percent of the total circuit .
a filtered power supply engineered to electrically protect the l.e.d.s and maintain a safe and reliable operation shall be provided .
inline fusing with a maximum rating of num amps shall be provided in the power lead to minimize the effect and repair cost of an extreme over voltage situation or other failure mode .
all signals shall be capable of flash operation with no restrictions or degradation of performance .
lamps shall be provided with numinch pigtails .
wires shall be terminated with a crimp style female quick slide numinch spade lug num wire size .
lamps shall have color coded num awg wires for identification of heads as follows red l.e.d .
red with white neutral yellow l.e.d .
yellow with white neutral green l.e.d .
green with white neutral all modules supplied to be retrofit into existing signal heads shall include a new gasket .
the l.e.d .
signal module shall be a single selfcontained device not requiring onsite assembly for installation into a signal housing .
the module shall have a permanent up arrow for correctly orienting the module in the signal housing .
the manufacturers name trademark serial number and any other necessary identification shall be permanently marked on the backside of the module .
the maximum wattage for a numinch num mm ball shall be num watts .
the maximum wattage for a numinch num mm arrow shall be num watts .
red and green arrows and greenyellow dual indication arrows shall consist of two rows of l.e.d.s .
the lamps shall be in parallel circuits such that one burnedout l.e.d .
will not affect more than num percent of the total circuit .
m.num pedestrian signal heads .
the signals covered under this subsection consist of l.e.d .
modules displaying alternating international hand and walking man symbols contained within a weatherproof housing .
mnum l.e.d .
signal module shall be a selfcontained devise not requiring onsite assembly for installation .
l.e.d .
signal modules shall be manufactured to fit in standard numinch signal housings as a retrofit replacement for existing signal lamps .
all hardware including screws washers nuts and bolts shall be stainless steel and all other components shall be corrosion resistant .
all components shall be readily accessible when the door is open .
the l.e.d .
signal module shall consist of a double message overlay combining the hand and walking man symbols .
the symbols shall be formed by arranging the l.e.d.s to form an outline of each symbol .
the l.e.d .
signal module shall conform to the requirements of the purchase specification of the institute of transportation engineers latest edition for light emitting diode l.e.d .
pedestrian traffic signal modules .
m.num pedestrian pushbutton detector .
pedestrian pushbutton assemblies shall be ada compatible and shall consist of a round or rectangular cast aluminum enclosure free of voids pits dents excessive foundry grinding marks and other exterior blemishes .
the housing shall come with holes in the bottom and back tapped to accept a ½inch npt thread plug .
the bottom hole shall be supplied with a threaded plug .
the back hole shall be supplied with a nonthread plastic plug or equal .
m.num paint colors .
federal yellow shall conform to the color standards approved and contained in the manual for signs and pavement marking of the national system of interstate and defense highways standard interstate colors .
m.num items requiring a materials certificate and a certificate of compliance .
for the following items a materials certificate and a certificate of compliance will be required confirming their conformance to the requirements set forth in the special provisions andor plans .
num .
electrical conduit num .
stainless steel bolts and nuts num .
lamps and luminairies num .
ballasts both multiple and series num .
conductors mnum section m.num signs and sign supports m.num sign panels .
m.num extruded aluminum .
the panels shall be fabricated of extruded aluminum channels astm bnum alloy num tnum and they shall be numinch thick num inches wide and of bolted joint design .
partial channel sections shall not be allowed except where sign dimensions warrant and then only one such reduced section of six inches shall be permitted per sign panel .
the panels attachments and hardware shall conform to the requirements and details indicated on the plans .
locking tab fastenings engaging the sign stringers and connected to the sign sheets shall be designed with a factor of safety of not less than num against the minimum yield stress of the material and shall be fabricated of numtnum aluminum alloy material as shown on the plans .
stud material shall be aluminum alloy numhnum electrically welded to the sign sheets by the capacitor discharge method .
hardware required to fasten panels together or to attach signs to posts shall be aluminum or stainless steel .
stainless hardware shall conform to the requirements of astm anum .
nuts shall be of the selflocking type .
m.num aluminum sheets .
aluminum sheets for signs shall conform to astm bnum latest issue alloy numtnum .
the minimum thickness of sheets shall be as shown on the plans .
m.num temporary construction sign panels .
the plywood shall be of the exterior type and conform to the requirements as set forth in department of commerce product standard psi num .
face core and cross veneers shall be grade b or better and the entire area of contacting veneer surface shall be bonded with a waterproof adhesive that meets the test requirements for exterior type .
the overlay shall be of the high density type .
precautions shall be taken during plywood manufacture and subsequent handling to prevent any press caul lubricants release agents or other contaminants from coming in contact with the overlay surface .
thickness length and width shall be as shown on the plans .
sign blanks shall be cut to shape using a saw blade that does not tear plywood grain .
holes shall be clean cut and uniform .
the contractor may use aluminum sheets for temporary construction signs which meet the requirements of subsection m.num aluminum sheets of these specifications .
mnum the contractor may also use vinyl rollup signs which meet the requirements for type ii engineering grade reflective sheeting .
m.num reflective sheeting .
m.num general .
the reflective sheeting covered by this specification shall consist of a retroreflective system having a smooth outer surface .
when an adhesive backing is used the sheeting shall have a precoated adhesive on the back protected by an easily removable liner .
a .
type iiia and type iiib are high performance grade encapsulated lens sheetings with designations a for glass bead and b for prismatic sheeting .
b .
type iv is a reflectorized reboundable flexible sheeting designed for channeling devices with markings and shall meet or exceed the retroreflection requirements color conformance and all tests in accordance with astm dnum .
c. type v is durable flourescent orange retroreflective sheeting for certain work zone signs .
d. type vi is a prismatic retroreflective sheeting used for certain outside work zone signs .
aashto mnum type i retroreflective sheeting type ii engineering grade and type iia super engineering grade are not included in these specifications .
m.num applications .
a .
type iiia or type iiib sheeting .
type iiia or type iiib sheeting shall be used on any sign for which type v or type vi sheeting is not specified .
b .
type iv sheeting .
type iv sheeting shall be used on channeling devices with markings including flourescent traffic cones drum barricades and plastic pipetype barricades .
c. type v sheeting shall be used on num .
all wnum and wnum signs .
num .
all wnuma wnuma wnum wnum wnum enum and enuma signs within work zones with orange background sheeting choice .
num .
all gnum series .
d. type vi sheeting shall be used on all rnum rnum rnum rnum rnuma wnuma wnuma wnum wnum wnum signs hazard markers type num num and typical endofroad markers enum and enuma series .
m.num material requirements type iiia iiib and type iv sheeting .
a .
color requirements .
the colors specified shall conform to the applicable requirements of aashto mnum except modified as follows mnum b prismatic reflective element material observation entrance angle angle white red orange yellow green blue o o num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num minimum specific intensity per unit area sia candelas per lux per square meter type iv sheeting observation entrance flourescent angle angle white orange o o num num num num num num num num c. specular gloss .
the reflective sheeting shall have an num degree specular gloss of not less than num for types iiia iiib and iv when tested in accordance with astm dnum .
d. color processing .
color processing shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements of aashto mnum .
e. shrinkage .
shrinkage shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements of aashto mnum except the shrinkage of type iii reboundable sheeting shall not be more than num inch in num hours in any dimension .
f. flexibility .
type iii and iv sheeting with the liner removed and conditioned for num hours at numof numoc and num percent relative humidity shall be sufficiently flexible to show no cracking when slowly bent around a numinch num mm mandrel with adhesive contacting the mandrel .
for ease of testing spread talcum powder on adhesive to prevent sticking to mandrel .
the test specimen shall be num¾inches by num inches .
nonadhesive sheetings shall show no signs of cracking or crazing when flexed repeatedly over a numinch mandrel to num at numof .
type iii reboundable sheeting shall be conditioned and tested at numof .
g. adhesive .
when an adhesive is used the reflective sheeting shall have either a pressure sensitive adhesive backing class num or a heat activated adhesive backing class num which mnum shall provide for application of the sheeting without the necessity of additional adhesive coats on either the reflective sheeting or application surface .
the class num adhesive shall be a pressure sensitive adhesive of the aggressive tack type requiring no heat solvent or other preparation for adhesion to smooth clean surfaces .
the class num adhesive shall be an adhesive activated by applying heat in excess of numof numoc to the material as in the heatvacuum process of sign fabrication .
the protective liner attached to the adhesive shall be removed by peeling without soaking in water or other solvents without breaking tearing or removing any adhesive from the backing .
the protective liner shall be easily removed following accelerated storage for num hours at numof numoc under a weight of num pounds per square inch num kgcmnum .
the adhesive backing of the reflective sheeting shall produce a bond to support a num¾ pound num kg weight for num minutes without the bond peeling for a distance of more than num inches num cm num inch for type iii reboundable sheeting when applied to a smooth aluminum surface and tested as specified .
h. impact resistance .
the impact resistance of type iii and iv reflective sheeting shall conform to the applicable requirements of aashto mnum with the following exception for type iii reboundable and type iv sheeting a num inchpound setting shall be used on the test instrument .
type iii reboundable sheeting shall also be further conditioned and tested at numof .
i .
accelerated weathering .
when applied in accordance with recommended procedures the reflective sheeting shall be weather resistant and following cleaning in accordance with manufacturers recommendations shall show no appreciable discoloration cracking blistering or dimensional change .
following exposure the panels shall be washed with a num percent hydrochloric acid solution for num seconds rinsed thoroughly with clean water blotted with a soft clean cloth brought to equilibrium at standard conditions and tested .
it shall have not less than the percent of the minimum sia specified in table num when subjected to accelerated weathering in accordance with astm gnum type e or eh weatherometer with humidifier off .
table num accelerated weathering testing requirements type iii iv sheeting type of hours material tested minimum specific intensity per unit area iii num num of table num iv num num of table num for orange material having glass bead retroreflective elements and for type iii reboundable sheeting the hours tested shall be num .
mnum m.num material requirements type v sheeting a. photometric coefficient of retroreflection ra .
when the sheeting applied on aluminum test panels is measured in accordance with astm enum it shall have minimum coefficient of retroreflection values as shown in table num .
the rotation angle shall be numo the observation angles shall be numo and numo the entrance angels component bnum shall be numo and numo and the entrance angle component bnum shall be numo .
table num minimum coefficient of retroreflection ra candelas per footcandle per square foot numo rotation angle type v sheeting observation entrance angle angle orange o o num num num num num num num num num num num num b. daytime color .
color shall conform to the requirements of table num .
daytime color and maximum spectral radiance factor peak reflectance of sheeting mounted on aluminum test panels shall be determined instrumentally in accordance with astm enum .
the values shall be determined on a hunter lab labscan num num spectrocolorimeter with option cmr num or approved equal num num instrument with circumferential viewing illumination .
computations shall be done in accordance with astm enum for the numo observer .
table num color specification limits daytime type v sheeting reflectance limit y color num num num num x y x y x y x y min .
max .
orange new .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num num orange weath ered .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num num num maximum spectral radiance factor new num min .
weathered num mnum c. nighttime color .
nighttime color of the sheeting applied to aluminum test panels shall be determined instrumentally in accordance with astm enum and calculated in the u v coordinate system in accordance with astm enum .
sheeting shall be measured at numo observation and numo entrance at numo rotation .
color shall conform to the requirements of table num .
table num color specification limits nighttime type v sheeting color num num num num u v u v u v u v orange new and weather ed .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num the four pairs of chromaticity coordinates determine the acceptable color in terms of the cie num standard colorimetric system measured with standard illuminant dnum .
d. resistance to accelerated weathering .
the retroreflective surface of the sheeting shall be weather resistant and show no appreciable cracking blistering crazing or dimensional change after one year of unprotected outdoor exposure in south florida southfacing and inclined numo from the vertical or after num hours of exposure in a xenon arc weatherometer in accordance with astm gnum type b method a .
following exposure panels shall be washed in a num percent hcl solution for num seconds rinsed thoroughly with clean water blotted with a soft clean cloth and brought to equilibrium at standard conditions .
after cleaning the coefficient of retroreflection shall be not less than num when measured as indicated in para .
d.num of this subsection and the color is expected to conform to the requirements of tables num and num for weathered sheeting .
the sample shall num .
show no appreciable evidence of cracking scaling pitting blistering edge lifting or curling or more than numinch num cm shrinkage or expansion .
num .
be measured only at angles of numo observation numo entrance and numo rotation .
where more than one panel of a color is measured the coefficient of retroreflection shall be the average of all determinations .
e. impact resistance .
the retroreflective sheeting applied according to the sheeting manufacturers recommendations to a test panel of alloy numtnum num num cm by num num cm by num num cm and conditioned for num hours shall show no cracking outside the impact area when the face of the panel is subjected to an impact of num inchpounds num nm using a weight with a numinch num mm diameter rounded tip dropped from a height necessary to generate an impact of num inchpounds at test temperatures of both numof numoc and numof numoc .
f. resistance to heat .
the retroreflective sheeting applied to a test panel as in para .
e above and conditioned for num hours shall be measured in accordance with para .
a at numo observation and numo entrance angles at numo rotation and exposed to num numof num numoc for num mnum hours in an air circulating oven .
after heat exposure the sheeting shall retain a minimum of num percent of the original coefficient of retroreflection .
g. field performance .
retroreflective sheeting processed and applied to sign blank materials in accordance with the sheeting manufacturers recommendations is expected to perform effectively .
the retroreflective sheeting will be considered unsatisfactory if it has deteriorated due to natural causes to the extent that num the sign is ineffective for its intended purpose when viewed from a moving vehicle under normal day and night driving conditions or num the coefficient of retroreflection is less than num when measured at numo observation and numo entrance at numo rotation .
all measurements shall be made after sign cleaning according to the sheeting manufacturers recommendations .
m.num material requirements type vi sheeting a. coefficient of retroreflection ra .
the coefficients of retroreflection shall not be less than the minimum values specified in table num .
testing shall be in accordance with astm dnum latest edition .
units coefficients of retroreflection ra shall be specified in units of candelas per lux per square meter candelas per footcandle per square foot .
the observation angles shall be as per astm dnum latest edition .
for colored transparent overlay films and for screen printed transparent color areas on white sheeting the ratios of the ra for the white to the ra for the color when measured at numo observation numo entrance and numo rotation shall be num to num for red not less than num for blue and not less than num for green when processed in accordance with the sheeting manufacturers recommendations .
table num minimum coefficient of retroreflection ra candelas per lux per square meter type vi sheeting astm dnum latest edition observation entrance rotation angle angle angle white yellow blue green o o o num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num mnum b .
color requirements .
conformance to color requirements of table num shall be determined by instrumental method in accordance with astm enum on sheeting applied to aluminum test panels .
the values shall be determined on a hunterlab labscan num num spectrocolorimeter with option cmr num or approved equal num num instrument with circumferential viewing illumination .
computations shall be done in accordance with astm enum for the numo observer .
table num color specification limits daytime type vi sheeting reflectance limit y color num num num num x y x y x y x y min .
max .
white num num num num num num num num num yellow num num num num num num num num num num blue num num num num num num num num num num green num num num num num num num num num num the four pairs of chromaticity coordinates determine the acceptable color in terms of the cie num standard colorimetric system measured with standard illuminant dnum .
c. gloss .
the retroreflective sheeting shall have an numo specular gloss of not less than num when tested in accordance with astm dnum .
d. color processing .
the retroreflective sheeting shall permit cutting and color processing with compatible transparent and opaque process colors in accordance with the sheeting manufacturers recommendations at temperatures of num to numoc num to numof and relative humidities of num percent to num percent .
the sheeting shall be heat resistant and permit force curing without staining of applied or unapplied sheeting at temperatures recommended by the sheeting manufacturer .
e. flexibility .
the retroreflective sheeting with the liner removed and conditioned at standard conditions shall be sufficiently flexible to show no cracking when slowly bent in one seconds time around a num mm num inch mandrel with the adhesive contacting the mandrel at test conditions .
talcum powder shall be spread on the adhesive to prevent sticking to the mandrel .
f. adhesive .
the protective liner attached to the adhesive shall be removed by peeling without soaking in water or other solutions without breaking tearing or removing any adhesive from the backing .
the protective liner shall be easily removed following accelerated storage for num hours at numoc numof under a weight of .num kgcmnum num pounds per square inch .
the adhesive backing of the retroreflective sheeting shall produce a bond to support a .num kg num pound weight for num minutes without the bond peeling for a distance of more than num cm num inches when applied to a test panel .
apply num cm num inches of a num cm x num cm num x num specimen to a test panel .
mnum condition and then position the panel face down horizontally suspend the weight from the free end of the sample and allow it to hang free at an angle of numo to the panel surface for num minutes .
g. impact resistance .
the retroreflective sheeting applied according to the sheeting manufacturers recommendations to a test panel of alloy numtnum num cm num inches by num cm num inches by num cm num inches and conditioned at standard conditions shall show no cracking outside the impact area when the face of the panel is subjected to an impact of num nm num inch pounds using a weight with a num cm num inch diameter rounded tip dropped from a height necessary to generate an impact of num nm at test temperatures of both numoc numof and numoc numof .
h. resistance to accelerated outdoor weathering .
the retroreflective surface of the sheeting shall be weather resistant and show no appreciable cracking blistering crazing or dimensional change after two years unprotected outdoor exposure facing the equator and inclined numo from the vertical .
following weather exposure panels shall be washed in a num hcl solution for num seconds rinsed thoroughly with clean water blotted with a soft clean cloth and brought to equilibrium at standard conditions .
after cleaning the coefficient of retroreflection shall not be less than the values in table num when measured at numo rotation and the colors shall conform to the requirements of table num .
the sample shall num .
show no appreciable evidence of cracking scaling pitting blistering edge lifting or curling or more than num mm num inch shrinkage or expansion num .
be measured only at angles of numo observation numo entrance and numo rotation and numo observation numo entrance and numo rotation .
where more than one panel of a color is measured the coefficient of retroreflection shall be the average of all determinations .
table num minimum coefficient of retroreflection ra after accelerated outdoor weathering candelas per lux per square meter type vi sheeting observation entrance rotation angle angle angle white yellow blue green o o o num num num num num num num num num num num num num num i .
resistance to heat .
the retroreflective sheeting applied to a test panel and conditioned at standard conditions shall be measured for retroreflectance at numo observation and numo entrance angles and numo rotation and exposed to num numoc num numof for num hours in an air circulating oven .
after heat exposure the sheeting shall retain a minimum of num percent of the original coefficient of retroreflection when measured at room temperature .
mnum j .
resistance to corrosion .
the retroreflective sheeting applied to a test panel and conditioned at standard conditions shall show no loss of adhesion appreciable discoloration or corrosion and after cleaning shall retain a minimum of num percent of the original coefficient of retroreflection when measured at numo observation numo entrance and numo rotation angles after num hours exposure to a num percent concentration of salt spray at numoc numof when tested in accordance with astm bnum .
k. general characteristics and packaging .
the retroreflective sheeting as supplied shall be of good appearance free from ragged edges cracks and extraneous materials and shall be furnished in either rolls or sheets .
when furnished in continuous rolls the average number of splices shall not be more than num per num meters num yards of material with a maximum of num pieces in any num meter num yard length .
splices shall be butted or overlapped and shall be suitable for continuous application as furnished .
when furnished as cut sheets or sign faces the sheeting shall be packaged flat in accordance with commercially accepted standards .
the sheeting shall be packed snugly in corrugated fiberboard cartons in accordance with commercially accepted standards .
each carton shall clearly stipulate the brand quantity size lot or run number and color .
stored under normal conditions the retroreflective sheeting as furnished shall be suitable for use for a minimum period of one year .
l. performance requirements and obligations .
num .
certification .
the sheeting manufacturer shall upon request supply with each lot or shipment a certification which states that the material supplied will meet all of the requirements listed herein .
num .
field performance requirements .
after ten years in service the coefficient of retroreflection shall not be less than the values listed in table num .
table num minimum coefficient of retroreflection ra after ten years candelas per lux per square meter type vi sheeting observation entrance angle angle white yellow blue green o o num num num num num num num num num num num num all measurements shall be made after sign cleaning according to the sheeting manufac turers recommendations .
natural causes include effects of exposure to weather .
natural causes exclude without limitation damage from exposure to chemicals abrasion and other mechanical damage from fasteners used to mount the sign collisions or mishandling .
mnum for screen printed transparent colored areas on white sheeting the coefficients of retroreflection shall maintain the ratios required for new sheeting .
num .
process inks .
the manufacturer of the sheeting shall furnish at no additional cost the process inks clears and thinners recommended for the sheeting to meet the performance requirements of this specification and shall further be responsible for technical assistance in the use of these inks in accordance with this specification .
num .
slip sheet .
slip sheet paper if recommended by the sheeting manufacturer for sheeting surface protection or for use in packaging storage or shipping finished signs shall be furnished in rolls by the manufacturer at no additional charge in at least equal dimension square meters and in the same sizes as the sheeting supplied .
num .
washers .
washers if recommended by the sheeting manufacturer to protect the sign surface from damage by bolts or other fasteners shall be furnished by the manufacturer at no additional charge .
m. fabrication date .
the sign fabricator shall date all signs at the time of fabrication with the fabrication date so that the start of the warranty period can be determined .
m.num testing procedures .
a .
testing conditions .
unless otherwise specified herein all applied and unapplied test samples and specimens shall be conditioned at the standard conditions of num numoc num numof and num percent relative humidity for num hours prior to testing .
b .
testing panels .
unless otherwise specified herein when tests are to be performed using test panels the specimens of retroreflective material shall be applied to smooth aluminum cut from astm bnum alloy numhnum numhnum numhnum or numtnum sheets in num cm num inch num cm num inch or num cm num inch thickness .
the aluminum shall be degreased and lightly acid etched before the specimens are applied .
the specimens shall be applied to the panels in accordance with the recommendations of the retroreflective sheeting manufacturer .
c. specific intensity per unit area sia .
measurements shall be conducted in accordance with instrumental photometric measurements of retroreflective materials and retroreflective devices federal test method standard num .
test will be conducted at num feet with numinch source and numinch receiver on numinch square test specimen .
observation and entrance angles shall be in the same plane .
rotate specimen to orientation angles recommended by the manufacturer .
the presentation angle is zero .
the sia of the sheeting when totally wet shall not be less than num percent of the dry values in tables num num num and num .
wet performance measurements shall be made on new sheeting in accordance with the standard rainfall test specified in section num of aashto mnum .
d. adhesion test .
adhesion test shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements of aashto mnum .
mnum e. colorfastness .
the colorfastness test shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements of aashto mnum except that the specimens shall be prepared and subjected to accelerated weathering as specified above .
f. fungus resistance .
for use in areas where fungus growth may be a problem and if specified by the engineer fungus resistance shall be determined as specified herein .
after inoculation with the test organism aspergillus niger and incubation for num days the reflective material shall show no appreciable formation of fungus growth .
any formation of fungus growth shall be noninjurious to the reflective material and shall be removable by wiping with a soft cloth .
after completion of the incubation and after being wiped clean the reflective material shall retain the full sia values as specified in tables num num num and num .
num .
test organism .
the test organism used in this test shall be aspergillus niger atcc no .
num .
this organism may be obtained upon request from the american type culture collec tion atcc num parklawn drive rockville maryland num or mycology laboratory prl u.s. army natick laboratories natick massachusetts num .
cultures of this organism shall be carefully maintained on a potatodextrose agar medium and promptly renewed if there is evidence of contamination .
the stock cultures may be kept for not more than num months in a refrigerator at a temperature from numof to numof numoc to numoc .
subcultures incubated at numof to numof numoc to numoc for num to num days shall be used in preparing the inoculum .
num .
culture medium .
the culture medium shall have the following composition nanonum num grams knumhponum num grams mgsonumhnumo num grams kci num grams agar num grams distilled water to make num ml .
the ph shall be num to num if otherwise adjust to that range with hcl or naoh .
after mixing the ingredients shall be sterilized by autoclaving for num minutes at num psi num kgcmnum at numof numoc .
under sterile conditions the medium shall be poured into num num mm by num mm petri dishes about num ml per dish and allowed to harden .
num .
inoculum .
add about num ml of sterile distilled water containing about num percent of nontoxic wetting agent to a subculture num to num days old of the test organism in a ripe fruiting condition .
the spores shall be forced into suspension with a sterile camels hair brush or other suitable means and diluted to num ml with sterile distilled water .
num .
preparation of specimens .
cut three num x num num cm by num cm specimens from the sample and apply to test panels with the reflective surface up .
completely immerse the test specimens in a leaching tank of continuously flowing water for num hours and then remove and dry .
the leaching tank shall be large enough to hold an amount of water weighing not less than num times the weight of the specimens .
the water entering the tank shall not fall directly on the specimens and shall flow at a rate of num to num liters per hour .
the ph of the water shall be in the range of num to num .
mnum num .
inoculation .
under aseptic conditions dip each specimen in num percent ethanol for a few seconds rinse in distilled water and place firmly on the surface of the solidified agar medium contained in the petri dishes .
place specimens with the reflective surface facing up one specimen to each dish .
with a sterile pipette distribute num to num ml of inoculum over the surface of each specimen and the surrounding medium .
num .
incubation period .
the period of incubation shall be num days at a temperature of numof to numof numoc to numoc and num to num percent relative humidity .
num .
control .
test three control specimens of untreated porous grade filter paper with the specimens of the reflective material to check the viability of the inoculum .
at the end of the incubation period the controls should be covered with fungus growth .
num .
test results .
upon completion of the incubation period examine the specimens visually for fungus growth .
wipe the specimens with a soft cloth wet with a num percent ethanol solution .
condition the specimens at standard conditions for num hours .
test the specimens in accordance with para .
c of this subsection and when finished attempt to remove specimen from the test panel .
m.num intended use .
the reflective sheeting specified herein is intended for use on surfaces of highway signs to assure their optimum visibility by day and at night when exposed to a light source and whether dry or totally wet by rain .
purchasers should select colors and preferred options permitted herein and specify the type of adhesive backing class num precoated pressure sensitive adhesive or class num heat activated adhesive as required .
m.num cutout letters symbols and accessories .
m.num description .
cutout letters digits and alphabet accessories shall be fabricated in either of the following manners a. embossed aluminum frames in which prismatic reflectors are installed so as to be an integral part of the character or otherwise securely affixed to prevent their displacement in handling or service .
letters in which reflectors are assembled by means of tape are unacceptable .
b. adhesive coated reflective sheeting shall be permanently adhered to flat aluminum backing .
the reflective sheeting shall conform to the applicable provisions for type iiia silver sheeting as specified in subsection m.num reflective sheeting .
m.num detailed specifications .
a .
design and fabrication of frames using prismatic reflectors .
letter design shall be the federal standard alphabet series d and e modified to accommodate the required reflectors .
all items shall be fabricated from .numinch sheet aluminum .
mnum mounting holes shall be provided within the frames to permit the use of screws rivets or other common fasteners .
the size and spacing of reflector holes shall be such as to afford maximum night legibility and visibility to the finished cutout figure .
b. finishing of frames .
after metal fabrication has been completed the aluminum frames shall be degreased etched neutralized and chemically treated before being finished in an approved baking white enamel .
c. prismatic reflectors .
the reflectors shall consist of a transparent acrylic plastic face herein referred to as the lens and an opaque back fused to the lens under heat and pressure around the entire perimeter to form a unit permanently sealed against dust water and water vapor .
the reflector lens shall be colorless yellow red or green .
the lens shall consist of a smooth front surface free from projection or indentations other than for identification and a rear surface bearing a prismatic configuration such that it will effect total internal reflection of light .
the manufacturers trademark shall be molded legibly into the face of the lens .
the reflector lens shall be methyl methacrylate meeting requirements of federal specification lmnuma type i class num. d. design and fabrication of characters reflectorized with encapsulated lens reflective sheeting .
letter design shall conform to bureau of public roads standards for use on national system of interstate and defense highways .
characters shall be a minimum of .numinch thick aluminum sheets of num hnum alloy .
aluminum shall be properly treated according to sheeting manufacturer .
m.num sign supports and structures .
m.num general .
signs sign panel supporting frames and overhead sign support structures including anchor bolts and foundations shall conform to the latest edition of the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
steel poles posts channel posts uchannels or other required shapes shall be galvanized and otherwise conform to the plans and applicable sections of these specifications .
anchor bolts shall be hotrolled steel conforming to astm anum or a substitute approved in advance by the engineer .
anchor bolts shall be of the proper size and length to develop proper bond in transferring loads to concrete foundations and possess a minimum yield strength of num psi .
m.num design of overhead sign structures .
prior to fabrication the contractor shall furnish in triplicate computations containing the design stresses and allowable stresses for each complete structure .
all plans and computations shall bear the seal of a rhode island registered professional engineer .
mnum cantilever sign supports shall consist of dual arms with a minimum num inch per foot taper on the arms .
columns may either be tapered on nontapered members .
all overhead span sign structures shall consist of a single horizontal steel member supported by steel columns at either side .
the columns and horizontal members may be either tapered or nontapered .
cantilever sign structures on interstate or limited access highways must comply with fatigue category i requirements including galloping vortex shedding if applicable natural wind gusts and truck induced gusts .
the truck induced loading will be based on num mph velocity .
cantilever sign structures on other roadways must comply with fatigue category ii requirements of the aashto standards including galloping vortex shedding if applicable natural wind gusts and truck induced gusts .
the truck induced loading will be based on num mph velocity .
the basic wind speed used in the determination of the design wind pressure shall be num mph .
structural components and their connections shall be designed to resist the worstcase fatigue loading upon evaluation of all applicable cases acting separately .
the design of anchor bolts shall result in a ductile steel failure prior to any sudden brittle failure of concrete .
when the clearance between the bottom of the leveling nuts and the top of the concrete is equal to or greater than one bolt diameter bending stresses in the anchor bolts shall be considered in the design .
use of grout under base plates shall generally not be permitted .
if specific conditions warrant its use the grout shall be considered nonload bearing .
loads shall be directly supported by the anchor bolts .
the following notes shall be included on all plans andor shop drawings in reference to anchor bolts pretensioning of all anchor nuts is required and shall be accom plished by tightening to numth turn beyond the snugtight position .
the maximum clearance between the bottom of the leveling nuts and the top of the concrete is critical and shall not exceed the amount specified on this drawings .
vibration mitigation devices will not be allowed .
m.num overhead sign structures steel .
pipes for end support columns cantilever arms and horizontal span members shall conform to the requirements of astm anum grade b .
stainless steel plates shall conform to the requirements of astm anum type num .
base plates and attached stiffener plates shall conform to the requirements of astm anum .
all other elements except bolts and nuts shall conform to the requirements of astm anum .
mnum after complete fabrication each of the fabricated steel sections of all sign supports shall be hotdip galvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm anum .
high strength bolts nuts and washers shall conform to the requirements of astm anum and shall be hotdip galvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm anum class c. headed castinplace anchor bolts shall be used in lieu of hooked anchor bolts .
all nuts for high strength bolted connections including nuts for anchor bolts shall be prevailing torquereusable type locking nuts .
all ubolts shall conform to the requirements of astm anum and shall be hotdip galvanized in accordance with the requirements of astm anum .
stainless steel bolts shall conform to the requirements of astm anum grade bnum and shall conform to the requirements of astm anum grade num .
stainless steel lock washers shall conform to the requirements of astm anum type num .
m.num ground mounted breakaway .
all materials utilized for foundations sign supports hardware and attachments shall conform to the breakaway design indicated on the plans .
founda tions shall be constructed of class aae concrete and reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of subsection m.num of these specifications .
m.num directional regulatory and warning sign mountings .
a .
wood posts .
wood posts shall be cut from wellseasoned straight sound southern yellow pine grade no .
num or better dressed on four sides and shall be treated with chromated copper arsenate type c in accordance with aashto mnum prior to the mounting of the sign to the post .
mounting hardware shall be of the theft resistant type as indicated on the departments approved materials list .
b. tubular square post .
tubular steel posts shall be numinch or num½inch square numgauge tubing with bracing anchorage and breakaway supports as shown on the plans .
c. uchannel .
uchannel posts for directional regulatory and warning signs shall be num pounds per foot as shown on the plans .
uchannels shall be galvanized in accordance with astm anum .
m.num street sign posts and brackets .
a. tubular steel posts .
posts for supporting street signs shall be tubular steel with an outside diameter of numdinches with a wall thickness of numinch and a minimum weight of num pounds per foot .
all steel posts shall be galvanized in accordance with astm anum and be free of slivers cracks burrs and other manufacture imperfections .
b .
brackets and hardware .
street name sign brackets shall consist of post to sign post top bracket and a sign to sign cross bracket .
the brackets shall be of the appropriate design and size for mounting extruded aluminum street name sign blades with a .num minimum gauge and of lengths up to num inches and num inches in height .
they shall be diecast of high strength aluminum mnum alloy num with tensile strength of num psi .
the brackets shall be free of holes pits or flaws and shall not be larger than the inside diameter of the base of the post top bracket to insure proper fit .
where two sign blades are used the two slots of the cross brackets shall be such that the signs are num degrees to each other .
street name sign brackets to be mounted on traffic signal poles shall consist of either one diecast aluminum cantilever type lbracket or one diecast aluminum wing type bracket .
a minimum of two stainless steel straps shall be used to hold each type bracket .
all brackets shall be free of pits or flaws and other manufacture imperfections .
bolts for bolt through slots shall be a num x ½ numpoint splint head bolt to lock the blade in the bracket .
m.num parking sign mile marker and delineator posts .
a .
parking sign posts .
posts for parking sign mountings shall be uchannel shape made from steel conforming to astm anum and galvanized in accordance with astm anum .
the post shall have a minimum weight of num pounds per foot and shall contain numinch mounting holes spaced num inch on center for a minimum length of num feet from the top of the post .
b .
mile marker post .
posts for mile marker mounting shall conform to the requirements for parking sign posts para .
a above except that mounting holes need only be included for a length of num from the top of post .
c. delineator posts .
post for delineator mountings shall be uchannel shape made from steel conforming to astm anum and galvanized in accordance with astm anum .
the post shall have a minimum weight of num pounds per foot and contain numinch diameter holes for mounting spaced at num inch on center for a minimum length of num num from the top of the post .
m.num review and approval of materials used in traffic sign construction .
m.num .
requirements .
the contractor will be required to submit prior to award of the contract the source of all items intended to be supplied for this contract .
the contractor is responsible for obtaining approval of each of these items and he shall request this approval in writing from the engineer .
wherever in the special provisions or on the plans a particular manufacturers product proprietary item is specified or indicated it shall be understood that this represents the standard required but that a similar product of another manufacturer may be considered as a substitute and approved as an equal .
should the contractor desire to use a product which is considered equal to a proprietary item he shall submit a complete description of the item together with seven copies of shop drawings catalog cuts andor other descriptive literature which would completely illustrate such items presented for formal approval .
this approval does not change the requirements for a certified test report andor materials certificate and a certificate of compliance as called for elsewhere .
the requirements for a certified test report andor materials certificate and a certificate of compliance for each of the individual items set forth in the special provisions are contained mnum below .
the contractor shall make available and supply these documents to the engineer in the following manner those materials requiring a certified test report shall have said documents forwarded to the engineer .
provisional acceptance must be obtained on these documents before the material is incorporated in the project .
final acceptance will be granted upon submission of a certificate of compliance after installation of the material .
those materials requiring a materials certificate shall have said documents forwarded to the engineer .
provisional acceptance must be obtained on these documents before the material is incorporated in the project .
final acceptance will be granted upon submission of a certificate of compliance after installation of the material .
the contractor shall supply these documents to the engineer wherever required by the special provisions relating to a particular item .
the method of processing for approval all items other than those described herein shall be established by the engineer .
m.num certified test report .
a certified test report is a document containing a list of the chemical metallurgical electrical andor physical results obtained from an actual test of the materials involved and shall attest to the fact that the specifications are adhered to .
the following information will also be required num .
name of organization to whom the material is consigned .
num .
quantity of material represented .
num .
means of identifying the consignment such as label marking seal number lot number etc .
num .
date and method of shipment .
the certified test report shall be signed by an authorized and responsible agent for the organization manufacturing the material and it shall be notarized .
m.num materials certificate .
a materials certificate is a document certifying that the materials components and equipment furnished conform to all requirements of the plans andor special provisions .
appurtenances such as miscellaneous hardware may be covered in total by a single entry .
the document shall also include the following num .
project to which the material is consigned .
num .
name of contractor to which material is supplied .
num .
kind of material .
num .
quantity of material represented by the certificate .
num .
means of identifying the consignment such as label marking seal lot number etc .
num .
date and method of shipment .
the materials certificate shall be signed by an authorized and responsible agent for the organization supplying the material and it shall be notarized .
mnum m.num certificate of compliance .
a certificate of compliance is a document certifying that the materials components andor equipment covered by the previously submitted certified test report andor materials certificate have been installed in the work and that they conform to all the requirements of the plans and or special provisions .
appurtenances such as miscellaneous hardware may be covered in total by a single entry .
the following information shall also be required on the document num .
project number .
num .
kind of material .
num .
quantity represented by the certificate .
num .
manufacturer and model number and lot number .
the certificate of compliance shall be signed by an authorized and responsible agent for the prime contractor and shall be notarized .
m.num items requiring a certified test report andor materials certificate and a certificate of compliance .
for the following items a certified test report and a certificate of compliance will be required confirming their conformance to the requirements set forth in these specifications special provisions andor plans .
should the consignee noted on a certified test report be other than the prime contractor then materials certificates shall be required to identify the shipment .
num .
reflective sheeting num .
demountable copy num .
aluminum post and attachment hardware num .
aluminum flat sheets for sign panels num .
anchor bolts and nuts num .
overhead sign support complete num .
delineators all num .
delineator posts section m.num pavement markings m.num glass beads dual gradation .
m.num scope .
this specification covers the requirements for glass beads which are to be dropped onto white and yellow epoxy resin pavement marking material to produce a highly weather andwear resistant reflectorized traffic marking .
m.num detailed requirements .
a. reflective glass spheres .
the glass spheres shall be transparent clean smooth and spherically shaped free of milkiness pits or excessive air bubbles and conform to the following specific requirements mnum num .
coatings .
the spheres shall be coated to enhance their embedment characteristics to the binder .
they shall show no tendency to absorb moisture in storage and shall remain free of clusters and hard lumps .
num .
quality assurance .
the spheres shall be segregated into maximum lots of num pounds and lot numbers shall be stamped onto each .
each lot shall be tested for gradation rounds and coating and a certificate of compliance stating such will accompany each lot .
num .
gradation .
the glass spheres shall meet the following gradation requirements when tested in accordance with astm dnum type i type ii sieve size percent passing sieve size percent passing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
roundness .
the glass spheres shall have a minimum of num percent rounds per screen for the two highest sieve quantities for types i and ii and no more than num percent angular particles per screen for the type i gradation .
the remaining fractions shall typically be no less than num percent rounds as tested according to astm dnum procedure a .
num .
refractive index .
the glass spheres shall have a refractive index of num to num when tested according to aashto mnum .
num .
silica content .
the silica content of the glass spheres shall not be less than num percent .
num .
packaging .
reflective glass spheres shall be shipped in moisture resistant bags .
each bag shall be marked with the name and address of the manufacturer the name and net weight of the material batch or lot number and shall include a certified test report stating that they meet the above test requirements .
m.num waterborne pavement markings .
the paint shall be formulated and processed specifically for service as a binder for beads in such a manner as to produce maximum adhesion refraction and reflection .
the paint shall be well mixed in the manufacturing process and shall be free from defects and imperfections that may adversely affect the serviceability of the finished product .
the paint shall not liver thicken curdle gel settle excessively or otherwise display any objectionable properties after periods of storage of at least six months and at any time during such periods shall be mixed manually as necessary to produce a smooth uniform consistency throughout .
mnum the paint shall dry on a road surface to an adherent film that will provide proper anchorage and reflection for the finished glass beads when applied as specified .
it shall be easily and uniformly applicable with mechanical linemarking equipment and shall have excellent covering properties .
the paint shall be suitable for binding glass beads so as to produce a highly weather and wear resistant traffic line .
a .
composition .
the paint composition shall be left to the discretion of the manufacturer as long as the finished product meets the following requirements num .
the paint shall contain not more than num percent lead astm dnum .
num .
volatile organic compounds voc shall not exceed num grams per liter astm dnum .
num. ph shall be a minimum of num .
num .
pigment content shall be numtonum percent by weight astm dnum .
num .
nonvolatile vehicle shall be num percent minimum by weight of total vehicle .
num .
total nonvolatile solids shall be num percent minimum by weight astm dnum .
num .
weight per gallon shall be a minimum of num lbs.gal .
for white and num lbs.gal .
for yellow astm dnum .
num .
the paint viscosity shall be numtonum ku at approximately numof astm dnum .
num .
the closed cup flash point shall not be less than numof astm dnum .
b .
color .
the color after drying for white shall be a flat white free from tint furnishing good opacity and visibility under both daylight and artificial light and shall match chip no .
num of federal standard num .
for yellow the color shall closely match chip no .
num of this particular standard .
c. dry opacity .
the paint shall have a minimum contrast ratio of num when tested according to astm dnum at a wet film thickness of num mils federal test no .
num. d. bleeding .
the paint shall have a minimum bleeding ratio of num when tested in accordance with astm dnum .
e. reflectance .
the daylight directional reflectance shall be not less than num percent for white and not less than num percent for yellow relative to magnesium oxide when measured in accordance with federal test method no .
num. f. scrub resistance .
the paint shall pass num cycles when tested in accordance with astm dnum .
g. freezethaw stability .
the paint shall display no change in consistency greater than num percent when tested in accordance with astm dnum .
mnum h. dry time .
the paint shall dry to a notracking condition in not more than num minutes .
the notracking condition shall be determined by actual application on the pavement at a wet film thickness of num mils .
the line for the test shall be applied with equipment so as to have the paint at the temperature of numof at the spray gun .
this maximum drying time shall not be exceeded when pavement temperature is numof and under humidity conditions of num percent or less providing that the pavement is dry .
m.num thermoplastic pavement markings .
m.num physical properties .
a .
color .
the thermoplastic material after heating for four hours at numof under agitation and cooled to numof shall meet the following white daylight reflectance at numo to numo num percent minimum yellow daylight reflectance at numo to numo num percent minimum and shall match color chip no .
num of the federal standard specification numa .
b .
set time .
when applied at a temperature range of numo to numof and thickness of num inch to numinch the material shall set to bear traffic without tracking or deformation in not more than two minutes when the air temperature is numof and not more than ten minutes when the air temperature is numof .
c. bond strength .
after heating the thermoplastic material for four hours at numof under agitation the bond strength to portland cement concrete shall exceed num psi .
d. cracking and resistance at low temperature .
after heating the thermoplastic material for four hours at numof under agitation applied and cooled to numof numof shall show no cracks .
e. impact resistance .
after heating the thermoplastic for four hours at numof under agitation and tested the impact resistance shall be a minimum of num inchpounds .
f. softening point .
after heating the thermoplastic material for four hours at numof under agitation and tested in accordance with astm dnum the materials shall have a softening point of numof to numof .
g. flowability .
after heating the thermoplastic material for four hours at numof under agitation and tested for flowability the percent residue shall not exceed num for white thermoplastic and num for yellow .
the temperatureviscosity characteristics shall remain constant throughout repeated reheatings to application temperature and shall show like characteristics from batch to batch .
the color shall not change after repeated heatings nor shall it change from batch to batch .
any yellowing or off color shall be cause for rejection of the batch .
h. yellowness index .
the white thermoplastic material shall not exceed a yellowness index of num .
mnum i .
extended heating flowability .
after testing the thermoplastic material in accordance with section num of aashto tnum the materials shall conform with the following flowability percent residue maximum num. j .
flash point .
the thermoplastic material shall have a flash point not less than numof when tested in accordance with astm dnum .
k. storage life .
the material shall meet the requirements of this specification for a period of one year .
the thermoplastic must also melt uniformly with no evidence of skins or unmelted particles for this oneyear time period .
any material not meeting the above requirements shall be replaced by the contractor .
l. specific gravity .
the specific gravity of the thermoplastic traffic line material shall not exceed num. m. methods of sampling and testing .
the minimum size batch of thermoplastic traffic striping materials sampled and tested shall not be less than num pounds unless the total order is less than this amount .
any manufacturer not familiar with the technique of making this material should consult the purchaser .
a small trial batch should be made prior to making the thermoplastic traffic line in large quantities to make certain the finished product will comply with all the requirements of this specification .
the material shall be tested in accordance with the appropriate method in federal test method standard no .
num appropriate astm or aashto designation .
the material shall not exude fumes which are toxic obnoxious or injurious to persons or property when it is heated during application .
m.num white thermoplastic composition .
a .
general .
the pigment beads and filler shall be uniformly dispersed in the resin .
the material shall be free from all skin dirt and foreign objects and shall comply with requirements according to table i .
table i composition component white binder alkyd type maleic modified num min .
glycerol ester of resin glass beads num min .
titanium dioxide astm dnum type ii num min .
calcium carbonate num min .
passing num sieve and num max .
inert fillers shall not contain silica other than as glass spheres b. binder .
binder shall exhibit a maximum acid value of num .
acid value shall be determined on a sample of composition from which the binder is extracted by means of a suitable mnum neutral organic solvent the solvent then being evaporated to obtain a substantially dry sample of binder .
acid values shall be determined in accordance with astm dnum .
m.num yellow thermoplastic composition .
the pigment beads and filler shall be uniformly dispersed in the resin .
the material shall be free from all skins dirt and foreign objects and shall comply with requirements according to table ii .
table ii composition yellow component organic leadfree pigment binder alkyd type maleic num min .
modified glycol ester of resin glass beads num min .
yellow pigment num min .
calcium carbonate num min .
num max .
passing num sieve and inert fillers shall not contain silica other than as glass spheres m.num primersealer .
the primersealer shall be used in conjunction with the thermoplastic line striping material on all concrete surfaces or may be used on older bituminous concrete surfaces over num months old if deemed necessary by the engineer .
the primersealer used shall be recommended by the thermoplastic manufacturer and shall be applied according to the manufacturers recommended procedures .
the primersealer shall be on the departments approved materials list .
m.num packaging and labeling requirements .
the thermoplastic traffic line material shall be packaged in suitable containers to which it will not adhere during packaging shipment or storage .
the packages shall consist of wax lined cardboard cartons approximately num x num x num in size and weigh approximately num pounds .
each container label shall designate the color manufacturers name batch number and date of manufacture .
each batch manufactured shall have its own separate number .
the label shall warn the user that the material shall be heated in the range of numof numof during application .
the contractor shall assume all costs arising from the use of the patented materials equipment devices or processes and save harmless the purchaser and its duly authorized representatives from all suits at law or action of every nature for or on account of the use of any patented materials equipment devices or processes .
mnum m.num epoxy resin pavement markings .
m.num physical properties .
a .
general .
the twocomponent num percent solids paint shall be formulated and designed to provide a simple volumetric mixing ratio e.g .
num part component a to num part component b specifically for service as a hotspray applied binder for glass beads in such a manner as to produce maximum adhesion refraction and reflection .
the material shall be composed of epoxy resins and pigments only and meet the following minimum requirements num .
color .
white the color after drying at the specified thickness shall be a flat white free from tint furnishing good opacity and visibility under both daylight and artificial light and shall match chip no .
num of federal standard num .
yellow the color after drying at the specified thickness shall match chip no .
num of federal standard num .
the paint shall be well mixed in the manufacturing process and shall be free from defects and imperfections that may adversely affect the serviceability of the finished product .
the paint shall not liver thicken curdle gel settle excessively or otherwise display any objectionable properties after storage .
individual components shall not require mixing prior to use when stored for a maximum of twelve months .
num .
composition .
the overall paint composition shall be left to the discretion of the manufacturer but shall meet the following requirements white titanium dioxide num num percent by weight astm dnum type iii epoxy resin num num percent by weight yellow chrome yellow num num percent by weight astm dnum type iii epoxy resin num num percent by weight num .
epoxy content component a .
the epoxy content of the epoxy resin will be tested in accordance with astm dnum and calculated as the weight per epoxide equivalent wpe for both white and yellow .
the epoxy content will be determined by a pigment free basis .
the wpe shall meet a target value provided by the manufacturer within a tolerance of num .
num .
amine value component b .
the amine value shall be tested in accordance with astm dnum to determine its total amine value .
the total amine value shall meet a target value provided by the manufacturer within a tolerance of num .
the manufacturer may specify an alternate test method for determining the amine value subject to the approval of the engineer .
num .
toxicity .
upon heating to application temperature the material shall not exude fumes which are toxic or injurious to persons or property .
a certification stating such is required to be submitted to the engineer .
mnum num .
abrasion resistance astm dnum .
when the abrasion resistance of the material is tested with a csnum wheel under a load of num grams for num cycles the wear index shall be no greater than num .
num .
hardness astm dnum .
the type d durometer hardness of the material shall be not less than num nor more than num after the material has been conditioned for not less than num hours nor more than num hours at numo numoc .
num .
tensile strength astm dnum .
the tensile strength of the material shall not be less than num psi after num hours of conditioning at numo numoc .
num .
compressive strength astm dnum .
the compressive strength of the material shall not be less than num psi after num hours of conditioning at numo numoc .
num .
infrared spectrophotometer analysis astm dnum .
samples of both part a and part b and of that mixed to the proper ratio shall be analyzed by infrared spectrography .
the spectrum of each component and final product shall be a reasonable match to the spectrum of the original formulation submitted by the manufacturer .
num .
directional reflectance astm enum .
the daylight directional reflectance without glass spheres shall be not less than num percent for white and not less than num percent for yellow relative to magnesium oxide .
num .
dry time laboratory astm dnum .
the epoxy resin compounds when mixed in the proper ratio and applied to a uniform wet film thickness of num mils and immediately dressed with glass beads at the proper rate shall exhibit a notracking drying condition in not more than num minutes at numof .
num .
dry time field .
the notracking condition for the field shall be considered as the condition where no visual displacement of the epoxy resin striping material is observed when a passenger car has passed over the stripe or handwork when viewed at a distance of num feet and shall be a maximum of num minutes at numof .
m.num certification .
the manufacturer shall furnish a certified test report by an independent testing laboratory prior to the start of the work indicating that the material as specified has been tested in accordance with the above procedures and that the results comply with the above requirements .
a material safety data sheet is also required .
a .
samples .
at least num days prior to use the manufacturer shall submit samples of the components to the engineer for use as a baseline test batch .
these samples shall be in sealed quart can containers contain a minimum of num fluid ounces contain all relevant manufacturing information identification of proposed rhode island contract numbers infrared spectrophotometer information and sent to rhode island department of transportation materials section central laboratory state office building num capitol hill providence ri num mnum b .
certified test reports .
the manufacturer shall furnish certified test reports for each batch delivered for application at the project site .
reports shall reference batch number and physical characteristics outlined above .
application shall not commence until the proposed epoxy materials are verified by submitting this certificate to the engineer .
m.num packaging .
the epoxy materials shall be shipped in appropriate durable and substantial containers .
individual containers shall be plainly marked with the following information manufacturers name and address name of product lot number batch number color net weight and volume of contents date of manufacture date of expiration statement of content i.e .
part a contains pigment and epoxy resin part b contains catalyst mixing proportions application temperatures and instructions and safety information .
section m.num landscaping materials m.num loam .
the material to be furnished shall consist of screened loose friable fine sandy loam or sandy loam as defined by the usdas soil conservation service in the soil survey manual issued in num free of subsoil refuse stumps roots rocks cobbles stones brush noxious weeds litter and other materials which are larger than ½inch in any dimension and which will prevent the formation of a suitable seed bed .
organic matter shall constitute not less than num percent nor more than num percent of the loam as determined by lossonignition of oven dried samples that have been drawn by the engineer unless otherwise specified or directed .
the loam shall have an acidity range of num ph to num ph .
the contractor shall notify the department of the intended source of loam to be employed at least two weeks prior to the intended time of use to allow time for sampling .
m.num plantable soil .
the material to be furnished shall consist of loose friable topsoil free of refuse brush stumps roots rocks cobbles stones noxious weeds litter and other materials which are longer than num inch in any dimension and which will prevent the formation of a suitable seed bed .
organic matter shall constitute not less than num percent nor more than num percent of the plantable soil as determined by lossonignition of oven dried samples that have been drawn by the engineer unless otherwise specified or directed .
the plantable soil shall have an acidity range of approximately num ph to num ph .
the composition of plantable soil can also be arrived at by thoroughly mixing a suitable organic soil with a suitable subsoil .
the resulting mix shall be a homogeneous material free from hard lumps other materials specified above and be capable of supporting plant growth .
this soil mixture must meet the above specified requirements for organic matter content and ph .
the contractor shall notify the department of the intended source of plantable soil to be employed at least two weeks prior to the intended time of use to allow for sampling .
m.num compost .
the material shall be a well decomposed stable weed free organic matter source .
it shall be derived from agricultural food andor yard trimmings .
the product shall contain no substances toxic to plants and shall be reasonably free less than num percent by dry weight of manmade foreign matter .
the compost will possess no objectionable odors and shall not resemble the raw material from which it was derived .
compost shall have a ph between num ph and num ph mnum and a moisture content between num percent and num percent .
the particle size shall pass through a numinch screen or smaller .
it must be stable to highly stable pass growth screening and have a soluble salt concentration at num d sm or less for soil blend .
the compost must meet us epa part num exceptional quality concentration limits for trace elementsheavy metal .
m.num high organic soil .
the material to be furnished shall consist of a soil free of refuse brush stumps roots rocks cobbles stones noxious weeds litter and other materials which are larger than num inches in the greatest dimension and which will prevent the formation of suitable seed bed .
organic matter shall constitute not less than num percent nor more than num percent of the high organic soil as determined by lossonignition of oven dried samples that have been drawn by the engineer unless otherwise specified or directed .
m.num lime .
m.num ground lime .
ground lime for all roadside horticultural purposes shall consist of a standard commercial product of ground dolomitic limestone intended for agricultural use .
it shall be fine ground dolomite such that when burned by standard lime producing methods it shall yield at least num percent calcium oxide and num percent to num percent magnesium oxide for a total of num percent yielded from calcium and magnesium oxide .
at least num percent but not more than num percent should pass through a nummesh screen and all shall be able to pass a nummesh screen .
m.num pelletized lime .
pelletized lime for all roadside horticultural purposes shall consist of a standard commercial product of pelletized dolomitic limestone .
the minimum calcium carbonate caconum derived from magnesium sources shall be num percent .
prior to pelletizing num percent by weight shall pass through an nummesh screen num percent through a nummesh screen num percent through a nummesh screen and num percent through a num mesh screen .
m.num .
fertilizer .
m.num .num commercial fertilizer .
a .
general .
commercial fertilizer shall be a product complying with the state and the u.s .
fertilizer laws .
deliver to the site in the original unopened standard size containers which shall show weight analysis of the product name of the manufacturer and bear the manufacturers certificate of compliance covering analysis .
b .
fertilizer for seeding and sodding .
fertilizer shall contain the following percentages by weight num percent available nitrogen n num percent available phosphoric acid p num percent available potassium k mnum significant quantities of trace elements such as iron boron etc .
shall also be contained in the fertilizer .
fifty percent of available nitrogen shall be in a slowrelease form as is found in certain ureaform products or natural organic forms or a combination of both .
the salt index of the fertilizer shall not exceed num .
unless otherwise specified fertilizer meeting these requirements shall be applied at the rates set forth in sections l.num seeding l.num sodding and l.num refertilization of seeded sodded and grassed areas of these specifications .
m.num fertilizer for trees shrubs vines perennials ornamental grasses ground covers and bulbs .
fertilizer shall contain the following percentages by weight num percent available nitrogen n num percent available phosphoric acid p num percent available potassium k significant quantities of trace elements such as iron boron etc .
shall also be contained in the fertilizer .
seventyfive percent of available nitrogen shall be in a slowrelease form as is found in certain ureaform products or natural organic forms or a combination of both .
the salt index of the fertilizer shall not exceed num .
unless otherwise specified fertilizer meeting these requirements shall be applied at the following rates trees shrubs vines num lbs .
of actual n per num square feet .
perennials ornamental grass ground covers num½ lbs .
of actual n per num square feet .
bulbs ½ lb .
of actual n per num square feet .
m.num bone meal .
the material to be furnished shall consist of fine ground steamcooked packing house bone with a minimum analysis of num percent phosphoric acid and num percent nitrogen .
m.num mulch .
m.num cellulose fiber .
cellulose fiber mulch shall be derived from natural clean whole woodchips .
fiber shall not be produced from recycled material such as sawdust paper or cardboard fiber and shall be dyed green to contrast with the soil on which it is to be applied .
fiber shall have a water holding capacity of not less than num ounces of water per num ounces of fiber .
the rate of application for cellulose fiber mulch shall be in accordance with manufactures guidelines and approved by the engineer .
m.num wood chips .
wood chips for mulch shall be numinch nominal thickness with num percent of the chips having an area of not less than num square inch nor more than num square inches .
chips shall be free from leaves twigs shavings and bark and other foreign materials which are injurious to healthy plant growth .
wood chips shall be obtained only from green wood and may be from either hardwood or softwood sources .
mnum m.num pine bark mulch .
pine bark mulch shall be derived from evergreen tree bark aged a minimum of num months and no more than num months .
the bark shall be shredded so that the resulting pieces are no more than numinch thick and no longer than num inches .
the mulch shall be free of stringy material and shall not contain an excess of fine particles .
the mulch shall be dark brown in color free of leaves twigs sod weeds shavings and other foreign materials which are injurious to healthy plant growth .
m.num adhesive mulch stabilizer .
adhesive mulch stabilizer material shall be a powder or liquid chemical which when properly mixed applied and cured will create a water insoluble bio degradable mesh .
prior to application the manufacturers recommendations shall be submitted for approval .
adhesive mulch stabilizer shall be mixed according to manufacturers directions or as specified .
m.num seed stabilizer materials .
m.num straw .
straw for mulch shall be mowings of acceptable herbaceous growth reasonably free from noxious weeds or woody stems and shall be reasonably dry .
no salt hay feed hay andor construction hay shall be used .
m.num erosion control netting .
all erosion control netting material shall be new clean sound free of rips and tears and shall be furnished in lengths of not less than num feet .
a. jute mesh .
jute mesh shall be uniform open plain weave of undyed and unbleached smolder resistant natural single jute yarn a minimum of num feet in width plus or minus num inch .
there shall be num warp ends per width and num weft ends per yard .
weight shall average num pounds per linear yard plus or minus num percent .
b. excelsior matting .
the excelsior matting shall be made of a uniform web interlocking wood excelsior fiber with a backing of mulchnet fabric one side only .
the mulchnet shall be woven of either twisted paper cord or cotton cord with mesh sizes not exceeding num½inches by num inches .
excelsior matting shall be furnished in rolled strips of not over numfoot average length and shall meet the following minimum requirements and as shown on the plans .
width minimum num inches plus or minus num inch .
weight to average num pound per square yard with a tolerance of plus or minus num percent .
staples shall be made from numinch lengths of no .
num gauge steel wire bent to form a u of num to num inches in width .
longer staples may be required for loose soils .
m.num erosion control blanket .
the blanket shall be a nonwoven natural biodegradable wood fiber formed into a blanket .
a photodegradable polypropylene netting shall be laminated to its surface .
the blanket shall not contain growth inhibiting additives and shall be free of noxious weed seeds .
mnum the width shall be num inches or num inches plus or minus num inch .
the weight shall average num pound per square yard with a tolerance of plus or minus num percent .
m.num staples for seed erosion stabilizer materials .
staples shall be made from num gauge steel shall be num inches long shall be used with jute mesh excelsior matting and erosion control blanket .
m.num seed mixtures .
m.num general .
all legume seed shall be inoculated within num hours before mixing and planting with the appropriate inoculum for each variety .
all inocula shall be fresh and shall be used within the date limit prescribed by the manufacturer .
three times the normal amount of inoculant shall be required when the seed is to be treated in an approved hydroseeder .
all seed delivered to the job shall be in containers labeled in accordance with provisions of the rhode island seed act of num volume num title num chapter num and its amendments as provided for agricultural seed offered for sale .
only the current years seed shall be accepted .
m.num park mix .
percent percent by volume by weight pure live seed creeping red fescue improved varieties num num kentucky bluegrass num num improved varieties perennial ryegrass num num improved varieties seeding rate num lbs .
per acre m.num slope mix .
percent percent by volume by weight pure live seed creeping red fescue num num improved varieties perennial ryegrass num num improved varieties birdsfoot trefoil lotus corniculata num num seeding rate num lbs .
per acre includes up to num hardseed .
mnum m.num residential seed mix .
percent percent by volume by weight pure live seed chewings fescue num num improved varieties kentucky bluegrass num num improved varieties perennial ryegrass num num improved varieties seeding rate num lbs .
per acre m.num temporary seed mix .
percent percent by volume by weight pure live seed annual ryegrass num num perennial ryegrass num num seeding rate num lbs .
per acre m.num native seed mix .
percent percent by volume by weight pure live seed switch grasspanicum virgatum num num little blue stem andropogon scoparius num num perennial ryegrass num num hard fescue num seeding rate num lbs .
per acre m.num wetlands mix .
the composition of a wetlands mix for a particular application will be set forth in the contract by a special provision code .
mnum m.num wildflower seed mix .
percent by weight yarrow achillea millefolium num oxeye daisy chrysanthemum laucanthemum num lanceleaved coreopsis coreopsis lanceolata num blackeyed susanrodbeckia lirta num seeding rate num lbs .
per acre hard fescue num lbs .
per acre m.num sod .
sod shall be live fresh and of suitable character for the purpose intended and for the soil on which it will be placed .
sods shall be at least num square feet in area and shall be thick enough to contain all natural roots without mutilation .
in no case will sods be permitted to be under numinch or over num inch thick unless express written permission of the engineer is procured .
sod stored longer than num hours will not be allowed under any circumstances .
sod shall have a minimum of the following num percent kentucky bluegrass improved variety and num percent red fescue festuca rubra improved variety .
upon delivery to the job site a certificate of compliance from the supplier sod producer stating that the sod meets the required specifications must be presented to the engineer before any work is to commence .
the certificate must also state the date which the sod was harvested .
m.num wooden pegs .
pegs shall be hard wood stakes .
they shall be approximately num inch by num inches by num inches in length .
the length shall be sufficient to penetrate from top of sod to at least num inches into subsoil .
m.num plant materials .
all plant materials shall conform in size grade and quality to the aan american standard for nursery stock as approved by the united states of america standards institute in effect at the time of invitation for bids all scientific and common plant names of the items specified shall conform with the edition of standardized plant names as adopted by the american joint committee on horticultural nomenclature in effect at the time of invitation for bids .
all plant material shall be nursery grown no collected material will be accepted .
all plant material shall be free from all insects pests plant diseases disfiguring knots stubs sunscald abrasions or cuts of the bark or any other form of injury harmful to the health of the plant material mnum or of objectionable disfigurement .
all plant material shall comply with the state and federal law with respect to inspection for plant diseases and insect infestations .
m.num planting incidentals .
m.num stakes .
stakes for tree supports shall be of a hardwood source free of knots insects and fungi .
stakes shall be of uniform size and shape and shall be a minimum of num inches square and be of a length sufficient enough to be driven into the ground num feet and have an above ground stake height of num inches above the point of attachment of the guy webbing .
the bottom of the stake shall be pointed with a taper of no less than num inches .
the type of stakes shall be uniform throughout the job .
m.num guy webbing .
guy webbing shall be a low abrasion woven fiber webbing with a break strength of num pounds or better .
the width of the webbing shall be no less than numinch nor greater than numinch .
the length shall be sufficient enough to be attached to the tree trunk and stake .
m.num burlap .
burlap shall be jute burlap in numfoot wide strips with a weight of approximately num ounces per square yard .
the burlap shall be sound dry uncontaminated free from rips tears and holes .
m.num twine .
twine for securing burlap shall be numply jute twine .
m.num tape .
tape for identifying guy webbing shall be bright yellow with a waterproof adhesive backing .
it shall num½inches wide and shall be uniform throughout the job .
m.num antidesiccant .
antidesiccant shall be an emulsion or other material which when mixed with water will provide a protective film over plant surfaces leaf which shall reduce or retard the loss of moisture through transpiration .
antidesiccant shall be delivered in containers clearly marked with the manufacturers name and instructions .
antidesiccant shall be mixed and applied according to the manufacturers guidelines .
m.num herbicides .
herbicides shall be packaged in standard containers marked with the name of the material the name of the manufacturer the net quantity contained therein and be in accordance with the provisions of the federal and state rules and regulations in effect at the time of delivery to the job site .
m.num preemergent herbicide .
preemergent herbicide for application in mulch areas and for other uses shall be granular and have the active ingredient trifluralin num .
all application rates and product use shall be in accordance with manufacturers guidelines .
m.num nonselective herbicide .
nonselective herbicide shall have the active ingredient glyphosate nphosphonometyl glycine and be num percent by volume .
all application rates and product use shall be in accordance with manufacturers guidelines .
m.num plant protection devices .
m.num general .
all materials become the property of the contractor after removal .
mnum m.num tree protection .
wood framing shall consist of nominal lumber num feet in length the width and thickness shall vary from num x num to num x num depending on trunk diameter or as directed by the engineer .
binding material shall consist of a single strand numgauge wire .
m.num shrub and dripline protection .
fencing shall consist of standard snow fencing .
the contractor shall utilize steel poles a minimum of num feet in length to stabilize and support the fencing .
m.num water for landscape use .
all water shall be obtained from clean fresh water sources and shall be free from injurious chemicals and other toxic substances harmful to plant life .
no water which is brackish will be permitted at any time .
the contractor shall identify to the engineer all sources of water at least num weeks prior to use .
the engineer at his discretion may take samples of the water at the source or from the tank at any time and have a laboratory test the samples for chemical and saline content .
the contractor shall not use any water from any source which is disapproved by the engineer following such tests .
m.num pavers .
m.num concrete pavers .
concrete pavers interlocking or brick like shall conform to astm cnum standard specifications for solid concrete interlocking paving units .
the average compressive strength of concrete after num days shall not be less than num psi .
concrete pavers shall not have a water absorption rate greater than num percent when tested in accordance with astm cnum and shall withstand without cracking or showing any sign of damage freezethaw test in accordance with astm cnum section num method a num cycles .
individual materials used to manufacture concrete pavers shall conform to the following num .
cement astm cnum portland cement num .
aggregates astm cnum washed graded sand and limestone aggregates num .
other constituents nonfading synthetic iron oxide color pigments integral plasticizers and densifying agents established as suitable for use in concrete .
concrete pavers shall have a size of num x num x numd or num x num x num nominal size for interlocking pavers and num x num x numd or num x num x num nominal size for brick like pavers .
m.num brick pavers .
brick pavers shall conform to astm cnum grade sw type fbs .
the size and trueness of shape shall be governed by astm cnum table vi and viii for type fbs .
the approximate size of the brick paver shall be num x num¼ x num¾ .
m.num granite pavers .
cut granite pavers shall conform to astm cnum and shall be free of cracks starts and seams .
cut granite pavers shall not have a water absorption rate greater than num percent when tested in accordance with astm cnum .
the density of the cut granite pavers shall be num pounds per cubic foot and shall have a minimum compressive strength of num psi .
the modules of rupture of the cut granite paver shall be a minimum of num psi in accordance with astm cnum .
mnum cut granite pavers shall have a nominal size of num x num x num or as specified on the plans .
the tolerance of face sizes shall be plus or minus numinch .
cut granite pavers shall have all side and top surfaces sawn the bottom may be sawn or split .
all angles shall be square and true and equal to num degrees .
the top surface face shall be flame finished or as specified on the plans .
the color shall be light gray or as specified on the plans .
m.num granite cobble pavers .
granite cobble pavers shall conform to astm cnum and shall be free of cracks starts and seams .
granite cobble pavers shall be uniform in size and shape or shall be as specified on the plans .
m.num landscape filter fabric .
the material to be furnished shall be nonbiodegradable nonwoven num percent polypropylene fabric .
the color shall be black .
the fabric shall conform to the following minimum specifications properties value grab tensile strength lbs .
num astm dnum grab elongation num num astm dnum trapezoid tear strength lbs .
num astm dnum mullen burst strength psi num astm dnum puncture strength lbs .
num astm dnum coefficient of permeability cmsec num num equivalent opening size us std .
sieve num num m.num stone fine setting bed and jointing material .
the material to be furnished shall be sharp washed concrete sand .
the material shall not contain more than num percent silt and shall be free from deleterious soluble salts .
the gradation shall meet the requirements of the following range mnum sieve size percentage passing num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num
