main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num series general requirements copyright main roads western australia main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num series general requirements revision register date clause number description of revision authorised by num guidance notes note num concerning as built and handover requirements added sco num num clause deleted asco num whole document reviewed and amended by section custodians asco num whole document reviewed and amended by section custodians asco num annexure numg guidance note num amended sco num guidance notes new note num concerning as built and handover requirements added sco num num annexure numf numg project work sign details amended cmpm guidance notes new guidance note num concerning project works signs added num num subclauses .num and .num amended subclause .num deleted and transferred to subclause .num b psm annexure numn deleted guidance notes new note num added udsm num num radiation safety general regulations num and code of practice and safety guide added cmpm num b to h sub clauses b to h added back omitted in error at previous revision num ndm site storage requirements amended num num amended to include synergy udsm main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contents clause page no num general .. num num scope num num references num num description of works num num general num num site access num num works by others num num interpretation of terms num num specifications codes and test methods num num supply of materials num num advertising and project works signs num annexure numa num description of works num annexure numb num separable portions num annexure numc num site access num annexure numd num works by others num annexure nume num principalsupplied materials num annexure numf num project works signs num annexure numg num project works signs acceptable sign layout standards num num survey information num num supplied survey setting out information num num road reference marks num num reestablishment of road reference marks num num survey control for bridge works num num protection of all other survey marks num num laser and global positioning construction control systems num annexure numa num road reference marking summary sheet num num site facilities num num contractors site facilities num num storage of hazardous materials num main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num superintendents main office num num telecommunications services num num accommodation for the superintendent num num laboratories num annexure numa num contractors site facilities num annexure numb num superintendents office num annexure numc num superintendents accommodation num annexure numd num superintendents representatives num num entry to land num num general num num water supplies num num general num num construction water num num water bores num annexure numa num water supplies num num utilities and services num num location num num liaison num num contractors equipment num num protection of services num num relocation of services num num street lighting num num traffic signals num num further information num annexure numa num relocation alteration to services by contractor num annexure numb num relocation alteration to services by principal num num contract specific requirements num num num not used num main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num series general requirements num general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of general management requirements for the administration of work under the contract .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below acts and regulations mines safety and inspection act num radiation safety general regulations num code of practice australian radiation protection and nuclear safety agency arpansa code of practice and safety guide portable densitymoisture gauges containing radioactive sources .
australian standards as num road and traffic engineeringglossary of terms main roads standards survey standard num third order levelling survey standard num road reference marks survey standard num quality statement survey standard num digital ground survey survey standard num earthworks volume calculations main roads specifications specification num traffic specification num occupational safety health specification num environment specification num clearing specification num earthworks specification num pits and quarries main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num description of works num general num .
the works to be executed under this contract are detailed at annexure numa .
scope of works num .
where applicable separable portions of the works are described at annexure numb .
separable portions num site access num .
the extent of the works site is as indicated on the drawings and access to the site is as described in annexure numc .
num works by others num .
where so indicated in annexure numd the contract works will be undertaken in conjunction with works by others .
the contractor must allow free access by others as required or ordered by the superintendent to enable these other works to be completed .
num interpretation of terms num .
the meaning of road engineering terms in this specification will be as defined in as num .
num specifications codes and test methods num .
in general materials manufactured articles and workmanship must conform to the relevant standards of the standards association of australia except where the provisions conflict with this technical specification then this technical specification will take precedence .
standards association num .
unless otherwise stated all standards codes or test methods referred to in the specification will be those current at the tender closing date .
currency num .
mrwa test methods are available from main roads internet web site under building roads and selecting standards technical materials engineering test methods test methods num supply of materials num .
materials supplied by the principal will be available to the contractor to the details and at the times indicated in annexure nume .
principal num .
details of materials required to be supplied by the contractor are contained within the relevant specification .
contractor num advertising and project works signs num .
strictly no advertising will be permitted on the site other than a project signs approved in writing by the superintendent and b names of manufacturers or names of owner on items of constructional plant c contractors mail box main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the contractor must provide project works signs that inform the general public and industry of the project details .
refer to a annexure numf for sign information details and b annexure numg for acceptable sign layout standards .
num .
all project works signs must be approved by the superintendent prior to their manufacture .
hold point num .
project works signs must be installed by the contractor no later than one week from the principal issuing possession of site .
sign installation num .
the contractor shall be responsible for all costs and charges relating to the manufacture installation maintenance and subsequent removal of all project works signs from the site .
num .
the contractor must remove all project signs from the site to an authorised disposal site no earlier than num weeks and no later than num weeks from the date of practical completion unless otherwise directed by the superintendent .
sign removal main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numa description of works the works comprise the constructionwidening of highway road street within the shire town city of between and slk to slk .
num .
the work includes the following a reconstruction to subgrade basecourse primerseal seal asphalt stage of km of road b construction of bridge no over rivercreek c construction of ancillary drainage works d construction of km of side roads e other complete the above to suit the works in tabular form if appropriate including any special features and delete this note annexure numb separable portions num .
the execution of the works will be subject to separable portions as follows separable portion a separable portion b separable portion c etc .
etc .
list all separable portions as required and delete this note main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numc site access num .
access to the site must be limited to the following points a b c add others as required and delete this note main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numd works by others nature of work by others location timing of works comments add details as required and delete this note main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure nume principalsupplied materials num .
general details of materials supplied by the principal are as follows purpose in works material type location approx .
quantity available cost rate exclusive of gst when available how available pit or stockpile depth of topsoil removal mm depth of over burden removal mm depth of useable material mm depth of topsoil respread mm further details or other requirements eg specification clause main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numf project works signs num .
the contractor shall install .
number of project works signs at locations as detailed on the drawings .
num .
signs and sign supports shall be fabricated and installed as per main roads western australia standard drawings .
num .
the main roads and state government logos and words must be included on all state government funded project signs .
the contractors logo and company name may also be included as indicated on the standard sign type but must not exceed the size of the main roads logo and name .
num .
the principal may require additional details to be displayed on the sign from that shown in the linked examples at annexure numg and should this be required will be provided by the superintendent .
num .
all text displayed on the project works signs must comply with as num standard alphabets for road signs .
num .
the signs and supports must be maintained in good condition for the full period of display .
annexure numg project works signs acceptable sign layout standards the approved state government funded project sign is sign no .
mgznum drawing no num num and other state and nonstate funded project signs are available from the main roads website www.mainroads.wa.gov.au under building roads select standards and technical road and traffic engineering traffic management sign index category num num funding series mrgz .
main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num survey information num supplied survey setting out information num .
prior to commencing work under the contract the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the contractor has checked the digital design model provided by the principal to ensure that there is no discrepancy between the digital design model and the drawings .
hold point num .
the points where the batters of the earthworks in the design model meet the existing undisturbed ground surface interface strings have been calculated from a survey of that ground .
the contractor shall establish new interface strings based on the design information contained in the drawings and the actual ground surface at the time of construction .
num .
setting out information and levels for tolerance checks at any point shall wherever possible be determined from the drawings with the exception of the cross section drawings .
the cross section drawings have been generated from the design model and are provided to the contractor for information only and are not generally to be used for setting out the works or for determining levels for tolerance checks .
num .
where setting out information or levels for tolerance checks that can not be determined from the drawings the contractor may use the digital design model for those purposes .
num .
settingout information for culverts and other drainage structures is detailed on the drawings .
drainage structures num road reference marks num .
road reference marks have been established by the principal in accordance with main roads survey and mapping standard num road reference marks .
this standard is available on the main roads website www.mainroads.wa.gov.au under building roads standards and technical survey mapping geodetic surveying survey control .
num .
the location and level of each road reference mark is shown at annexure numa and is also available on the main roads website www.mainroads.wa.gov.au under building roads standards and technical survey mapping survey portal .
num reestablishment of road reference marks num .
any road reference marks rrms outside the batter of the earthworks that are disturbed by the contractor must be re established at the contractors expense to the tolerances given in the main roads standard num road reference marks .
disturbance num .
any rrm that is reestablished must be surveyed constructed and data lodged in accordance with the main roads standard num road reference marks .
data lodgement num .
the contractor must notify the superintendent of its intention to disturb where necessary a rrm prior to its disturbance .
main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num survey control for bridge works num .
the contractor must establish from the provided rrms two survey marks to define line and one survey mark to define level at each bridge site .
the contractor is responsible for the protection and maintenance of these marks and must use only these marks for setting out the bridges .
line station level num .
setting out marks must be placed by the contractor to an accuracy that ensures that the construction tolerances of the structures as stated in the specification and drawings are achieved .
accuracy num protection of all other survey marks num .
the contractors attention is brought to the existence of cadastral survey marks defining property boundaries and the road reserve and state survey marks or bench marks established on or in the vicinity of the site .
established survey marks num .
the contractor must be aware of these marks and is responsible for all associated reestablishment costs as a result of any disturbance to these marks outside the batters of the earthworks resulting from the contractors activities .
disturbance num .
when the contractor or principal becomes aware of the need to reestablish either of these types of marks the following will apply a cadastral marks in accordance with the landgate regulations all re establishment cadastral surveys must be carried out by a licensed surveyor .
the contractor will ensure that its licensed surveyor provides a regulation numa certificate for the superintendent upon completion of t he survey .
cadastral marks b state survey marks ssms and bench marks bms prior to any disturbance the contractor must notify the superintendent of the need to reestablish either of these types of marks .
the superintendent will arrange relocation andor replacement through the senior geodetic surveyor and landgate .
ssms and bms num laser and global positioning construction control systems num .
when grader blade laser control or other automated control systems are used for the purpose of road construction such that the construction pegging of the subgrade or pavement would not otherwise be provided then the following horizontal and longitudinal alignment control requirements must be established by the contractor for the use of the superintendent prior to the commencement of subgrade preparation or any pavement construction control requirements a offset pegs must be established on at least one side of the road formation .
offset pegs b the pegs must be placed at nummm offset to the surface design edge of subgrade .
c chainages must be clearly marked on the pegs .
pegs marked main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num d the spacing between pegs must not be greater than numm on straights and numm on curves and include all curve tangent points .
pegs spacing e the pegs must be placed vertical and within nummm tolerance to their exact horizontal location .
f the pegs must remain undisturbed until the superintendent has released the hold point to allow the bituminous binder to be applied .
any pegs that are disturbed must be reestablished by the contractor at no cost to the principal .
pegs removal g construction levels are not required to be marked on the pegs .
h the pegs must be removed by the contractor at the completion of the works .
main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numa road reference marking summary sheet main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num site facilities num contractors site facilities num .
the contractor must supply and maintain facilities onsite for all contractors staff workmen and subcontractors .
the facilities shall include all necessary offices stores workshops sheds toilets washing facilities accommodation change rooms shelter sheds drying conveniences mess rooms and other facilities as required by industrial agreements for such camps including the cleaning and maintenance of the camp .
provision num .
access to the work sites must be constructed by the contractor and maintained in a dustfree condition throughout the duration of the contract .
access tracks num .
onsite storage facilities must be provided for all materials to be incorporated into the works such as cement and steel reinforcement .
the contractor must provide facilities satisfactory for the storage of such materials as may be described in the various sections of the specifications .
storage num .
details of sites available to the contractor for the establishment of a camp and facilities are provided at annexure numa .
available sites num .
prior to erecting any campsite facility or site office structures the contractor will ensure that the proposed location and positioning of the units and all associated services and all specialised storage areas including areas for septic tanks effluent discharge and camp rubbish have been nominated to the superintendent on a layout plan and where applicable to the local authority .
hold point num .
all buildings and facilities established and used by the contractor must be removed from the site at no cost to the principal on completion of the works and the site must be left in a clean and tidy condition .
site cleanup num .
upon completion of the works the access tracks established by the contractor must be removed and the ground rehabilitated as specified in specification num earthworks .
num storage of hazardous materials num .
sites for the storage of fuel oil and other contaminant materials including plant maintenance sites must be specially designed to confine any spillages within the site in accordance with statutory requirements .
these sites must ensure that any spillages are confined .
adequate quantities of suitable material to counteract spillages will be kept on hand by the contractor .
spillages num .
the contractor must check with the local government authority for any special requirements with respect to the storage of nuclear density meters as described in clause num laboratories .
nuclear density meters main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num superintendents main office num general num .
the contractor must provide an office for the superintendent at the location of the works .
the office must be maintained and cleaned daily for the duration of the contract .
num .
the office shall have minimum plan dimensions to accommodate the number of rooms personnel listed below at point num with the height at wall plates of not less than numm .
dimensions the project manager or senior project manager or superintendent elect to determine the size of the site office to accommodate the number of personnel to be on site .
office configuration may be altered to meet site office requirements .
room sizes should remain as listed below .
the following consideration must be taken into account when determining site office requirements refer to annexure numb for site office example .
office for superintendents representative office for quality officer business support office for surveillance officer likelihood of an engineer graduate coming onsite .
a desk location to accommodate short term personnel i.e .
superintendent auditor surveyor materials tester a separate room to accommodate mfd server storage cupboards .
adjust details below as required and delete this note num .
the office must be in good condition vinyl floored lined thermally insulated weatherproof windows complete with curtainsblinds fly screens and doors .
by use of interior walls the office shall be subdivided into the following separate areas to accommodate the following a num office numm x numm superintendents representative b num office numm x numm quality officer c num office numm x numm surveillance officer graduate engineer andor short term visitors auditor surveyors d kitchen numm x numm e num room numm x numm to house the mfd server storage cupboards f meeting room numm x numm optional g refer to example at annexure numb num .
the office must be supplied with filtered potable water and continuous numvolt electric power num hours per day for the duration of the contract and must be equipped with the following in as new condition main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num a yale type lock with duplicate keys .
in urban or builtup areas the outer door will also be fitted with a hasp and staple and padlocks and keys will be supplied by the superintendent security b supply insert number cherrygraphite workstation having dimensions not less than numm x numm x numm high equipped with lockable cherrygraphite three num drawer mobile pedestal furniture equipment c one num cherrygraphite desk having plan dimensions not less than numm x numm with lockable cherrygraphite three num drawer mobile pedestal d insert number fourdrawer lockable filing cabinet e supply insert number cherrygraphite numw x numh x numd bookcases f supply insert number two door lockable impact tall cabinets for stationary and filing storage g supply insert number high back office chairs with arm rests on castors featuring full ergonomic height back and seat adjustments h supply insert number visitors chairs with arm rests on castors featuring ergonomic height back and seat adjustments i insert number meeting tables having dimensions numm x numm with insert number matching chairs j one num kitchen table having dimensions numm x numm with four num matching chairs k one num refrigerator minimum capacity num litres complete with freezer compartment l one num stainless steel sink with cupboard under .
continuous filtered potable water supply and drainage system to be provided to the sink m supply insert number split reverse cycle air conditioners each of minimum numkw cooling capacity n one num electric water jug with automatic cutoff in as new condition or n an electric hot water dispensers with a capability of heating water to num degrees celsius andor cold water dispensers with ongoing supplies of num litres water refill bottles optional only if filtered potable water supply not suitable o one microwave p ongoing supply of tea coffee sugar and nonpowdered milk q lighting each officeroom having double fluorescent tubes r power each officeroom have quad power sockets s supply insert number pinboards and insert number whiteboards .
t supply insert number rubbish bins main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the site office must be supplied and equipped as detailed with water power and telephones connected prior to the commencement of the works .
refer to annexure numa for office furniture requirements .
num .
provision will also be made for a parking area adjacent to the office for the sole use of the superintendent .
the parking area must have adequate access for road vehicles and will contain four num parking bays .
parking area num superintendents additional offices num .
the contractor must provide additional offices for the superintendent at each bridge site .
the office must be maintained and cleaned daily for the duration of the contract .
additional offices num .
the office will have minimum plan dimensions of numm x numm and height at wall plates of not less than numm .
dimensions num .
the office must be in as new condition vinyl floored lined thermally insulated weatherproof windows complete with curtainsblinds fly screens and doors .
num .
the additional offices shall contain the following a supply numvolt electric power num hours per day for the duration of the contract power supply b supply insert number split reverse cycle air conditioners minimum numkw cooling capacity air conditioning c yale type lock with duplicate keys .
in urban or builtup areas the outer door will also be fitted with a hasp and staple and padlocks and keys will be supplied by the superintendent security d supply insert number cherrygraphite workstation having dimensions not less than numm x numm x numm high equipped with lockable cherrygraphite three num drawer mobile pedestal furniture equipment e supply insert number high back office chairs with arm rests on castors featuring full ergonomic height back and seat adjustments f one num table having dimensions numm x numm g one num refrigerator minimum capacity num litres complete with freezer compartment h one num stainless steel sink with cupboard under continuous supply of filtered potable water and drainage system to be provided to the sink i one num electric water jug with automatic cutoff in as new condition j one microwave new k ongoing supply of tea coffee sugar and nonpowdered milk l lighting each officeroom having double fluorescent tubes lighting m power each officeroom have quad power sockets power n supply insert number pinboards and insert number whiteboards .
o supply insert number rubbish bins main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num telecommunications services num general num .
the contractor must provide all telecommunications services infrastructure and physical connections to the superintendents site office in accordance with this clause unless otherwise specified .
num .
the contractor must provide the entire infrastructure for the main roads data telecommunications service up to and including the connection to the main roads edge device modemrouter .
num .
for security reasons only main roads can and will arrange with the relevant carrier for the main roads data telecommunications service to utilise the data telecommunications infrastructure provided by the contractor .
num .
the telecommunications infrastructure must be suitable for the data service specified in clause num num data service num main roads will arrange the subscription to one data telecommunications service for connection to its edge device to be installed by main roads at the superintendents office to meet the data networking needs of the superintendent .
num .
the data service arranged by main roads will terminate in the superintendents site office on infrastructure provided by the contractor and will consist of one num mbps minimum committed information rate a ip man service the preferred data service or b telstra government wideband ip telecommunications service gwip or c telstra government bdsl ip telecommunications service gbip or d an xdsl service .
num .
while these terrestrial services will be given preference a mobile data service third generation numg or higher equivalent in performance to the preferred data service may be offered to main roads by the contractor .
num .
the contractor must make all reasonable effort to ensure that a nominated main roads telecommunications service provider is able and willing to deliver the offered data service to the main roads site office .
num .
if the relevant telecommunications service provider confirms in writing to the contractor that none of data communications services specified in clause num above is practicable to deliver for the purposes of the contract then an alternative data communications service will be provided by the contractor subject to the prior approval of main roads .
num .
the data service will be connected from main roads representatives office to either main roads wide area network or metropolitan area network .
main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num voice services num .
where the preferred data service specified is provided voice services for the main roads representatives office will be provided by main roads .
otherwise the contractor must provide the following voice services a two pstn voice telecommunication services each complete with a telephone handset with digital display b each service must be provided with i. telstra message bank service ii .
caller identification incoming and outgoing iii .
easy call features including three party conference call waiting and call transfer .
c or if an alternate carrier is used then the equivalent features are to be provided .
num .
the handsets must be connected and located in the separate areas at each end of main roads representatives office .
num facsimile services num .
the contractor must provide one pstn telecommunications service for dedicated connection and use with a facsimile interface unit fifu that forms part of the multifunction device mfd specified in clause num .
the facsimile service must have caller id enabled .
num multifunction device num .
the contractor must provide one multifunction device mfd in the superintendents office for exclusive use by the main roads representatives .
num .
the mfd must be new or in as new condition and for the duration of the site office provided with continuous supply of all associated consumables required by superintendent .
num .
the mfd must have the following features a b w digital device num num ppm b colour device num ppm c paper input anum anum manual d bin num sheet e duplex standard f security password print mailbox facility g memory nummb h power consumption energy star compliant i automatic document feeder adf standard j paper input additional tray num sheet k finisher collator stapler main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num l scan supportable formats email fax tiff jpg pdf scan to pc .
scanning resolution num x numdpi num x numdpi num x numdpi and num x numdpi m network interface or printer kit to support the following ethernet numbaset tcpip dhcp n software template printing ocr electronic audit web interface ms wnum xp and ms wnum compliant windows server num xnum xnum windows server num xnumxnum .
certified print drivers pclnum postscript num .
print resolution numx numdpi o facsimile features and fifu group num enabled minimum num kbps p hardware console pedestalcabinet q management reporting enabled num access security num .
the telecommunications services and associated equipment must be for the sole access and use of main roads representative .
num .
the services and equipment must be housed and secured in the superintendents site office .
the contractor must provide industrystandard structured cable reticulation from the sites building distributor bd to the services and equipment in the superintendents site office .
num .
the contractor must provide a telecommunications building distributor tbd in the superintendents office .
this tbd must be located within two metres of the location designated by the superintendent for the location of the main roads edge device .
the tbd must be connected by the contractor to the telecommunications service providers network directly or indirectly via a site bd .
num .
the contractor must provide physical and transmission security for each telecommunication service to the satisfaction of superintendent .
num .
the contractor must provide reasonable access for main roads technical staff to the contractors and superintendents site offices to facilitate delivery installation diagnosis repair and restoration of the services and equipment provided .
num other requirements num .
the contractor must supply and install a communications cabinet or rack consistent with and suitable for the structured cabling system and telecommunications infrastructure specified in this clause .
num .
the contractor must provide an industry standard num amp num vac gpo within num metres of the location designated by the main roads representative as the location of the main roads edge device .
cabinetrack num .
each telecommunications service must be provided with relevant contemporary standard customer premise equipment cpe comprising cpe main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num a connecting facilities such as connectors and cabling and b terminating equipment including network terminating units terminal adapters and the equipment specified .
num .
unless otherwise specified the cpe must be at least the basic terminating equipment that is provided by the service provider for the relevant telecommunications service installed .
num .
the cpe must be connected to the relevant telecommunications service termination within the office and to be tested by the service provider prior to commissioning while so connected .
the contractor must obtain a certificate showing each test and its result from the service provider .
each result must meet the minimum industry standards unless otherwise specified .
num .
the contractor must provide cat num structured cabling for voice facsimile and data reticulation within the main roads representatives offices from a single location that is within the vicinity of the telecommunications building distributor tbd to each of the separate office areas to allow main roads to install a edge device .
structured cabling num .
an additional cat num cable must be provided by the contractor to the relevant office area to allow connection to the multi function device mfd specified in clause num .
mfd connecting cable num .
each telecommunications service must be installed connected tested functioning and with features in accordance with the industry standards unless otherwise specified .
testing of tele communications services num .
all telecommunications services to be provided by the contractor are to be installed and commissioned within five num working days of the main roads representatives office buildings being delivered to site .
installation num .
at least num working days before the provider intends to connect the relevant telecommunications services the contractor is to provide the main roads representative with the providers reference details relating to that those connections and the scheduled dates for connection .
num .
the contractor must provide secure air conditioned well lit accommodation for the main roads edge device and associated swithes ups and server in the location sodesignated in this specification .
connection dates num service levels num .
the contractor must provide a business hours numhour response service level agreement sla with the relevant supplier for each telecommunication service and associated features .
service level agreement num .
the contractor must provide a similar service level agreement for the equipment and the infrastructure as agreed by the main roads representative provided by the contractor in accordance with this clause .
main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
for all telecommunications services infrastructure and physical connections that the contractor provides pursuant to this clause the contractor must meet all costs associated with the ordering delivery connection support of service levels access and usage and for disconnection of each telecommunications service and its cpe .
num .
num accommodation for the superintendent and additional personnel num general num .
the contractor must provide and maintain the following accommodation facilities and services prior to the commencement of any construction activities on the site until num days after practical completion of the works or on approval by the superintendent .
a the contractor must provide one num twobedroom transportable building or equivalent approved by the superintendent which is fully air conditioned reverse cycle split system .
the accommodation building must be in good condition and have vinyl floors lined and thermally insulated and weatherproof and will be complete with windows fitted with curtainsblinds fly screens and door and must be similar in size to that shown in main roads drawing num annexure numc complete with all furnishings and fittings as shown including .
i. mats to all external doors ii .
a new colour television of minimum size num cm with access to regional television stations and any other services available in the contractors camp and iii .
a telephone hand set connected to its own line or to an extension of the line provided to the office for the superintendent .
num .
the contractor must position the quarters in the vicinity of the offices for the superintendent .
the contractor must positioning power drainage a construct a suitable drainage and sewerage system to the building b provide and maintain to the building a continuous potable hot and cold water supply sufficient for the needs of a bathroomlaundrykitchen and a three phase electrical power supply of three kilowatts operating capacity c provide new pillows linen and two towels for each of the two people using the quarters and d have the beds made and floors vacuumed daily linen and towels changed twice weekly cleaning num .
prior to the positioning of the superintendents office andor living quarters the contractor will nominate the proposed location for such facilities to the superintendent .
hold point main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num additional accommodation num .
the contractor must provide and maintain additional single quarters accommodation meals and laundry services for the number of superintendents representatives indicated in annexure numd .
number of representatives num .
shower toilet laundry and additional facilities in camp mess rooms will be to a standard comparable to that established by industrial caterers currently operating in the north west of western australia .
ablutions num .
additional accommodation for the superintendents or principals representatives in a camp must include reverse cycle air conditioned single quarters each with a minimum numkw cooling capacity and will be floored lined thermally insulated and weatherproofed and will be complete with windows curtains blinds fly screens and door .
each accommodation unit must comprise a bedroom with dimensions not less than numm x numm x numm high and a private bathroom ensuite with minimum dimensions numm x numm x numm high .
num .
the bedroom ensuite must contain the following bedroom a one num bunk and inner spring mattress numm x numm b closet numm x numm x numm high c one num writing table with drawer numm x numm complete with chair d one num as new lounge chair e one num ceiling light f one num wall light g one num mirror minimum size numm x numm h two num double power sockets num pin i one num small refrigerator complete with freezer compartment j two num chests of drawers numm x numm x numm high and k a new colour television size num cm with access to regional television stations and any other services available in the contractors camp .
num .
the bathroom ensuite must containing the following bathroom a shower b toilet c one num hand basin complete with shelf and mirrored vanity cabinet d one num ceiling light e two num double power sockets num pin f one num mirror g hot and cold filtered potable running water .
main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the contractor must provide and maintain to the quarters a continuous filtered potable water supply sufficient for the needs of the quarters and a suitable drainage and sewerage system .
a power supply to cater for all of the superintendents requirements must also be provided .
water drainage num .
the contractor must supply all camp accommodation with pillows linen two blankets and two towels per person have the beds made and floors swept daily and linen and towels changed twice weekly .
cleaning num .
paths num mm wide of class nnum concrete will be constructed to connect the living quarters for the superintendents and principals representatives together and to the site office camp mess and ablution facilities .
pathways num meals for superintendent and representatives num .
meals must be to a minimum standard comparable to that established by industrial caterers currently operating in the north west of western australia .
tenderers are advised that the superintendents representatives may not reside in the camp on a continuous basis .
the superintendents representatives will give at least num hours written notice of their intention not to take a meal .
minimum standard num laboratories num contractors laboratory and ndm storage facilities num .
if the contractor utilises a transportable materials testing laboratory it must be positioned in the vicinity of the site office or camp site .
position of laboratory num .
at least one week prior to the proposed conducting of any materials conformance testing the contractor shall submit to the superintendent the proposed laboratory quality manual required by the national association of testing authorities nata .
hold point num .
if a nuclear density meter ndm is to be stored on site the contractor must provide evidence to main roads that the contractor had informed radiation health branch wa of their new storage location ndm storage num temporary storage less than twelve num months num if the ndm is to be stored temporarily on site for a period of less than one num month it is permissible for the meter to be stored in an unoccupied locked vehicle provided the following conditions can be met num month a the vehicle must be secured within a compound and at least five metres separation from any office accommodation units sheds work and access areas or other parked vehicles .
b the meter must be locked at the handle and secured within its locked transport container secured within the vehicle .
main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num c radiation placards shall be placed on the vehicle and at least five metres from the storage vehicle .
placards num if the ndm is to be stored temporarily on site for a period of one num to twelve num months in a transportable materials testing laboratory it is permissible provided the following conditions can be met num months a the laboratory must be secured within a compound and at least five metres separation from any office accommodation units sheds work and access areas or other parked vehicles b the ndm must be locked at the handle and stored in a locked container secured to the laboratory floor secured c radiation warning placard shall be placed adjacent to any entry to the storage laboratory the placards shall be removed when there is no meter stored .
placards d under no circumstances is the laboratory to be occupied while the meter is stored within the laboratory .
num longer term storage greater than twelve num months storage num months num the contractor shall provide and erect at a location in the vicinity of the laboratory if provided or if a laboratory is not provided then in the vicinity of the contractors site facilities a storage shed or sea container for the security and protection of the ndm .
num the storage shed or sea container shall be at least five num metres from any office accommodation units sheds work and access areas or other parked vehicles num the contractor must provide clean dry storage facilities for the security and protection of any consistency block .
consistency block num the ndm storage facility shall meet either of the following requirements a storage shed is to be provided and erected to the following requirements storage shed i. a numm x numm x nummm minimum thickness concrete base must be constructed within the shed and ii .
the lockable shed must be secured to the slab b sea container where provided shall be of similar dimensions and lockable sea container c radiation placards must be attached to all sides of the shed container radiation placards d the compound the fence of the compound surrounding either of the above facilities must meet the following requirements compound i. be at least two num metres high ii .
provide at least numm separation on all sides between the storage facility and the fence and iii .
a gate into the compound that is lockable main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num e the compound and facilities will be used exclusively for the storage of the ndm and must not be used for any other purpose .
num .
on site storage shall be in accordance with the requirements of the australian radiation protection and nuclear safety agency code of practice and safety guide portable densitymoisture gauges containing radioactive sources .
this document is available at arpansa code of practice website www.arpansa.gov.aupublicationscodesrpsnum.cfm .
standards num superintendents laboratory and ndm storage shed num .
the superintendent will place on site for his use a transportable materials testing laboratory for the duration of the contract .
num .
where the contractor is erecting an on site facility for the storage of his own nuclear density meter it will be permissible to allow joint storage of both devices in the one shed .
num .
the superintendents laboratory will not be available for use by the contractor .
main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numa contractors site facilities insert details of any known sites otherwise insert requirement for the contractor to seek approval from local authority andor superintendent for proposed sites and delete this note main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numb superintendents office site office numm x numm main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numc superintendents accommodation main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numd superintendents representatives num .
number of main roads wa personnel including superintendents representatives for this contract are insert estimated number and delete this note main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num entry to land num general num .
the protection and maintenance of the environment outside the site and the need to consult with and have regard for the landowners or lessees property must be observed by the contractor .
num .
the contractor must not enter upon any land outside the designated clearing areas detailed in specification num clearing unless the hold point at clause num has been released by the superintendent .
num .
prior to the proposed entry by the contractor onto any land outside the limits of clearing for the works the contractor must obtain written approval of the land owner or lessee detailing the standard of construction maintenance and rehabilitation of any affected areas and give the superintendent at least five num days notice of any such intention .
hold point num .
the contractor shall comply with all conditions specified by the landowner or lessee for entry onto land outside the limits of clearing for the works .
num .
upon completion of the works all access tracks established by the contractor must be removed and the ground rehabilitated as specified in specification num earthworks .
main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num water supplies num general num .
the contractor must make all necessary arrangements for the supply and servicing of the required quantities of suitable water for the works both for construction purposes and for potable water for concrete manufacture pavement construction and site facilities .
supply num .
the responsibility for investigating the feasibility and availability of suitable water for the works from all sources and obtaining the necessary approvals will rest entirely with the contractor .
num .
existing stock water points or station water supplies must not be used unless specific approval has been obtained from the current land ownerlessee .
livestock must be allowed unhindered access to preexisting water points in the vicinity of the works .
stock access num construction water water used by the contractor for material compaction and dust suppression must be obtained from sources other than water corporation water supply services existing wetlands or the river unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of superintendent that alternatives are not viable and all required approvals have been obtained .
water sources num water bores num .
where the principal has established water bores in the vicinity of the works these will be made available for use by the contractor as possible water sources .
all risks associated with the use of such water bores will remain with the contractor as the performance of the bores may be affected by seasonal fluctuations and can not be guaranteed .
details of pump tests locations and any restrictions placed on the use of water from these bores are given in annexure numa .
principal supplied bores num .
the selection of the appropriate pumping equipment to utilise the bores is dependent on the nominal size and class of bore casing used in the development of the bores .
pump type num .
any test results given are from the only tests carried out .
the performance of the bores quantities available from open water sources and the quality of water can not therefore be guaranteed and may be subject to seasonal fluctuations .
test results num .
if drawdown at any water source during the works is considered excessive the superintendent may then direct the contractor to discontinue the use of the bore or limit the amount of water drawn from the bore .
the contractor must use replacement water from alternative sources at no additional cost to the principal .
excessive drawdown main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numa water supplies num .
water sources made available by the principal as possible supplies of water are located as follows location slk or chainage description offset side pump test details num .
potable water is available at insert location at a cost to the contractor of complete as required and delete this note main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num utilities and services num location num .
the location of all existing utilities and services shown on the drawings will be regarded as indicative only .
the contractor must ascertain the exact location of the utilities prior to commencing works in the area .
exact location num liaison num .
the contractor must make the appropriate allowances in the contractors works program for all necessary liaison and programming with service authorities as required for the provision of installation by service authorities during the works .
the contractor must reinstate make good and backfill service trenches to the relevant service authority requirements .
service authorities num contractors equipment num .
no utility may be moved to accommodate the contractors equipment or its method of operation when the utility does not interfere with the works unless such removal is at the expense of the contractor and in each case subject to the approval of the utility authority concerned .
non essential relocation num protection of services num .
the contractor must locate and take all necessary precautions when working in the vicinity of all utilities and services with in the construction site .
the superintendent may arrange for the repair of damage not made good by the contractor and the cost of such repair will be deducted from payments due to the contractor .
damage and repair num relocation of services num .
relocationalterations to services is detailed in annexure numa and must be arranged by the contractor before the superintendent will permit any roadworks in the vicinity to proceed .
any special requirements relating to such relocations are also noted in annexure numa by contractor num .
where any service relocationalterations have been or will have been arranged by the principal prior to possession of site or are scheduled to be arranged by the principal during the contract period details of such relocationalterations are provided in annexure numb .
by principal num .
where described as such in the specification and prior to the commencement of works in the vicinity of the service the contractor must seek the superintendents confirmation that all required utility services alterations have been completed by the principal .
hold point num .
the contractor shall excavate trenches place select bedding lay conduits as required and leave these trenches open in a safe condition until the utility authority or company has relocated their service cable or pipe and then backfill as required .
trenches main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num street lighting num .
existing street lighting poles requiring relocation for roads under the principals jurisdiction will be relocated by the contractor as indicated on the drawings .
western power corporation wpc lighting will normally be relocated by wpc or arranged for relocation through wpc andor synergy .
relocation num .
the contractor must liaise with wpc andor synergy as necessary for this work to proceed during the works .
the contractor must allow reasonable time and access to effect the relocation of light poles to ensure relocation is coordinated with the road and or bridge works .
contractor to liaise with wpcsynergy num .
existing street lighting poles identified for removal on roads under the principals jurisdiction will be removed from site to an authorised disposal site by the contractor or purchased and removed by the contractor from site .
removal num .
street lighting should be operational at all times during the roadworks .
the contractor must liaise with the principal and wpc to ensure an appropriate level of lighting permanent or temporary is provided for the duration of works .
operation num .
street lighting works should be carried out in accordance with specification num roadway lighting .
lighting num traffic signals num .
the contractor must not interfere in any way with the operation of any existing traffic signal equipment except as otherwise allowed in specification num traffic .
no interference num .
particular care must be taken where working in close proximity to traffic signal control boxes signal controllers due to the presence of underground communications cabling which maintains co ordinated traffic control as part of perths scats sydney co ordinated adaptive traffic system network .
communication cabling num .
existing signal poles requiring relocation are as indicated on the drawings and comply with the requirements of specification num traffic signals relocation num further information for further information refer to main roads website at using roads road and traffic information work on main roads .
this reference contains details including the applications to undertake works on state and local roads .
main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numa relocation alteration to services by contractor type of utility or service owner location requirement main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numb relocation alteration to services by principal type of utility or service owner location requirement timing main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num contract specific requirements num num not used main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num series guidance notes delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference all edits to downloaded tdp documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
deletions shall be struck through e.g .
example .
insertions shall be in italics e.g .
example .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted then the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
the overall custodian of this specification is the contract management practice manager .
the following table indicates others with an interest in parts of this specification title clause no section survey information num num survey and mapping manager site facilities num num manager road and traffic engineering telecommunications num snr communications consultant or snr technical consultant laboratories num pavement and surfacing manager entry to land num manager road and traffic engineering senior environment officer water supplies num num geomechanical and structural materials engineer utilities and services num num senior road engineer num .
description of works annexure numa complete as required .
the format shown is typical but may be varied to suit the works .
include all salient features of the works .
num .
separable portions annexure numb num where separable portions are used insert as many separable portions as are required and describe the location of each separable portion usually in terms of a chainage for typical rural works or b from streetrd to streetrd for urban works note separable portions are not normally required for most major works and are only used where one or more portions of the works must be completed ahead of other portions .
if in doubt regarding the necessity of nominating separable portions seek advice from the project and contract management branch .
num ensure that the annexure to the general conditions part b in the conditions of tendering is completed for the full description of separable portions .
num where separable portions are not used insert not used at annexure numb .
main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
access to site annexure numc num list all permitted access points to the site usually by nominating side road entries .
num this is usually more critical in urban works or in builtup areas than in typical rural works .
in the interests of overall traffic safety it may be desirable in builtup areas to limit the contractors access to the site to nominated points .
num .
works by others annexure numd num detail all known instances of works being undertaken by others during the contract period in annexure numd particularly the timing of such work so that the contractor can make due allowance in its program .
num examples of works by others might include a relocation of services and utilities often by the relevant service authority b installation of traffic signals c provision of pavement marking d landscaping num .
contract specific requirements num where it is necessary to include a reference to special site works or other special provisions of a temporary nature such a reference can be made as a contract specific requirement commencing at clause num .
for example the need for special working platforms for certain items of plant or a specially designed detour to be built around the works etc .
num the contract specific requirement can itself refer to other specification parts that are required to effect the construction of the feature .
num .
principal supplied materials annexure nume list all principalsupplied materials giving for each item such details as num type of material e.g .
basecourse crushed aggregate culvert units etc .
num where located e.g .
roadside dumpsite at slk road mrwa depot at etc num quantity num cost to the contractor if applicable num other considerations a the complete details of materials supplied by the principal should be inserted into the relevant specification part .
this would particularly apply to details for the following items that have a high technical content i .
traffic signal components ii .
street lighting components iii .
emergency telephone components b the value of principalsupplied materials is entered in the conditions of tendering .
c where applicable details can be expanded in the information for tenderers .
d insert appropriate availability of material which may be described as i. from the date of possession of site .
ii .
within weeks of possession of site .
iii .
as from insert date main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
setting out information clause num num the project manager must ensure that road reference marks rrms have been established during preconstruction and are available for construction .
if not then action should be taken to establish the rrms to the required main roads survey standard num .
num if the rrms are to be established as a separate survey prior to construction then it is essential that the marks are connected to the original geodetic survey network that was used to define the ground model for design .
this may have only been a minor control traverse .
further information for these requirements can be obtained from the senior geodetic surveyor .
num coordinate values of rrms are available from the survey portal within the survey and mappings standards section of the main roads website available at www.mainroads.wa.gov.au .
it is the project managers responsibility to ensure the co ordinate values of the rrms have remained unaltered since establishment to ensure that no ambiguities arise between the contractors surveyor and main roads survey representatives .
num the project manager must be aware of the need for the project to be designed and supplied in its respective main roads wa approved project zone coordinate system gdanum .
the project manager must ensure all spatially referenced data e.g .
rrms design models drawings and amendments are supplied in their nominated project zone .
num mx genio default output double precision dnum output is the standard mx output that will ensure the integrity of the digital model is retained .
it is the contractors responsibility to convert this data into any other required digital output for its needs .
num the principal shall not supply string reports mx minor option num cross section reports mx minor option num or geometry reports mx minor option num for setting out the works .
the principal has provided sufficient information in the form of design drawings and the design model to enable the contractor to set out of the works .
the contractor shall be responsible for any reporting or reformatting of the design model .
num .
contractors site facilities annexure numa num provide details of known available sites suitable for camp location .
num .
water supplies annexure numa num further information on pump tests locations and any restrictions placed on the use of water from these bores can be provided in the information for tenderers .
num .
service alterations annexure numa num for service alterations undertaken by the principal it is essential to detail the timing of such alterations in order for the contractor to make due allowance in the construction program .
num clause num directs the contractor to contact western power andor synergy and this is applicable for all locations with the south west interconnected system swis .
for locations outside this area the contractor will need to be directed to horizon power and the clause will need to be amended accordingly .
the extent of horizon power and swiss areas is detailed on the plan available at httpwww.horizonpower.com.aubusinessyour_accountget_connectedlicence_areas.ht ml main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
project works signs clause num num clause num refers to annexure numf numg for project works sign details and examples .
the project manager will need to enter the number of signs required for the project into the space at num. in annexure numf and also into the bill of quantitiesschedule of rates and ensure their location is shown on the drawings .
num for all state funded capital works projects the example sign drawing number num is the approved sign layout and must be used .
alternative sign layouts for nonstate funded projects are also available online and all drawings are available through the link at annexure numg .
further advice on signs may be obtained from the traffic engineering standards manager .
num if an opening date is required to be included on the sign it may be prudent when determining a date to use the anticipated time of the year e.g .
opening mid num rather than to the exact tender date of completion .
num .
as built and handover requirements clause num num on all metropolitan projects where there is need for the contractor to provide any of the above information such as as built drawings operating manuals and the like the project manager should liaise with the data management support officer in the asset management section of metropolitan region as to the adequacy and format of the information that will need to be provided num where the information to be provided relates to a particular specification series such as for traffic signal manuals then the requirements shall be detailed in the as built and handover requirements section of the relevant specification .
main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contract specific requirements to add or delete the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
none at this time main roads western australia specification num general requirements page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification amendment checklist specification number title of specification amended by name signature date verified by independent verification name signature date contract number description of contract item description initial note all changesamendments to the current approved specification must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
specification was reviewed and amendments where required .
specification was reviewed and no amendments made .
num .
amended standard clauses obtained endorsement from the specification custodian and approved by manager contract management practice .
num .
contract specific requirements identified and incorporated where required .
see specification guidance notes .
num .
any new materialsproducts in addition to those stated in the specification have been approved by the custodian .
provide details at num .
num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
new or amended inspection testing parameters included in specification have been checked by custodian .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
proposed alterations to the standard method measurement smm have been reviewed and approved by specification and contracts officer .
num .
confirmed that the completed specification reflects the intent of the design .
num .
specification format and styles checked .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to team leader or senior project manager for review and approval .
num .
further action necessary see attached documentation .
approved by specification num quality systems copyright main roads western australia specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issued date num clause concerning specification limits clarified mps num whole document header added sco num references added wa num wa num wa num asnum mps num num amended direct transmission modes num num added the use of digital model and gps to identify chainages num amended direct transmission modes num added location of potentially contaminated materials annexure numa num amended construction characteristic moisture control annexure numa num added cbr requirement to embankment and subgrade added asnum to embankment and subgrade amended subbase and basecourse ll pi and ls test frequency amended asnum asnum basecourse test frequency amended construction characteristic moisture content added agpttnum wa num num renumbering of clauses mps num specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num quality plan num num num not used num system elements additional requirements num num monitoring and measuring resources inspection measuring and test equipment num num performance evaluation inspection and testing num num identification and traceability num num control of production and service provision process control num num validation of processes for production and service provision special processes num num control of externally provided processes products and services num num control of documented information documents and records num num control of nonconforming outputs num num improvement num num monthly reporting num num num not used num hold points num num hold points num num num not used num as constructed and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num testing requirements num num general num num test methods num num insitu density and air voids num num insitu moisture num num standard deviation num num procedure for resolving disputed conformance status num num minimum testing frequency num annexure numb num identification and traceability num annexure numc num specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name monitoring and measurement of processes num annexure numd num validation of processes for production and service provision num annexure nume num requirements for selected critical subcontracts num specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name general num scope num .
the contractor shall manage its contract obligations through the implementation of a third party certified quality management system compliant with asnzs iso num .
third party certification shall be maintained for the duration of the contract .
num .
this quality specification sets out the principals minimum requirements for establishing implementing and managing a quality plan for the work under the contract .
quality plan num .
the contractor shall establish implement and manage a contract specific quality plan complying with the contract the requirements of asnzs iso num num .
for terms and definitions refer to asnzs iso num .
definitions num .
the superintendent shall reserve the right to conduct surveillance and second party audits on the contractors and any subcontractors compliance with specification num .
the contractor shall promptly provide the superintendent upon request any documentation records or assistance during the surveillance or audit activity .
surveillance and second party audit num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num general conditions of contract asnzs iso num quality management systems fundamentals and vocabulary asnzs iso num quality management systems requirements asnzs num structural steel welding asnzs num buried flexible pipelines installation as num sampling of concrete as num determination of properties related to the consistency of concrete slump test as num methods for sampling and testing aggregates as num bituminous emulsions for the construction and maintenance of pavements as num methods of testing soil for engineering purposes as num methods of testing soils for engineering purposes method num soil compaction and density tests nuclear surface moisturedensity gaugesdensity of a type a or type c standard density block specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name as num specification of the supply of concrete as num elastomeric bearings for use in structures as num methods for impact tests on metals as num paints and related materials methods of test as num numerical values rounding and interpretation of limiting values as num concrete kerbs and channels gutters manually or machine placed asnzs num methods of sampling and testing asphalt method num sample preparation compaction of asphalt test specimens using a gyratory compactor asnzs num methods of sampling and testing asphalt method num moisture content of asphalt asnzs num methods of sampling and testing asphalt method num degree of particle coating austroads test methods agpttnum determination of permanent deformation and resilient modulus characteristics of unbound granular materials under drained conditions agpttnum stripping potential of asphalt tensile strength ratio agpttnum asphalt binder drain off main roads test methods wa num random sample site location wa num sampling procedures for soil and manufactured granular materials wa num preparation of disturbed soil and manufactured granular material samples for testing wa num soil and manufactured granular material moisture content convection oven method wa num soil and manufactured granular material moisture content microwave oven method wa num particle size distribution sieving and decantation method wa num particle size distribution abbreviated method for coarse and medium grained soils wa num liquid limit cone penetrometer method wa num plasticity index wa num linear shrinkage wa num dry densitymoisture content relationship modified compaction fine and medium grained soils wa num dry densitymoisture content relationship modified compaction coarse grained soils wa num dry density ratio percent wa num calibration of nuclear moisturedensity meters standard blocks wa num check of the consistency of measurements by nuclear moisturedensity meters secondary standard blocks wa num moisture ratio percent specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name wa num maximum dry compressive strength wa num determination of the california bearing ratio of a soil standard laboratory method for a remoulded specimen wa num main roads wa supplement to austroads test method agpttnum wa num main roads wa supplement hctcrb to austroads test method agpttnum wa num determination of the unconfined compressive strength of laboratory compacted specimen wa num determination of the unconfined compressive strength of hydrated cement treated crushed rock base wa num foreign materials wa num sampling and preparation of granulated rubber wa num particle size distribution of aggregate wa num flakiness index wa num los angeles abrasion value wa num los angeles abrasion value of crushed limestone wa num crushing test value wa num bulk density of granulated rubber wa num particle size distribution of granulated rubber wa num steel content of granulated rubber wa num colour of aggregate wa num surface shape using a straightedge wa num dry density sand replacement method wa num determination of field density nuclear method wa num sampling and storage of asphalt wa num preparation of asphalt for testing wa num dispersion of bitumen in soil wa num bitumen content particle size distribution of asphalt and stabilised soil centrifuge method wa num stability flow of asphalt marshall method wa num maximum density of asphalt rice method wa num bulk density and void content of asphalt wa num bulk density and void content of asphalt vacuum sealing method wa num chlorides and total soluble salts in soil and water wa num calcium carbonate content wa num standard density blocks for nuclear moisturedensity meter calibration wa num operational checks for nuclear moisture density meter roads maritime services nsw test methods t num moisture content of bituminous mixes mass loss method main roads standards num digital ground survey num design and drawing presentation specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name main roads specifications specification num general requirements specification num pavements specification num stone mastic asphalt specification num asphalt wearing course specification num asphalt intermediate course specification num materials for bituminous treatments specification num saftey and traffic barrier systems specification num concrete for structures specification num structural steelwork specification num protective treatment of steelwork specification num bridge bearings specification num fencing num definitions num quality plan num .
the quality plan shall be the document specifying the processes of the contractors quality management system including the product realisation processes and the resources to be applied to achieve the specific requirements of the contract .
definition num .
the quality plan shall address the contractors management responsibility authority and communication requirements and clearly detail the contractors quality management representative qmr role with respect to the contract .
num .
the quality plan shall include the scope of works detailed in the specification num general requirements for the contract .
the quality plan must also address the requirements detailed in as num and the special conditions of contract .
scope of works num .
the quality plan shall clearly detail how the contractors quality management system procedures and instructions shall be applied to meet the requirements of the contract and shall clearly detail the cross referencing to all documents of the contract .
num .
the quality plan shall clearly address the requirements specified in specification num quality systems and shall demonstrate compliance with the contract .
the contract num .
the quality plan shall clearly detail the contractors delegation of its management responsibilities authorities and communication requirements for any subcontracted work under the contract .
delegation num .
if not submitted and explicitly approved in writing during the tendering process the contractor shall submit a suitable fully documented quality plan to the superintendent for approval prior to commencement of work under the contract .
hold point specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num .
any amendments to the approved quality plan shall be submitted to the superintendent for approval .
amendments approval num intrepretations num .
unless specified otherwise the specification limits are absolute .
the as num absolute method is applicable .
specification limits num num not used system elements additional requirements num monitoring and measuring resources inspection measuring and test equipment num .
the contractor shall document in the quality plan all test devices required to provide evidence of conformity .
where monitoring or measurement of a product or process is required in order to demonstrate conformity of the finished product with the contract the contractor shall ensure the requirements of asnzs iso num monitoring and measuring resources for the works are documented and met .
all equipment num .
nuclear moisture density meters ndm shall be calibrated in accordance with wa num on standard blocks .
the standard blocks shall be calibrated in accordance with main roads calibration method num or as num .
nuclear density meter ndm num .
the contractor shall calibrate the ndm to an appropriate range between num tm to num tm to suit the material being tested in the contract .
a typical low range is num to num tm and a high range is num to num tm .
calibration ndm range num .
the ndm shall have current density calibrations for the num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm and num mm direct transmission dt modes for calibrations completed by july num .
for calibrations carried out after july num density calibrations are required for the num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm and num mm direct transmission dt modes .
the ndm shall be compatible with the normal operating procedures and test methods of main roads western australia .
dt modes num .
a current nata endorsed calibration certificate shall be supplied to the superintendent prior to the ndm being used for conformance testing of the works .
hold point specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num .
the operational performance of the ndm shall be checked in accordance with calibration procedures wa num .
the operational consistency of the ndm shall be determined in accordance with wa num .
the consistency of the ndm shall be determined at the commencement of the contract and at least monthly thereafter using the one or more consistency blocks provided by the contractor .
the contractor shall provide details of these blocks and their location .
test methods num .
the direct transmission mode depth of probe to be used for each insitu density test undertaken shall be stated in the appropriate inspection planss inspection and test plans .
insitu density test num .
the depth of probe shall be the maximum depth of the num calibrations listed above that can be accommodated within the layer at the time of testing taking specified construction tolerances into account e.g .
num mm for a num mm basecourse layer .
probe num performance evaluation inspection and testing num .
the contractor shall develop and document inspection plans inspection and test plans itps to undertake the monitoring and measurement of the works .
the inspection plans shall clearly describe the monitoring verification and validation activities specific to the product and the criteria for product acceptance for each product or service specified in the contract in accordance with asnzs iso num .
inspection plans num .
the contractor shall prepare detailed test procedures where test procedures required for inspection plans are not detailed in either australian standards or main roads test methods .
test procedures num .
all quality control testing shall be conducted by a laboratory holding current national association of testing authorities nata accreditation for all test methods referred to in the specifications .
nata accreditation for all test methods shall be maintained until the completion of the contract .
all test reports shall be nata endorsed by a current approved signatory for the laboratory conducting the testing .
nata num .
at least one week before conducting any materials conformance testing the contractor shall make available to the superintendent the laboratory quality manual required by nata so that an initial audit of the laboratory can be conducted .
hold point num .
sampling methods shall be unbiased and either random or systematic in concept or as specified .
random site selection shall be undertaken in accordance with wa num .
the frequency of tests shall at all times be adequate to demonstrate the works conformance with the specification .
the frequency of tests shall be as listed in annexure numa of the quality system specification .
full details of all sampling plans shall be included in the relevant inspection plans .
sampling methods specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num identification and traceability num .
the principles used to define the limits of any lot for the contract shall be definition of a lot a the maximum size of a lot is limited to the quantity of work that is the subject of a single conformance decision b the whole of the works included in the lot shall be continuous c the lot has been produced by the same works process d the lot has been brought to completion at the same time and e the lot shall appear to be of a constant quality without obvious changes in attribute values whether or not these attributes form part of the acceptance criteria .
num .
in the case of selecting a lot for the purpose of judging the conformance of the insitu density particular attention shall be paid to establishing the uniformity of density in a direction transverse to the road alignment .
boundaries of lots shall be chosen so as to ensure vertical transverse and longitudinal homogeneity .
lots for in situ density products num .
the extent of each lot shall be clearly identified in the field prior to the commencement of any product realisation activity .
identification shall be either by markers in the field or using a suitable agreed digital model and gps data .
when an agreed digital model is used the start and end of each lot shall be defined by physical markers in the field .
the contractor shall establish and describe in the quality plan a unique lot identification system for identification and traceability of the product compliant with asnzs iso num .
the lot shall be demarcated on site with markers until the lot has been brought to completion .
as a minimum the markersdigital model shall detail the chainage and lot identification clearly legible from the alignment centre line .
production lot num .
all lots defined for the purpose of conformance testing that form only a part of a production lot shall be identified with markersdigital model as detailed for a production lot .
the identification of the testing lot to be maintained until the superintendent releases the hold point associated with the certification that the testing lot conforms to the requirements of the specification .
testing lot num .
the contractor shall predetermine in accordance with the contract what the portion of the works shall be taken to constitute a single production lot for each relevant process and the bounds of each testing lot prior to sampling or testing .
the lot specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num .
no work shall proceed for any lot until field identification has been established for the extent of that lot .
field identification num .
the contractor shall provide traceability for all manufactured products incorporated into the works in accordance with asnzs iso num for identification and traceability .
unless otherwise detailed in annexure numb the trace shall start at the supplier and finish at the location where product is incorporated into the works .
traceability num .
if the manufacture of products off site forms part of the contract the contractor must provide the superintendent with the name and address of the manufacturer and the date of commencement of manufacture at least seven num days prior to the commencement of manufacture of such products .
the traceability records associated with the list in annexure numb shall be considered as constructed information and forwarded to the superintendent in accordance with the contract .
traceability records num control of production and service provision process control num .
the contractor shall develop sufficiently detail process descriptions and procedures in the quality plan that demonstrate the contractors control of production and service provision in accordance with asnzs iso num for the contract .
process control num .
the processes listed in annexure numc and annexure nume shall where they apply be included in the development of the contractors processes for production and service provision in the quality plan to meet the requirements of the contract .
mandatory process descriptions num .
where directed by the superintendent to undertake work under the contract such as daywork activities the contractor shall develop and submit the relevant process descriptions for the proposed activities for the superintendents approval .
approval num .
the management of all plant and equipment used to undertake the work under the contract shall be addressed in the quality plan in accordance with asnzs iso num .
plant and equipment specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num validation of processes for production and service provision special processes num .
the contractor shall develop sufficiently detailed process descriptions and procedures in the quality plan that demonstrate the contractors validation of processes for production and service provision in accordance with asnzs iso num for activities detailed in annexure numd .
num control of externally provided processes products and services num .
subcontractor also to mean a supplier is a person other than the contractor that supplies goods or services required to complete any portion of the works under the contract .
definition num .
the quality plan shall define the type and extent of control exercised over those subcontractors employed for the contract in accordance with asnzs iso num .
control exercised num .
the quality plan shall address the control of subcontracts for the critical processes defined in annexure nume when any such work product or service is subcontracted .
critical subcontracts num .
the contractor shall develop and maintain an audit schedule that details the audits to be undertaken by the contractor of the approved subcontractors for the duration of the contract .
a current copy of the audit schedule shall be forwarded to the superintendent .
audit schedule num control of documented information documents and records num .
the quality plan shall detail the documented procedure for the control of documents required by the contract in accordance with asnzs iso num .
document and data control num .
the control of records shall be in accordance with the requirements of the contract and asnzs iso num .
control of records num .
the state records act num requires main roads and its contractors to provide for the keeping of state records related to contracts .
legislative requirement num .
the contractor must implement and manage a record keeping plan in accordance with main roads record keeping code of practice for the management of contract records .
this document is available from the main roads website internet address httpwww.mainroads.wa.gov.au under building roadscontracting to main roadsrecords code of practice .
record keeping plan num .
the contractor shall supply a copy of the record keeping plan to the superintendent within num days of award of contract .
specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall ensure as a minimum but not limited to that the following records are kept and forwarded to the superintendent records required a audit reports b conformance reports c as constructed drawings and information d bitumen surfacing daily records and spraying loading records e contractor supplied water borehydrological reports f commissioning records g operation manuals relevant to the completed works h records of the location of all potentially contaminated materials such as recycled sand .
num .
all records shall be clearly legible .
the contractor shall at all reasonable times make available to the superintendent copies of such information on request .
num .
the contractor shall prepare a test report for all tests undertaken even when the result of the test will not be used for compliance measurement .
the contractor shall deliver all test reports for each lot to the superintendent within num hours of completing the test procedure or carrying out a compliance measurement .
test reports num .
as constructed information shall clearly detail where the constructed works differ from that shown on the current drawings .
the contractor shall detail as constructed information in red ink accurately and legibly on a clean set of current drawings within num one week from the information becoming available .
the contractors marked up drawings detailing the as constructed information shall be promptly made available to the superintendent upon request .
as constructed information num .
all information for incorporation into as constructed information shall be captured and stored in accordance with main roads digital ground survey standard and shall include metadata in accordance with main roads metadata requirements document both documents available on main roads website internet address httpwww.mainroads.wa.gov.au under building roadsstandards and technicalsurvey and geospatial services .
this type of as constructed information shall be crossreferenced on the marked up drawings .
data capture specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall supply to the superintendent an electronic record of the as constructed information in autocad format in accordance with main roads design and drawing presentation standard available on main roads website internet address httpwww.mainroads.wa.gov.au under building roadsstandards and technicalroad and traffic engineeringtypical project processes .
data lodgement num .
within four num weeks from the date of practical completion the contractor shall forward all records to the superintendent .
records at practical completion num control of nonconforming outputs num .
the quality plan shall detail the procedures that address the control of nonconforming outputs in accordance with asnzs iso num .
non conformance num .
all detected nonconformances shall constitute a hold point in the operations of the work under the contract associated with the detected nonconformance and shall be reported to the superintendent within num hours of being detected .
detected non conformance num .
the contractor shall submit to the superintendent a proposed method for the rework repair or removal of the non conforming lot to ensure conformance to the requirements of the specification .
num .
any pavement lot that is nonconforming in insitu density shall be fully reworked .
rework for pavements is defined as the reconstruction of the nonconforming lot in accordance with the requirements of the specification .
insitu density product num .
prior to the release of the hold point on a detected nonconformance andor nonconforming lot the contractor shall certify to the superintendent and provide conformance records in accordance with the contract that the reworked or repaired lot conforms to the requirements of the specification and the improvement to the quality plan is approved by the superintendent .
hold point specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num improvement num .
the quality plan shall detail the procedures for addressing corrective and preventative actions for the improvement of the quality plan in accordance with asnzs iso num .
improvement num .
the contractor shall develop and submit a proposed corrective action to eliminate the cause of a detected nonconformance in accordance with asnzs iso num for the superintendents approval .
associated actions to prevent any reoccurrence shall form part of the corrective action process .
corrective action approval num monthly reporting num .
within num days of the end of each month the contractor shall submit to the superintendent a completed monthly quality performance report using the form available on main roads website internet address httpwww.mainroads.wa.gov.au under building roadscontracting to main roadscontractor reporting forms .
the contractor shall use this form or any updated version as advised by the superintendent for all quality reporting required under the contract .
monthly reporting num num not used hold points num hold points num .
a hold point is defined as that stage in the process of delivering the work under the contract beyond which the contractor must not proceed to the next activity without the written approval of the superintendent .
definition num .
the methodology for identifying reaching and releasing hold points in the contract shall be addressed in the quality plan .
num .
to obtain release of the hold point for a lot the contractor shall comply with the following requirements hold point release for a lot a the contractor shall have completed all conformance inspection reports for any underlying lots or any adjacent lots affected by the lot in question .
b all underlying lots and any adjacent lots affected by the lot in question shall be conforming .
specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name c the contractor shall request a hold point release in writing with all supporting conformance test results at least num hours or such other period detailed in the specification prior to the time when the contractor wishes to proceed with the next activity which affects the lot in question .
notice d the submission of any hold point release to the superintendent by the contractor is the contractors certificate of compliance that the submitted lot conforms to the contract requirements .
contractors certification num num not used as constructed and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name annexure numa testing requirements in accordance with the requirements of the contract for monitoring and measurement testing procedures and minimum testing frequencies shall conform to the following details num general this annexure sets out the minimum sampling and testing requirements for the acceptance of various works to be carried out under the contract .
additional sampling testing and acceptance requirements may be detailed elsewhere in the specification or in referenced standards .
where no minimum sampling and testing requirements are specified the contractor shall be able to demonstrate conformance of the work in accordance with clause num of asnzs iso num .
included in the test methods shown in the following sections are requirements for test authorities to be nata accredited for the following applicable sampling and sample preparation methods wa num num num num num num and as num part num .
the contractor shall be responsible for patching holes made as a result of sampling and testing .
the sample and test holes shall be backfilled immediately after sampling or testing by the persons responsible for carrying out the sampling and testing .
backfilled material shall have similar properties and shall be compacted at or near optimum moisture content to densities matching the surrounding material .
the contractors conformance decision shall apply to the whole of the lot or part of the work subject to test .
num test methods num density earthworks and pavement for the works in general density shall be measured insitu by use of a nuclear moisturedensity meter in accordance with wa num .
all measurements shall be made using the direct transmission mode .
if the insitu density is outside the range of densities num tm for which the nuclear moisturedensity meter can be calibrated then wa num shall be used .
for the purpose of measuring conformance of all work under the contract the insitu density shall be expressed as a percentage of the maximum dry density .
this percentage shall be calculated in accordance with wa num .
the maximum dry density shall be determined by wa num or wa num .
where the pavement material is stabilised or modified with portland cement the maximum dry density determinations shall be commenced two num hours after mixing is complete and shall be completed within a further two num hours .
if low heat lh cement or lime is used for the stabilisation or modification these determinations shall be commenced three num hours after mixing is complete and shall be completed within a further three num hours .
specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num density and insitu air voids asphalt density and insitu air voids shall be determined on the basis of the results of tests of core samples of asphalt sampled from the pavement in a stratified random manner after laying and compaction in accordance with wa num .
core samples shall not be taken from asphalt placed on a bridge deck or other concrete structure .
core samples shall be taken from asphalt placed over a geotextile reinforced seal .
the density of the samples shall be determined in accordance with wa num or wa num .
the density shall be expressed as a percentage of the mean marshall density of accepted asphalt from the same production shift in accordance with wa num and wa num or wa num .
the air voids shall be calculated using the mean maximum density of asphalt from the same production shift in accordance with wa num and wa num .
num moisture content the moisture content shall be determined using wa num .
if it is not practicable to use this method then wa num or wa num may be used .
however correlation must be established with wa num before proceeding with the subsidiary methods wa num and wa num .
num crossfall and deviation from a straight edge crossfall and deviation from a straight edge shall be measured by wa num .
num insitu density and air voids num insitu density the conformance of every lot of the work under the contract with respect to density shall be determined by comparing the characteristic dry density ratio of the lot or the characteristic percent marshall density of the lot for asphalt and the limits specified in the specification .
the dry density ratio or the marshall density shall be determined at the number of locations per lot defined in table numanum .
the locations shall be selected in accordance with wa num .
the characteristic dry density ratio or the characteristic percent marshall density rc of a lot shall be calculated thus rc r ks where r is the mean of the results of dry density ratio tests or the mean of the results of the percentage of marshall density tests on the lot being assessed reported to the nearest num percent k is the multiplier as detailed in table numanum specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name s is the standard deviation of the results of dry density ratio tests or the standard deviation of the results of the percentage of marshall density tests on the lot being assessed calculated in accordance with clause num and reported to the nearest num percent .
table numanum density test requirements works component number of tests per lot multiplier k freeways highways and main roads shared paths embankment foundation num num num num embankment construction levees num num num select fill num num num num kerbing backfill num num num bedding embankment backfill for culverts and drainage structures num num num bridge backfill num num num num bridge foundation and mse wall backfill num num num num subgrade preparation num num num num subbase num num num num basecourse num num num num asphalt density and insitu air voids general num num num shared path num num sheeting num num unless otherwise noted the multiplier k shall be based on the major component of the project i.e .
freeway highway etc .
the characteristic dry density ratio or the characteristic percent marshall density rc of a lot shall be reported to the nearest num and rounding of all calculations shall be in accordance with as num .
num insitu air void content of asphalt the conformance of every lot of the work under the contract with respect to insitu air void content shall be determined by comparing the characteristic insitu air void content specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name of the lot and the limits specified in the specification .
the number of core samples per lot is defined in table numanum .
the location of the core samples shall be selected in accordance with wa num .
the characteristic insitu void content of a lot shall be calculated to the nearest num percent using the following formulae and rounding of all calculations shall be in accordance with as num minimum characteristic value r ks maximum characteristic value r ks where r is the mean of the results of the percentage air void content on the lot being assessed reported to the nearest num percent .
k is the multiplier as detailed in table numanum .
s is the standard deviation of the results of airvoid content on the lot being assessed calculated in accordance with clause num and reported to the nearest num percent .
num insitu moisture the conformance of any lot with respect to insitu moisture shall be determined by comparing the dryback characteristic moisture content or construction moisture content of the lot and the limits specified in the specification .
the moisture contents shall be determined at the number of test locations per lot defined in table numanum .
the test locations shall be selected in accordance with wa num. i basecourse dryback the dryback characteristic moisture content dmc of a lot shall be calculated thus dmupper mnum ksnum and dmlower mnum ksnum where mnum is the average of the sample moisture contents on the lot being assessed taken from the upper half of the basecourse layer and determined in accordance with wa num reported to the nearest num percent .
mnum is the average of the sample moisture contents on the lot being assessed taken from the lower half of the basecourse layer and determined in accordance with wa num reported to the nearest num percent .
k is the multiplier as detailed in table numanum .
snum is the standard deviation of the sample moisture content determinations taken from the upper half of the layer calculated using the following relationship and reported to the nearest num .
specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num num num num n x x s i n i where ix is an individual result .
x is the mean of n results .
n is the number of results from one lot .
snum is the standard deviation of the sample moisture content determination taken from the lower half of the layer calculated using the following relationship and reported to the nearest num num num num num n x x s i n i where ix is an individual result .
x is the mean of n results .
n is the number of results from one lot .
ii dryback of other layers the dryback characteristic moisture content dmc of a lot shall be calculated thus dmc m ks where m average of the sample moisture contents on the lot being assessed taken from the pavement layer and determined in accordance with wa num reported to the nearest num percent .
k is the multiplier as detailed in table numanum .
s is the standard deviation of the results of insitu moisture content tests on the lot being assessed calculated in accordance with clause num and reported to the nearest num percent .
table numanum insitu moisture content requirements works component multiplier k specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name number of tests per lot freeways highways and main roads shared paths embankment foundation num num num num embankment construction levees num num num select fill num num num num kerbing backfill num num num bedding embankment backfill for culverts and drainage structures num num num bridge backfill num num num num bridge foundation mse wall backfill num num num num subgrade preparation stabilised subgrade num num num num subbase num num num num basecourse num num num num sheeting num num unless otherwise noted the multiplier k shall be based on the major component of the project i.e .
freeway highway etc .
the dryback characteristic moisture content dmc of a lot shall be reported to the nearest num and rounding of all calculations shall be in accordance with as num .
num standard deviation where specified the standard deviation of the distribution of the values of a property shall be calculated as num num num n x x s i n i where ix is an individual result .
x is the mean of n results .
n is the number of results from one lot .
num procedure for resolving disputed conformance status where the superintendents audit testing indicates that a lot is nonconforming and such status is disputed by the contractor the following course of action shall be taken s specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name a where acceptance of a lot is by statistical analyses for a quality verification requirement listed in table numanum the results of the superintendents audit tests and contractors tests shall be combined to determine acceptance or otherwise of the lot provided the following conditions are satisfied i the ratio of the greatest variance standard deviation squared to the least variance of the two sets of results does not exceed the f value in table numanum .
ii the differences between the means of the two sets of results divided by the standard error of difference sw does not exceed the t value in table numanum .
the standard error of difference shall be calculated using the formula n s s s w num num num num num where ws is the standard error of difference nums is the standard deviation of audit test results nums is the standard deviation of contractors test results n is the total number of results which must be contributed to equally by the audit and contractors testing .
the combined test results shall be used to calculate the required parameter in accordance with the specifications but using the k multiplier in table numanum .
b where the conditions ai or aii are not satisfied or when acceptance of a lot or item is not by statistical analysis for a quality verification requirement listed in table numanum the contractor and superintendent shall carry out additional joint testing to determine the acceptance or otherwise of the work .
the joint testing shall be carried out in accordance with the following requirements i joint testing shall be carried out using the contractors laboratory and testing equipment .
ii before the joint testing commences the contractors nuclear moisturedensity meter shall be calibrated at main roads materials engineering branch and that calibration shall be used for the joint testing and for subsequent testing .
iii testing personnel from both parties shall be present during all phases of sampling and testing .
iv the execution of all testing tasks shall be divided approximately equally between both parties .
v both parties shall have the right to repeat any nondestructive measurements .
vi calculations shall be to the satisfaction of both parties .
specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name vii the application of joint test results shall be in accordance with the contract specification and the results shall be accepted by both parties as correct and final .
viii the costs of the calibration of the nuclear moisturedensity meter and the joint testing shall be assigned as follows if the additional testing performed as above shows the lot or item of work to be conforming the cost of such testing shall be borne by the principal .
if the additional testing performed as above shows the lot or item of work to be nonconforming the cost of such testing and any subsequent test on the rectified work shall be borne by the contractor .
c at any time and upon the request of either party the superintendent and contractor shall carry out an evaluation of their respective testing methods to determine the reason for any continuing discrepancies and arrive at a uniform testing technique .
specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name table numanum combination of results work component quality verification requirement total no of testslot multiplier k f value t value freeways highways and main roads shared paths embankment foundation compaction standard num num num num num num embankment construction select fill compaction standard num num num num num num levees compaction standard num num num num num bedding embankment backfill for culverts and drainage structures compaction standard num num num num num num bridge foundation and bridge backfill compaction standard num num num num num kerbing backfill compaction standard num num num num num num subgrade preparation stabilised subgrade compaction standard num num num num num num subbase compaction standard num num num num num num basecourse compaction standard num num num num num num dry back moisture content construction moisture content moisture standard num num num num num num sheeting compaction standard num num num num num num asphalt compaction standard num num num num num num specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num minimum testing frequency num .
the minimum frequency of testing to determine the conformance of works processes with specified characteristics shall be as detailed in the minimum testing frequency table of the specification or in the following table product process quality verification requirement minimum testing frequency num roadworks embankment foundation for control of compaction end product specification dry density ratio wa num as per table numanum particle size distribution wa num num per lot contractors developed method spec dry density ratio wa num as per table numanum num in num lots tested particle size distribution wa num num per lot for control of construction moisture construction moisture content wa num or num num per test site as shown in table numanum all lots tested optimum moisture content omc wa num or wa num the mean value of these omcs shall be taken to represent the lot num per lot principals method spec particle size distribution wa num num per lot for control of construction moisture construction moisture content wa num or wa num num per test site as shown in table numanum all lots tested optimum moisture content omc wa num or wa num the mean value of these omcs shall be taken to represent the lot num per lot excavations geometrics ruralfreeway as necessary to meet the specified tolerances of the technical specification specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name product process quality verification requirement minimum testing frequency embankment construction culvert selected bedding and culvert embankment backfill select fill for control of imported material supplied by the contractor particle size distribution wa num num per num mnum linear shrinkage wa num num per num mnum california bearing ratio wa num num per num mnum foreign materials wa num num per lot organics asnum num numsourcecontract for control of compaction end product specification dry density ratio wa num as per table numanum particle size distribution wa num num per lot contractors developed method spec dry density ratio wa num as per table numanum num in num lots tested particle size distribution wa num num per lot for control of construction moisture construction moisture content wa num or wa num num per test site as shown in table numanum all lots tested optimum moisture content omc wa num or wa num the mean value of these omcs shall be taken to represent the lot num per lot principals method spec particle size distribution wa num num per lot for control of construction moisture construction moisture content wa num or wa num num per test site as shown in table numanum all lots tested embankment construction culvert selected bedding and culvert embankment optimum moisture content omc wa num or wa num the mean value of these omcs shall be taken to represent the lot num per lot for control of dryback moisture specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name product process quality verification requirement minimum testing frequency backfill select fill continued dryback characteristic moisture content as per table numanum geometrics ruralfreeway as necessary to meet the specified tolerances in the technical specification subgrade construction for control of imported material supplied by the contractor particle size distribution wa num num per num mnum linear shrinkage wa num num per num mnum california bearing ratio wa num num per num mnum foreign materials wa num num per lot organics asnum num numsourcecontract for control of compaction end product specification dry density ratio wa num as per table numanum particle size distribution wa num num per lot for control of construction moisture principals method spec particle size distribution wa num num per lot construction moisture content wa num or wa num num per test site as shown in table numanum all lots tested optimum moisture content omc wa num or wa num the mean value of these omcs shall be taken to represent the lot num per lot for control of dryback moisture subgrade construction continued dryback characteristic moisture content wa num as per table numanum geometrics ruralfreeway as necessary to meet the specified tolerances in the technical specification specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name product process quality verification requirement minimum testing frequency subbase for control of subbase supplied by the contractor psd wa num num per num mnum of stockpile la abrasion wa num num per num mnum of stockpile caconum wa num num per num mnum of stockpile mdcs wa num num per num mnum of stockpile liquid limit wa num num per num mnum of stockpile plasticity index wa num num per num mnum of stockpile linear shrinkage wa num num per num mnum of stockpile soaked cbr wa num num per num mnum of stockpile for control of compaction dry density ratio wa num as per table numanum particle size distribution wa num num per lot for control of construction moisture construction moisture content wa num or wa num as per table numanum for control of dryback moisture dryback characteristic moisture content wa num .
as per table numanum geometrics ruralfreeway as necessary to meet the specified tolerances in the specification .
for control of compacted subbase material supplied by the contractor psd wa num num per lot linear shrinkage wa num num per lot additional requirements for cement stabilised sub base for control of stabilisation layer depth num sites per lot cement content num sites per lot specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name sheeting access track for control of compaction end product specification dry density ratio wa num as per table numanum particle size distribution wa num num per lot layer depth for access track num sites per lot geometrics rural as necessary to meet the specified tolerances in the specification basecourse for control of basecourse supplied by the contractor psd wa num num per num mnum of stockpile la abrasion wa num num per num mnum of stockpile flakiness index wa num num per num mnum of stockpile caconum wa num num per num mnum of stockpile mdcs wa num num per num mnum of stockpile liquid limit wa num num per num mnum of stockpile plasticity index wa num num per num mnum of stockpile linear shrinkage wa num num per num mnum of stockpile dust ratio contract num per num mnum of stockpile soaked cbr wa num num per num mnum of stockpile wetdry strength variation as num num per num mnum of stockpile secondary mineral content in basic igneous rock as num num testssourcecontract accelerated soundness index by reflux as num num testssourcecontract resilient modulus agpttnum wa num num sets of num testssourcecontract psd bitumen content wa num num per num mnum of stockpile la abrasion for bitumen stabilised limestone wa num num per num mnum of stockpile bitumen emulsion as num num per num mnum of stockpile bitumen dispersion wa num num per num mnum of stockpile basecourse continued emulsifiers wetting agents as per tech spec information to be provided by the supplier for control of compaction dry density ratio as per table numanum specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name particle size distribution wa num num per lot for control of construction moisture construction moisture content wa num or wa num as per table numanum for control of dryback moisture dryback characteristic moisture content as per table numanum geometrics ruralfreeway as necessary to meet the specified tolerances in the technical specification for control of compacted basecourse supplied by the contractor psd wa num num per lot linear shrinkage wa num num per lot additional requirements for cement stabilised basecourse for control of stabilisation layer depth num sites per lot cement content num sites per lot additional requirements for hydrated cement treated crushed rock base hctcrb crushed rock base same as for basecourse num day unconfined compressive strength wa num num per num mnum of stockpile tested at the lower end of the construction hydration period range repeated load triaxial test using internal displacement measuring device agpttnum or wa num test each num mnum of stockpile at the upper and lower end of the construction hydration period range additional requirements for hctcrb trial mixes crushed rock base properties num day unconfined compressive strength wa num num day unconfined compressive strength wa num repeated load triaxial test using internal displacement measuring device agpttnum each trial mix in accordance with specification num num bituminous surfacing bitumen emulsion manufacture tests as specified in as num and specification num ph at numc as required for quality control specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name particle charge residue from evaporation num test for each production batch for each type of emulsion setting time for crs num test for each production batch for other grades num test per week sieve residue consistency at numc num test for each type of emulsion every month water content non aqueous volatiles content sedimentation num test for each type of emulsion every num months stone coating and water resistance test cationic bitumen emulsions wa num residue from evaporation viscosity at numc crs only num test every num months bitumen emulsion delivery to site residue from evaporation as num num per delivery tanker bitumen produced in western australia distillation of crude oil tests in accordance with specification num viscosity at numc viscosity at numc penetration at numc viscosity of residue at numc after rtfo test num test for each production batch for each binder class ductility at numc matter insoluble in toluene num test for each numth production batch for each binder class density at numc flash point as required for quality control but no less than num per year durability in accordance with specification num specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name bitumen produced in western australia blending of bitumens tests in accordance with specification num initial batch viscosity at numc viscosity at numc penetration at numc viscosity of residue at numc after rtfo test matter insoluble in toluene density at numc flash point num test for initial batch for each binder class truck loads viscosity at numc num test for each numth load for each binder class bitumen imported into western australia tests in accordance with specification num viscosity at numc viscosity at numc penetration at numc viscosity of residue at numc after rtfo test ductility at numc after rtfo test num test for each cargo load for each binder class matter insoluble in toluene num test for each numth cargo load for each binder class density at numc flash point as required for quality control but no less than num per year durability in accordance with specification num polymer modified binder tests in accordance with specification num torsional recovery softening point num test for each production batch for each binder class rubber content snumr num test every week viscosity at numc num test for each binder class every month segregation value num test for each binder class every month snume and snume classes only consistency at numc stiffness consistency num at numc num test for each binder class every month specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name polymer modified binder continued all other binder classes consistency at numc stiffness elastic recovery at numc snume and snumr only consistency num at numc compression limit at numc snumr only num test for each binder class every num months flash point loss on heating num test for each binder class no more than every num months crumb rubber psd bulk density iron or steel content num per production lot cutterflux oils certificate of conformance for all tests currency of certificate to be no older than two months geotextile fabric for sealing tests in accordance with specification num wide strip tensile strength mass per unit area maximum elongation thickness num test for every num mnum of fabric bitumen retention at numc num test for every num mnum of fabric uv stabilisation retained strength melting point num test every num months reclaimed asphalt pavement rap tested in accordance with specification num num samples for every num tonne of rap source rock weathering as num table anum polished aggregate friction value as num one test per designated source area or one test per year crushed aggregate for sprayed sealing quarry testing psd wa num num tests per quarry production lot flakiness index wa num num tests per quarry production lot la abrasion wa num num test per num months water absorption as num num test per num months degradation factor as num num test per num months wet strength and wetdry strength variation as num num test per num months petrographic examination num test per num months per material type specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name crushed aggregate for sprayed sealing quarry testing continued secondary mineral content as num num test per num months resistance to stripping as num num test per num months crushed aggregate for sprayed sealing onsite testing ald as num minimum num tests per dump site per aggregate size moisture content wa num or num num per aggregate size per delivered lot and after inclement weather crushed aggregate for asphalt coarse aggregate colour wa num num test per lot crushed material flakines index wa num num test per quarry production lot la abrasion wa num num test per num months water absorption as num num test per num months degration factor as num num test per num months wet strength and wetdry strength variation as num num test per num months petrographic examination num test per num months per material type secondary mineral content as num num test per num months resistance to stripping as num num test per num months fine aggregate colour wa num num test per lot crushed material water absorption as num num test per num months sand primerseal cover material psd wa num num tests per production lot or day laterite aggregate for asphalt psd wa num num per lot crushing test value wa num num per lot pafv as num num per contract per material type geometrics of sprayed surfacing sprayed edge position every num m asphalt manufacture materials mineral filler psd num test per lot adhesion agent tests to as num certification by producer for each delivery specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name asphalt manufacture routine testing full test or partial test in accordance with specification num num or num .
the minimum specified number of full tests shall be undertaken before commencing any partial tests .
a full test can be done in lieu of a partial test .
asphalt plant production per shift per mix type and size up to num tonnes num full test up to num tonnes num full tests up to num tonnes num full tests up to num tonnes num full tests and num partial test up to num tonnes num full tests and num partial tests up to num tonnes num full tests and num partial tests up to num tonnes num full tests and num partial tests num tonnes num full tests and num partial tests asphalt manufacture periodic testing moisture content asnzs num or tnum num test per week uniform coating of binder asnzs num num test per week stripping potential of asphalt tensile strength ratio test agpttnum intermediate course only using freezethaw conditioning num test per num t of num mm mix num test per num t of num mm mix asphalt binder drain off agpttnum num test per shift asphalt laying asphalt paving bitumen content of tack coat num test per num batches where a lot is not more than a days production of tack coat control of compaction asphalt temperature on delivery num test per num trucks taken in paver on a random basis or num test per truck load if more than num hours since batching or after inclement weather percent marshall density as per table numanum insitu air void content as per table numanum geometrics width every num m depth every num m specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name microsurfacing component material supply bitumen emulsion properties as num series producers compliance certificate per production lot .
aggregate la abrasion wa num producers compliance certificate including num test per num mnum source rock aggregate pendulum friction test pafv as num and as num or as num producers compliance certificate including num test per num mnum source rock particle size distribution wa num num test per stockpile or per num mnum which ever is lesser sand equivalent as num num test per stockpile or per num mnum which ever is lesser mineral filler producers compliance certificate per production lot polymer modifier producer compliance certification per production lot additives producer compliance certification per production lot microsurfacing production and laying particle size distribution wa num and wa num num test per lot where a lot is num mnum or one days production which ever is lesser binder content wa num or as num num test per lot where a lot is num mnum or one days production which ever is lesser finished layer shape wa num num tests per lot where a lot is num mnum or one days production which ever is lesser texture depth wa num wearing course num tests per lot where a lot is num mnum or one days production which ever is lesser num drainage drains and channels geometrics num cross section per num m subsoil drains line and level grade every num m culvert barrel line and level grade every num m inlet outlet invert level each inlet outlet easting and northing each corrugated metal pipe internal diameter num mm in accordance with as num appendix o entire barrel length internal diameter num mm in accordance with the note below inlet outlet and lnum for barrel length l num m inlet outlet lnum lnum and numlnum for l num m specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name corrugated metal pipe continued on completion of installation the contractor shall measure the internal diameter of the culvert at the premarked locations using a calibrated steel measuring tape or other suitable measuring device as approved by the superintendent .
the following information shall be recorded and reported a full details of the culvert tested including date of test and when backfill was completed .
b the pre and postinstallation diametric measurements .
c calculated installed deflections .
d whether each culvert tested was acceptable .
end treatments and blinding concrete num day compressive strength num cylinders per num mnum concrete slump test num for each num mnum or part thereof bedding including select bedding material for control of compaction principals method spec moisture content num per lot optimum moisture content omc wa num or wa num the mean value of these omcs shall be taken to represent each material of constant quality num per each material of constant quality backfill for control of compaction cement stabilised backfill nil embankment quality material num per lot drainage sumps clay lining psd wa num num per site liquid limit wa num num per site plasticity index wa num num per site foundation bedding for control of compaction principals method spec moisture content num per lot optimum moisture content omc wa num or wa num the mean value of these omcs shall be taken to represent each material of constant quality num per each material of constant quality backfill cement stabilised material nil embankment quality material for control of compaction as per table numanum geometrics num cross section per num m duct markers position height plumb each specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name floodway rock protection particle size distribution geometrics num per num num mnum num cross section per num m concrete wall geometrics num cross section per num m stone pitching drainage stone dimensions num per load plan dimensions num per site gabions geometrics num cross section per num m manholes gullies and catchpits size position and invert level each foundation bedding for control of compaction principals method spec moisture content num per lot optimum moisture content omc wa num or wa num the mean value of these omcs shall be taken to represent each material of constant quality num per each material of constant quality backfill cement stabilised material nil embankment quality material for control of compaction as per table numanum num roadworks miscellaneous guide posts and slk markers position height and vertical each signs and devices concrete footing compressive strength as num part num num num num cylinders per num mnum or part thereof footing dimensions each position height and vertical each kerbing line and level every num m tolerances as per as num section num strength num specimens per num mnum or part thereof shapeprofile num cross section every lot setting time as num appendix k num per delivery tanker kerbing backfill for control of compaction end product specification dry density ratio wa num num per lot specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name kerbing backfill continued moisture content wa num or wa num num per lot fencing position and line every num m shared path and cycleways width and line every num m for control of compaction as per table numanum concrete barriers dimensions and profile based on lot length length num m num test length num m num m num tests length num m num tests alignment no portion of the barrier finished outside of tolerances contained in the concrete barriers clause of the installation section of specification num cover minimum cover shall not be less than specified concrete strength and consistency special class concrete num per num mnum or part thereof num test if less than num mnum n class as per as num wire rope safety barrier systems footing dimensions each post post position height and verticality each post alignment no portion of the barrier finished outside of tolerances contained in the wire rope safety barrier systems clause of the installation section of specification num wire rope anchor blocks dimensions each anchor block wbeam and thrie beam hole dimensions each post post position height and verticality each post alignment no portion of the barrier finished outside of tolerances contained in the wbeam thrie beam clause of the installation section of specification num foundation capacity a random post selected every num m minimum of num posts in continuous length barrier specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name steel rail barriers footing dimensions each post post position height and verticality each post rail alignment every num m minimum length over num posts in continuous section welding steel rail barriers as per as num radiographic testing visual inspection magnetic particles inspection dye penetration test ultrasonic testing refer to the welding clause of specification num structural steelwork end treatments preexcavated hole dimensions each post post position height and verticality each post alignment no portion of the end treatment finished outside of tolerances contained in the wbeam thrie beam clause of specification num crash attenuators foundation footing each foundation footing road marking paint producer certification per delivery load dropon glass beads producer certification per delivery load application of paint and glass beads application rate per application run geometry of lines every num m num bridgeworks and box culvert bridge foundations and bridge backfill for control of compaction end product specification dry density ratio wa num as per table numanum particle size distribution wa num num per lot geometrics rural as necessary to meet the specified tolerances of the specification specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name structural concrete consistency slump test as num num per num mnum or part thereof num test if less than num mnum where concrete batch plant facilities are used outside the metropolitan area a slump test shall be carried out on each truck delivering concrete to site .
strength as num part num num num per num mnum or part thereof num test if less than num mnum fine aggregate concrete clay and fine silt settlement method as num num monthly organic impurities other than sugar as num num monthly particle size distribution as num monthly water absorption num monthly coarse aggregate concrete particle size distribution as num weekly water absorption num monthly reactive alkali part num of report no .
trnum by the cement concrete association of new zealand .
num per source material per contract water mrwa test method wa num monthly concrete trial mixes as num part num consistency slump test strength each trial mix in accordance with specification num welding steel beams road safety barrier systems and traffic barriers for structures as per as num radiographic testing visual inspection magnetic particles inspection dye penetration test ultrasonic testing refer specification num galvanising thickness refer specification num num per mnum num or num per m num per post paintwork dry film thickness as num or bs num refer specification num num per mnum num or num per m num per post elastomeric bearings as per as num compression stability proof loading stiffness refer specification num specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name abutment protection plan dimensions num per abutment site stone dimensions num per load parapet panels dimensions each linelevel every num m reinforced earth panel dimensionsfinish each backfill psd num per abutment resistivity num per abutment ph num per abutment dissolved salts num per abutment panel linelevelplumb every num m polymeric reinforcing strips under job specific environmental conditions refer specification num loading num per bridge exposure to water num per bridge site damage num per bridge uv exposure num per bridge temperature num per bridge wall including footing cross section and height num cross section per num m position and line every num m fencing position and line every num m fence postpier verticality each postpier footings footing dimensions each postpier limestone blocks refer clause num of specification num num per num blocks antigraffiti coating systems paintwork dry film thickness astm d num num per every mnum for each surface panel painted dry film thickness asnzs num num per surface less than num mnum adhesion num per every num mnum for each coating system layer specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num electrical light pole foundations concrete footings as num part num num num num specimens per num mnum or part thereof footing dimensions each installation steel light poles and arms welding as num each assembly galvanising as num each assembly fabrication including lap joint each assembly slip base torquing each assembly pole installation grouting each installation slip base retorquing each installation pole position and plumb each installation luminaire focusing each installation electric cabling insulation each circuit earth resistance each installation luminaire installation focusing each installation mast installation pole position and plumb each installation orientation each installation specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name annexure numb identification and traceability in accordance with the requirements of the contract for product identification and traceability traceability shall apply to num structural concrete the trace shall start at the batching plant at the start of manufacture .
num concrete general works the trace shall start at the batching plant at the start of manufacture .
num welding for fabrication of steel beams the trace shall start at the point of manufacture .
num prestressing cables the trace shall start at the point of manufacture num bridge bearings the trace shall start at the point of manufacture num asphaltbitumen the trace shall start at the asphaltbitumen supplier num paints including anti graffiti coatings the trace shall start at the point of manufacture num contractor supplied pavement materials the trace shall start at the point of manufacture num guideposts the trace shall start at the point of manufacture num .
the boundaries of each lot of asphalt placed shall be recorded using main roads chainages and slks .
num .
the location of asphalt represented by each grading and marshall property test result shall be recorded in terms of these identified lots .
specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name annexure numc monitoring and measurement of processes num .
minimum requirements in accordance with the requirements of the contract for control of production and service provision the contractor shall develop detailed process descriptionsprocedures for the following processes .
num roadworks a clearing topsoil removal and respreading b embankment foundation compaction c earthworks and excavation including rock d pits and quarries clearing topsoil removal overburden removal e embankment construction including selected fill f subgrade preparation g subbase construction h basecourse construction i cement stabilisation of basecourse j road safety barrier systems num drainage a culvert installation b backfill to conduits pipes box culverts and grids c culvert base slabs and end treatment construction num miscellaneous roadworks a fencing num bridgeworks a fabrication and erection of steel beams b manufacture of precast prestressed concrete beams c concrete manufacture transport placing and curing d bridge foundation compaction e mechanically stabilised earth abutments f falsework construction g formwork construction h reinforcement installation specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name i supply fabrication and surface treatment of bridge balustrades and traffic barriers for structures j surface finishes to concrete k prestressing cables installation stressing and grouting l protective treatment for steel surfaces m manufacture and installation of bearings n installation of shear keys o installation of expansion joints p pile driving q abutment protection r limestone retaining walls num electrical a lighting pole manufacturing base and pole installation b conduits and cable pit and electrical cabling installation c telephone foundation installation num crushed rock products a source rock production b crushed products production and stockpiling c preparation of conforming products stockpile num bituminous surfacing a preparation of surface b prime primerseal and seal c rubberised seal d asphalt production and laying to demonstrate that manufacturing processes are under control the contractor will need to address the following aspects with appropriate documentation or procedures .
num aggregate control a supplier to have quality system to asnzs iso num. b contractor to audit suppliers quality system and product .
c incoming inspection to include examination of documentation demonstrating required level of nata endorsed testing carried out by supplier .
these records are to be available to the superintendent .
specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name d product identification and traceability to be maintained .
e action plans to correct nonconformances to be documented .
f storage and stockpiling at asphalt plant should allow for i all incoming material to be separately stockpiled until conformance is verified ii separate storage for each size and type with appropriate identification iii preparation and maintenance of stockpile floor e.g .
concrete iv measures to prevent contamination v accountability and traceability for product movement vi action plan to correct nonconformances and vii nonconformance limits to be established for properties not given limits in specification e.g .
psd .
num bitumen control a incoming inspection to include i examination of appropriate documentation given producer certification and ii checking of load and bitumen temperature on delivery .
b separate identified storage for each class of bitumen .
c continuous recording of temperature in the ring production line .
num control of hydrated lime and other materials a inspection of documentation demonstrating conformance certification from supplier .
b appropriate separate and dry storage for hydrated lime and any other filler .
num asphalt production by continuous plants the process control procedures shall address the following a aggregate cold feed including filler i documentation of proportions of and psd limits for each component required ii calibration of the feed system of each component over the full range of material feed rates iii regular monitoring of moisture content determinations on feed aggregate with action plan for adjustment of feed rate iv visual inspection of feeds numday b bitumen feed i calibration of bitumen feed over full range of feed rates and temperatures specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name ii regular documented checks on bitumen feed rate at operating temperature numweek iii establishment of conformance limits for feed rates iv establishment of action plans in event of nonconformance c mixing i continuous recording of mix discharge temperature ii regular testing of particle asnzs num iii regular testing of moisture content asnzs num weekly iv establishment of action plan in event of nonconformance d storage and delivery i duration of storage at plant to be recorded ii delivery truck cleanliness to be checked iii check that mix is covered during delivery iv temperature on delivery to be tested in accordance with testing schedule attached e final inspection and testing conformance testing shall be carried out in accordance with the testing schedule for each lot .
a lot is defined as one days production of a specified mix type or less if changes are made which result in the creation of a new lot .
all test reports shall be nata endorsed and reported to the superintendent as a conformance record .
when a nonconformance is detected its disposition shall be in accordance with documented procedures .
num asphalt production by batch plants a aggregate cold feed as for continuous plants numi .
b screening and storage in hot bins i description of bin and screen monitoring process ii action plan for correcting problems .
nb a description of current practice should be sufficient .
c proportioning i documentation of proportions of each hot bin component required and psd limits for each component ii calibration of aggregate weigh bin over full range iii regular documented checking of weighing iv recording of mass of each component for each batch mixed v calibration of bitumen weigh bucket or metering device over full range vi regular documented checking of bitumen weighing vii recording of mass of bitumen in each batch viii recording of the discharge temperature of each batch ix regular testing of particle coating asnzs num weekly x regular testing of moisture content asnzs num weekly specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name xi establishment of conformance limits and nonconformance action plans .
d storage and delivery as for continuous plants numiv .
e final inspection and testing as for continuous plants numv .
num asphalt placing and compaction the installation phase of the contract will be described by a documented process description which will need to cover the following aspects where relevant a identification of lots for placing and traceability of material b traffic control measures c transport of asphalt from plant to site d preparation of surface e application of tack coat f placing of material including joints g compaction h inspection and testing covering insitu density and geometric requirements i protection of work num pavement marking a road surface preparation b road marking paint application c glass bead application d retroflective raised pavement markers num documented process descriptions the process descriptions shall address but not be limited to the following a the sequence of operations b the types of equipment required its maintenance calibration etc c any special working environment aspects d competency and skills of personnel e the work methods f materials to be used specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name g division of work into lots h characteristics tolerances and workmanship standards to be met i inspection test and control points j how the process will be monitored to ensure its continuing suitability and k records to be maintained .
prescribed customer requirements shall also be explicitly addressed .
specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name annexure numd validation of processes for production and service provision num .
special process procedures num in accordance with the requirements of the contract for validation of processes for production and service provision procedures shall be prepared for the following processes num surveying a compliance with the criteria detailed in specification series num survey information .
b monitoring verification and validation of all survey activities undertaken to meet the requirements of the contract .
c survey records of observations and calculation undertaken for verification of lot conformance .
d survey equipment .
num prestressing num galvanising num structural concrete num welding num steel fabrication num painting specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name annexure nume requirements for selected critical subcontracts subcontractors for the following critical processes must have third party certification of their quality management system to asnzs iso num for the manufacture and supply of aggregate asphalt placement bitumen stabilised limestone bitumen products cement stabilisation of pavements concrete culverts pipe and box type drainage structures including manholes and gullies electrical installation including lighting traffic signals its installations limestone pavement marking prestressing post tensioning prime primer sealing sealing resealing and enrichment rockbase sealing signs supply only steel fabrication steel reinforcing structural components for bridges including but not limited to beams bearings expansion joints and piles specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name specification num guidance notes delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference all edits to downloaded tdp documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
deletions shall be struck through e.g .
example .
insertions shall be in italics e.g .
example .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted then the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
the custodian of this specification is the manager project services .
num .
annexure numa testing the list of minimum testing frequencies shown in clause num must be appropriately amended to suit the requirements of the contract .
num .
annexure numb identification and traceability the list of elements must be appropriately amended to suit the requirements of the particular works .
num .
annexure numc monitoring and measurement of processes the list of processes must be amended to suit the requirements of the particular works .
num .
annexure numd validation of processes for production and service provision the list of elements must be appropriately amended to suit the requirements of the particular works .
num .
annexure nume requirement for selected critical subcontracts the list of elements must be appropriately amended to suit the requirements of the particular works .
num .
as constructed information if as constructed information other than that detailed at clause num control of records is required then that additional information will need to be added to the contract specific requirements section of the specification .
specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name contract specific requirements to add or delete the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
none at this time .
specification num quality systems num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name specification amendment checklist specification num quality systems revision no ______ project manager name _______________signature _____________date________ checked by name _______________signature _______________date________ contract no _______contract description __________________________________ item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked change mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materialsproductsclauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager contracts .
num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection testing parameters included in spec num test methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as constructed requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date _______________ specification num traffic copyright main roads western australia specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date annexure numb num table numb.num risk rating changed from extreme to very high amended likelihood from moderate to possible rspm num whole document reformatted to corporate branding guidelines mps num num num num num a num num num added references to traffic management at roadworks on state roads policy num reference updated to new rail safety national law wa act num num updated reference to section num of the code of practice num num num address and name of hvs branch amended num added reference to code of practice num added reference to main roads check list num changed reference to main roads safety and health incident report form num added clause regarding fatal or serious injury num added requirement for suitability audit annexure numb risk ratings updated in line with corporate standards annexure numf cross reference key updated guidance notes custodian changed to road safety policy manager num clauses amended cmpm num num traffic management plan to include impact on adjacent properties cmpm num num list of documents amended num c deleted num address of hvo branch amended specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no scope num num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num traffic management policy num num contractors traffic management policy num num num not used num planning num num hazard identification risk assessment and control num num legal and other requirements num num objectives and targets num num traffic management plan num num num not used num implementation num num structure and responsibility num num training and competency num num communication num num documentation num num document and data control num num operational controls num num emergency preparedness and response num num sidetracks and detours num num traffic control devices num num num not used num management and evaluation num num monitoring and measurement num num incident investigation corrective and preventative action num num records and records management num num traffic management audits num num num not used num management review num num review num num num not used num specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num principal identified hazards num annexure numb num traffic risk classification num annexure numc num requirements for sidetracks and detours num annexure numd num traffic incident reporting form num annexure nume num traffic risk context num annexure numf num contractors traffic management plan cross reference key num annexure numg num staging requirements num annexure numh num traffic restrictions num specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num general scope num scope num .
this specification outlines the minimum requirements for establishing implementing and managing a traffic management plan for the work under the contract .
num .
the contractor shall establish implement and manage a contract specific traffic management plan complying with a. the contract b .
main roads traffic management for works on roads code of practice c. australian standard as num d. main roads traffic management at roadworks on state roads policy and application guidelines where applicable for state roads e. occupational safety and health act num f. occupational safety and health regulations num g. road traffic code num and h. main roads guide to the preparation of traffic management plans .
num .
the traffic management plan shall form part of the contractors osh management plan and shall comply with the requirements of specification num occupational safety and health .
osh management plan num .
the traffic management plan shall also address the impact of each traffic management scheme on traffic flow and movements on the road network including adjacent properties .
the contractor shall ensure that the road system including the surrounding road network continues to operate efficiently and any disruption to road users is minimised .
road network efficiency num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below acts and regulations occupational safety and health act num occupational safety and health regulations num rail safety national law wa act num road traffic code num specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name main roads act num australian standards as num road and traffic engineering glossary of terms as num traffic control devices for works on roads as num railway safety management general requirements australiannew zealand standards asnzs iso num guidelines for quality andor environmental management system auditing asnzs iso num risk management principles and guidelines asnzs num occupational health and safety management systems main roads standards traffic management for works on roads code of practice website address www.mainroads.wa.gov.au our roads temporary traffic management workzones on roads .
traffic management at roadworks on state roads policy and application guidelines website address www.mainroads.wa.gov.au building roads standards and technical road and traffic engineering traffic management temporary traffic management congestion management at roadworks .
main roads specifications specification num quality systems specification num occupational safety and health specification num clearing specification num earthworks specification num culverts specification num bituminous surfacing num definitions num .
this specification outlines the minimum requirements for establishing implementing and managing a traffic management plan for the work under the contract .
num .
the following particular definitions will apply specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the traffic management plan tmp shall be the document that addresses the management of hazards and risks associated with the traffic environment .
the traffic management plan shall also detail the contract traffic management objectives and targets specify the necessary operational processes procedures and the related resources to achieve the specific requirements of the contract .
traffic management plan num .
a traffic control diagram tcd shall be the document developed in accordance with the contractors tmp and is required for each and every proposed traffic control measure required under the contract before the implementation of the traffic control measure in accordance with the hold point in clause num .
traffic control diagram num .
the traffic risk assessment treatment register shall be the document that contains the contractors identified contract specific traffic hazards hazards identified by the principal the assessment of the risks associated with the identified hazards and details the control measures that shall be put in place to manage the hazards .
traffic risk assessment treatment register num .
the traffic management representative tmr shall be the person the contractor has nominated as having the primary responsibility for ensuring that the traffic management plan is implemented over the term of the contract .
traffic management representative num .
incident is any unplanned event resulting in or having the potential for injury ill health damage or other loss .
incident num .
code of practice is the traffic management for works on roads code of practice .
code of practice num .
main roads traffic management policy is the main roads traffic management at roadworks on state roads policy and application guidelines .
main roads traffic management policy num num not used traffic management policy num contractors traffic management policy num .
the contactor shall have a traffic management policy and include a copy of the policy in the traffic management plan .
tm policy num num not used planning num hazard identification risk assessment and control num .
the contractor shall prepare a traffic risk assessment treatment register in accordance with annexure numb for hazards associated with traffic including network traffic performance and road users .
traffic risk assessment treatment register num .
the traffic risk assessment treatment register shall be prepared by the contractor using persons who hold a minimum competency accreditation in assessment team specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name accordance with the code of practice .
the traffic management plan shall be authorized by the contractors representative and the tmr .
num .
the completed traffic risk assessment treatment register shall form part of the traffic plan .
num .
the traffic risk assessment treatment register shall address all hazards including the hazards listed in annexure numa principal identified hazards .
principal identified hazards num legal and other requirements num .
the contractor shall maintain at least the current published editions of the following documents at the contractors office on site for the period of the contract a .
traffic management for works on roads code of practice b .
standards as num traffic control devices for works on roads c. traffic management at roadworks on state roads policy and d. guidance notes safe movement of vehicles in the workplace .
mandatory documents num .
application of the contract requirements standards and codes of practice in no way relieves the contractor from undertaking any activity function process or procedure necessary to meet its duty of care obligations as prescribed in the osh act num or other relevant legislation or standards .
num objectives and targets num .
the contractor shall determine the contract traffic management objectives and targets for the contract and clearly detail these contract objectives and targets in the traffic management plan .
num .
the contractor shall detail the procedure that ensures the contractors representative and the tmr regularly review the contract performance against the prescribed traffic management objectives and targets .
num .
the contractor shall incorporate any staging requirements detailed at annexure numg and the traffic restrictions detailed at annexure numh into the traffic control diagram .
num traffic management plan num .
the traffic management plan shall address all the work under the contract and shall detail all procedures processes work practices and information required by the contract .
traffic management plan num .
the traffic management plan shall be consistent with all requirements of the contractors osh management plan and suit the contractors method of operation .
num .
the contractor shall complete the information requested in annexure nume and include it as part of the traffic management plan .
risk context specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the traffic management plan shall be prepared andor reviewed and endorsed by a person with accreditation in advanced worksite traffic management or where complex traffic arrangements are involved a roadworks traffic manager rtm .
certification num .
if not submitted and explicitly approved in writing during the tendering process the contractor shall submit a suitable fully documented traffic management plan to the superintendent for approval prior to commencement of work under the contract .
hold point num .
where any of the following events occur the contractor shall review the traffic management plan and submit suitable amendments to the superintendent within num week of the event or other timeframe directed by the superintendent whichever is the lesser a. a nonconformance b. the contractors practice no longer reflecting the traffic management plan or c. an incident occurring .
mandatory changes num .
if the contractor proposes to amend the traffic management plan or the contractor is required to make mandatory changes to the traffic management plan the amended traffic management plan shall be resubmitted to the superintendent in accordance with requirements of the hold point associated with the traffic management plan .
the amended traffic management plan shall not be used until the superintendent has released the hold point .
amendment num .
the contractor shall provide the superintendent with a controlled copy of the traffic management plan for the duration of the contract .
num .
the contractor shall establish implement and maintain detailed procedures in the traffic management plan for all essential traffic engineering aspects as required by as num for the development of tcds .
traffic engineering num .
the outcomes of the following considerations shall be included in any tcd a .
the capacity required to accommodate traffic demand over the affected section of road and surrounding road network at a level acceptable to the superintendent during the term of the construction activity or particular work activity .
an example of an acceptable method is contained in the main roads traffic management policy .
capacity b .
the number and width of traffic lanes and road space that will be required to accommodate traffic demand taking into account property access right turning movements and passing requirements parking needs and special events that may impact on the available space and traffic flows .
traffic lanes c. intersection capacity analysis where construction activities traffic controls or traffic routing impact on an intersection where the intersection is either under signal control or at least one leg of the intersection includes a road with a classification of district distributor or higher classification as defined by the mrwa metropolitan functional road hierarchy .
intersection capacity specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name d. the needs of other road users such as pedestrians people with disabilities children cyclists motor cyclists users of public transport and heavy vehicles .
other road users e. traffic flows associated with public transport and the interruption to transport facilities including bus stops exclusive bus lanes etc .
public transport f. traffic flows and needs of special vehicles such as road trains highwide loads and emergency vehicles .
special vehicles g. the need to accommodate the continued safe operation of warden controlled school crossings .
school crossings num num not used implementation num structure and responsibility num .
the contractor shall nominate a traffic management representative tmr for the duration of the contract .
the tmr shall have as a minimum main roads worksite traffic management accreditation in accordance with section num of main roads traffic management for works on roads code of practice .
tmr num .
the tmr shall be on site at all times when activities relating to the execution of the work under the contract are taking place requiring traffic management control .
the tmr shall have the necessary authority and resources to meet the tmrs responsibilities under the contract .
num .
responsibilities and accountabilities for all contract management personnel including employees and subcontractors shall be detailed and applied in accordance with specification num occupational safety and health .
responsibilities num .
the contractor shall be responsible for the management and control of all traffic management issues on site in accordance with the contract including work under the contract undertaken by subcontractors .
subcontract works num .
where a subcontractor is engaged by the contractor or on the contractors behalf to perform any work under the contract the contractor shall provide the subcontractor with all relevant contract information and the parts of the traffic management plan that are relevant to the work to be performed by the subcontractor .
relevant information num training and competency num .
the contractor shall have on site at all times when traffic arrangements are in place a supervisory person that holds a current accreditation in basic worksite traffic management or worksite traffic management .
management competencies num .
personnel who hold a competency in accordance with main roads traffic management for works on roads code of practice shall be recorded on the skills register and documentary evidence maintained for the duration of the contract in accordance with specification num .
skills register specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall incorporate at least the following traffic information into the site specific osh induction training program site induction training a. training related to hazards likely to be encountered on site and control measures that have been developed in response to these hazards b. roles and responsibilities and c. the requirements of the traffic management plan .
num communication num .
traffic management information shall be communicated to workers in accordance with specification num occupational safety and health .
site communication num .
the contractor shall develop and detail procedures that ensure relevant requirements of the tcd and proposed traffic controls are advised to all affected personnel including the public property owners and occupiers businesses local authorities transport and government agencies and emergency services .
key stakeholders num .
where the contractors tmp involves complex traffic management arrangements such as but not limited to extensive detours lane closures and contra flows the contractor must notify main roads heavy vehicle services num great eastern hwy redcliffe wa num hvs at least num days prior to implementation of such plans .
where the contractors tmp contemplates restrictions on the road network such as a reduction of existing lane widths overall carriageway width vertical height clearance or the like the contractor must consult with hvs prior to finalising the plan which must be at least num days prior to implementation .
restrictions that would preclude existing heavy vehicle operations without main roads prior approval are not acceptable .
heavy vehicle services num .
not less than num days prior to the implementation of the contractors proposed placement of any restrictions on the road network the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the contractor has obtained acknowledgement from hvs of its proposed restrictions on the road network .
hold point num .
prior to the implementation of any restrictions on the road network the contractor shall erect warning devices and signs in a text height and placement in accordance with as num and the code of practice in advance of the restriction stating the minimum clearances .
num .
prior to the installation of warning devices and signs in advance of any restriction the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the advance warning devices and signs conform to the requirements of the contract .
hold point num documentation num .
the contractor shall establish implement and maintain a current controlled copy of all traffic management documentation on site .
current documentation num .
the traffic management plan shall clearly detail the cross referencing to all documents of the contract and the contractors osh management system and have referenced documentation available on site for the duration of the specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract .
num .
the contractor shall complete annexure numf which crossreferences the requirements of specification num to the traffic management plan .
the traffic management plan shall utilise section and clause numbers so that crossreferences are explicit and unambiguous .
num document and data control num .
the control of documents and the control of records shall be in accordance with specification num quality systems .
quality system num .
copies of all traffic data information and records generated throughout the construction works shall be retained on site for the duration of the contract .
num operational controls num .
occupational safety and health hazards shall be addressed in accordance with specification num occupational safety and health .
osh hazards num .
the contractor shall use annexure numb to assess the likelihood and consequence of traffic hazards and the categorisation of each traffic risk occurring during the works .
risk assessment num .
the contractor shall develop all traffic management schemes based on a maximum lane capacity as detailed in main roads traffic management policy where applicable or as num unless the contractor can demonstrate to the superintendents satisfaction alternative lane capacities that could be suitably applied to the section of the network that will be subject to the traffic management scheme .
maximum lane capacity num .
all works in the vicinity of railway crossings shall be subject to detailed risk assessment and managed in accordance with the requirements of the traffic management for works on roads code of practice .
railway crossings num .
works such as trenches or spoil heaps and other hazards shall be individually signed and barricaded at all times not withstanding that the area in question may not be opened to traffic or the public at any time .
signing and barricading of hazards num .
the contractor shall detail and implement procedures that ensure traffic control measures are evaluated for effectiveness and modified to manage the hazard .
the evaluation procedure shall detail the responsibilities timelines and records that will be kept as part of the process .
evaluation num .
the contractor shall not be permitted to reduce the load carrying capacity of any existing structure unless explicitly stated in the contract .
existing structures num emergency preparedness and response num .
the traffic management plan shall detail procedures that ensure access for emergency vehicles past or through the construction site shall be maintained at all times and that emergency vehicles are not unduly delayed .
emergency vehicles num .
while the contractor is working on site they shall render assistance in the event of a crash or vehicle breakdown .
render assistance specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall document as part of the traffic management plan the nominated key personnel for emergency situations with their contact details and the contact details of the emergency service providers and relevant main roads personnel e.g .
traffic operations centre manager heavy vehicle services manager .
num sidetracks and detours num .
sidetracks and detours for the purpose of moving traffic through or around the works shall be designed constructed and maintained in both wet and dry conditions in accordance with annexure numc .
annexure numc num .
temporary driving surfaces shall be maintained to a standard that permits safe and comfortable travel of all road users at the design speed of the sidetrack or detour .
the contractor shall ensure that the design of temporary driving surfaces shall as far as practicable address the environment and the road users .
driving surfaces num .
temporary driving surfaces shall be sealed in accordance with and at those locations nominated in annexure numc .
bituminous surfacing num .
where bituminous surfacing has not been specified as the temporary driving surface the contractor shall undertake and detail the hazard identification risk assessment and controls for the alternative surfacing ensuring all environmental issues and vehicle types including motor cycles caravans and outofdimension vehicles and cyclists have been taken into account as part of the risk assessment .
risk assessment num .
the contractor shall take appropriate action to eliminate dust raised from any temporary driving surface when this dust constitutes an inconvenience or hazard to motorists or nearby residences .
the contractor shall undertake the minimum maintenance measures shown at annexure numc inclusive of during standdowns weekends and holiday periods .
dust nuisance num .
sidetracks detours and temporary surfaces through or around work sites for shared paths cycleways and footpaths shall be designed and constructed to ensure they meet the standards detailed in austroads guidelines as num and the code of practice .
paths num .
prior to opening a sidetrack to any road user the contractor shall issue a certificate of compliance certifying to the superintendent that the sidetrack complies with all requirements of the contract .
hold point num traffic control devices num .
prior to implementing any proposed traffic control measures for the work under the contract particularly the installation of regulatory control devices such as temporary speed restrictions the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the traffic control diagram conforms to the requirements of the contract .
hold point num .
all traffic control measures shall be in place and fully operational before the contractor commences the execution of any work activity requiring traffic management .
specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
if the contractor proposes to amend the tcd the amended tcd shall be resubmitted to the superintendent in accordance with requirements of the hold point associated with the tcd .
the amended tcd shall not be used until the superintendent has released the hold point .
amendment num .
the contractor shall provide the superintendent with a controlled copy of the tcd for the duration of the use of the tcd .
num .
the contractor shall supply erect and maintain all traffic control devices in good condition in accordance with asnum .
num .
the contractor shall promptly change signage adjusting to changing conditions in accordance with as num .
e.g .
worker symbolic signs shall not be displayed when workers are not on site or not visible to traffic .
traffic controller signs shall not be displayed while a traffic controller is not being utilised .
after care signage shall be reinstated at the end of each work period .
keeping signage current num .
the contractor shall promptly remove any traffic control devices that are no longer required .
num .
the contractor shall provide and station accredited traffic controllers as required by the code of practice to ensure the safety of road users and workers .
traffic controllers will be stationed to guide public vehicles past hazards that can not be suitably signed .
num num not used management and evaluation num monitoring measurement num .
the contractor shall establish implement and maintain detailed procedures in the traffic management plan for the monitoring and measurement of traffic management practices to achieve the contract traffic management objectives and targets .
procedures num .
the monitoring and measurement of traffic controls and traffic management practices shall be undertaken by the contractor through regular inspection of traffic management activities .
the checklist on main roads website shall be used for these inspections .
website address www.mainroads.wa.gov.au our roads temporary traffic management plan preparation operational check and onsite inspection checklist .
workplace inspections num .
traffic controls shall be inspected throughout the day and at night in accordance with the requirements of asnum .
num .
the inspection program shall be adjusted to suit changing circumstances andor risk environment such as during times of increased traffic flows or speeds contraflow arrangements or when changed controls are introduced .
specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num incident investigation corrective and preventative action num .
detected nonconformances shall be managed in accordance with the requirements of specification num quality systems for the control of nonconforming product .
non conformance num .
corrective and preventative actions shall be managed in accordance with the requirements of specification num quality systems for the improvement of the traffic management plan .
corrective preventative actions num .
all traffic incidents shall be reported and investigated in accordance with the requirements of specification num occupational safety and health .
incident investigation procedure num .
incident reports must be forwarded to the superintendent within num hours of the incident occurring or becoming apparent .
incident reporting timeline num .
contractors shall use the form outlined in annexure numd for reporting traffic related incidents on works under the contract .
the contractor may use a contractors developed incident reporting form only when the contractor can demonstrate that the proposed alternative form meets or exceeds the requirements of annexure numd subject to the superintendents approval .
incident report form num .
the form outlined in annexure numd or the proposed alternative form shall be used in conjunction with the safety and health incident report form available from main roads website address www.mainroads.wa.gov.au under under building roadscontracting to main roadscontractor reporting forms or other incident reporting form advised by the superintendent .
num .
the traffic management plan shall detail the reporting and investigation procedures for incident investigation .
the procedures shall include the investigating officer responsible and the time limits imposed for reporting and investigating the incident and to closeout the incident in a timely manner to prevent a recurrence .
num .
the superintendent may participate in or undertake an investigation into the incident and the contractor shall cooperate with and provide assistance to the investigation organised or undertaken by the superintendent .
investigation num .
in the event of a fatality or serious injury arrangements in the tmp shall be followed for preserving the worksite of evidence of all aspects of the incident .
the code of practice requires that the site is not cleaned or tampered with including all traffic management devices and crash debris must be left in situ until police andor worksafe arrive .
therefore additional lane closures or complete road closure may need to be applied .
fatal or serious injury num records and records management num .
traffic management records shall be in accordance with specification num occupational safety and health .
records control num .
the control of records shall be kept for the site in accordance with the quality plan for the contract and these procedures shall be supplemented records control specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name with procedures that are osh specific for records and records management in accordance with asnzs num .
num .
records shall be registered ordered and retained on site for the duration of the contract .
site records num .
a daily diary shall be kept for the site and details recorded in accordance with as num for each inspection of the traffic controls and traffic guidance schemes in place throughout the contract .
the record shall identify the traffic control diagram tcd in place at the time of the inspection and details of any variations to the tcd .
daily diary num traffic management audits num .
the superintendent shall reserve the right to conduct second party audits on the contractor and any of the contractors subcontractors and suppliers .
as a minimum a suitability audit of the traffic management plan will be carried out prior to approval and a compliance audit will be undertaken when the traffic management scheme has been implemented .
audit checklists are available on main roads website address www.mainroads.wa.gov.au our roads temporary traffic management plan preparation .
second party audits num .
the contractor shall incorporate traffic audits into the audit schedule developed and implemented as part of specification num occupational safety and health .
audit schedule num .
all traffic audits audit timelines and reporting shall be undertaken in accordance with the requirements of specification num occupational safety and health .
audit reports num num not used management review num review num .
a review of the traffic management plan shall be undertaken at the same time and in the same manner as the osh management plan .
traffic management plan review num .
the superintendent shall be issued a certificate of compliance by the contractor certifying that the site procedures practices and operations are in accordance with the contract .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa principal identified hazards the contractor shall assess the risks and determine suitable control measures utilising the hierarchy of control for at least the following hazards and incorporate the assessment into the traffic management plan .
contract mandatory a .
traffic speed b. overdimension vehicles c. access for cyclists pedestrians and people with disabilities d. excavations e. working around mobile plant f. dust g. interruption to traffic flows queue lengths network impacts h. working in vicinity of railway crossings i .
working around schools school crossings and school zones j .
access to commercial and adjacent properties k. access to construction site by workers and construction equipment l. traffic control during dawn and dusk m. night work lighting etc n. work in the vicinity of signalised intersections and pedestrian crossings o .
above ground hazards p. contraflow contract specific add specific hazards as required specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numb traffic risk classification num .
in order to clearly understand the risks associated with this contract and then outline the manner in which identified risks will be managed the contractor shall undertake an assessment of all significant foreseeable risks associated with the contract and determined the treatment measures that so far as practicable minimise the risk .
num .
the identification and assessment process must be undertaken in accordance with asnzs iso num and the likelihood and consequences rated before the application of risk treatments primary risk and after residual risk the determined controls utilizing table numb.num table numb.num and table numb.num of this annexure numb .
asnzs iso num num .
the contractor shall so far as practicable control or reduce identified risks in accordance with the hierarchy of control as defined by asnzsnum .
treatment measures shall be authorised and managed by the contractor in accordance with table numb.num management approach for residual risk rating .
risk control and reduction num .
the superintendent may direct the contractor as to the primary risk rating and the residual risk rating to apply to any risk .
the contractor shall reassess authorise and manage its risk control measures in accordance with the level of risk directed by the superintendent .
num .
a residual risk rating of very high is not permissible under the contract .
num .
the contractors shall use the osh risk classification in accordance with specification num occupational safety and health when addressing safety hazards of the general public and road users moving through the site .
road users specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table numb.num qualitative measures of consequence or impact consequence description insignificant mid block hourly traffic flow per lane is equal to or less than the allowable lane capacity detailed in asnum .
no impact to the performance of the network .
affected intersection leg operates at a level of service los of a or b .
no property damage .
minor mid block hourly traffic flow per lane is greater than the allowable road capacity and less than num of the allowable road capacity as detailed in asnum .
minor impact to the performance of the network .
intersection performance operates at a level of service los of c. minor property damage .
moderate midblock hourly traffic flow per lane is equal to and greater than num and less than num of allowable road capacity as detailed in asnum .
moderate impact to the performance of the network .
intersection performance operates at a level of service los of d. moderate property damage .
major midblock hourly traffic flow per lane is equal to and greater than num and less thennum of allowable road capacity as detailed in asnum .
major impact to the performance of the network .
intersection performance operates at a level of service los of e. major property damage .
catastrophic midblock hourly traffic flow per lane is equal to and greater than num of allowable road capacity as detailed in asnum .
unacceptable impact to the performance of the network .
intersection performance operates at a level of service los of f. total property damage .
specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table numb.num qualitative measures of likelihood likelihood description rare the event or hazard may occur only in exceptional circumstances will probably occur with a frequency of less than num times per year i.e .
less than once in num years .
unlikely the event or hazard could occur at some time will probably occur with a frequency of num to num times per year i.e .
once in num to num years .
possible the event or hazard might occur at some time will probably occur with a frequency of num to num times per year i.e .
once in num to num years .
likely the event or hazard will probably occur in most circumstances will probably occur with a frequency of between num and num times per year .
almost certain the event or hazard is expected to occur in most circumstances will probably occur with a frequency in excess of num times per year .
important note the likelihood of an event or hazard occurring shall first be assessed over the duration of the activity i.e .
period of exposure .
for risk assessment purposes the assessed likelihood shall then be proportioned for a period of exposure of one year .
example an activity has a duration of num weeks i.e .
period of exposure num weeks .
the event or hazard being considered is assessed as likely to occur once every num times the activity occurs i.e .
likelihood or frequency num eventnum times activity occurs num times per activity .
assessed annual likelihood or frequency num times per activity x num weeksnum weeks num times per year .
assessed likelihood possible .
specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table numb.num qualitative risk analysis matrix risk rating consequence likelihood insignificant minor moderate major catastrophic almost certain low high high very high very high likely low medium high very high very high possible low low medium high high unlikely low low low medium high rare low low low low medium table numb.num management approach for residual risk rating residual risk rating required treatment very high unacceptable risk .
hold point .
work can not proceed until risk has been reduced .
high high priority osh mr and roadworks traffic manager rtm must review the risk assessment and approve the treatment and endorse the tcd prior to its implementation .
medium medium risk standard traffic control and work practices subject to review by accredited awtm personnel prior to implementation .
low managed in accordance with the approved management procedures and traffic control practices .
specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numc requirements for sidetracks and detours complete this annexure if required refer clause num .
denote as not used if not required and delete this note table numc.num approved sidetrack locations unless otherwise detailed in the drawings sidetracks shall be constructed at the following locations section slk road name side comments from to lhsrhs num num num num table numc.num prohibited sidetrack locations unless otherwise detailed in the contract the construction of a sidetrack is prohibited at the following locations section slk road name side comments from to lhsrhs num num num specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table numc.num construction and maintenance parameters section geometry pavement maintenance sealing requirements design speed lane width min .
curve radii min depth finished level tolerance min grading min watering sealed treatment type kmh m m mm mm per week per day yesno all num num num num no n.a .
note first line shows default parameters amend as required and delete this note table numc.num existing roads the following existing roads are permitted to be used to detour traffic around the works .
section slk road name side comments from to lhsrhs num num num num specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numd traffic incident reporting form region incident report no .
contract no .
contractor major incident reports must be forwarded to the superintendent within num hours of the incident occurring or becoming apparent .
contractors shall use this form for reporting of traffic incidents on works under contract and this form supplements the safety incident report form .
num details of incident reported to supervisor tmr other safety incident report no atmospheric conditions light conditions fatality clear day light injury road surface overcast night time property damage unsealed raining dawndusk police attended yesno sealed fogsmokedust street lighting time and date of incident road condition on am pm wet off day month year dry not provided other relevant details last maintenance grade watering and dust conditions specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num details of traffic management in place tcd no name of individual that prepared the tcd time last inspected accreditation no tcd approved day month year tmp approved day month year num descriptions of vehicles detail make modelpedcyclistvru registration no direction of travel age of driver num vehicle num num vehicle num num vehicle num comments num description of incident draw the incident including the direction of travel traffic control signs fixed structures and north point .
north specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num attachments the following copies must be submitted with this incident report .
approved tmp approved tcd approvals for temporary speed restrictions daily diary num police report accident reported to police yes no report made by phone fax mail or email date report made day month year police wa reference number num details of person completing this incident form name contractor name position date signature specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure nume traffic risk context the contractor shall define the context of the traffic risk environment in which the contract is undertaken and shall complete the following for inclusion into the traffic management plan num .
the location of the project incorporating a location plan where possible .
num .
key features in respect to traffic environment i.e .
freeways national highway and major urban roads volumes speeds intersection controls adjoining properties parking etc that may impact on issues associated with the project num .
climatic conditions that may be expected over the term of the contract num .
timing and duration of the project num .
likely numbers of personnel on site and how the contract will be resourced i.e .
subcontract employeeday labour etc .
num .
key work processes and likely associated traffic hazards specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numf contractors traffic management plan cross reference key this reference key table shall form part of the contractors traffic management plan and shall be placed at the front of the traffic management plan .
this table will be used by auditors and must be filled in accurately by the contractor .
specification num reference contractors traffic management plan reference clause headings ref headings num confirmation that the traffic management plan complies with requirements of spec num num contractors traffic management policy num traffic risk assessment and treatment register num schedule of mandatory documents num traffic management objectives and targets num traffic management performance review procedure num consistency with osh management plan num annexure nume information num certification of traffic management plan by qualified person num management of amendments to traffic management plan num procedure relating to identification and management of traffic engineering aspects num traffic engineering aspects listed a to g num traffic management representative num roles and responsibilities num management of subcontractors num confirmation of supervisors competencies in bwtmwtm num skills register num site induction training program num communication procedures to workers num communication procedures to other affected personnel specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num reference contractors traffic management plan reference clause headings ref headings num referenced system documents num document and data control procedures num operational hazard identification assessment and control procedures num risk assessment associated with railway crossings num traffic treatment evaluation procedures num access for emergency vehicles num emergency contact details num risk assessment for unsealed temporary driving surface num certificate of compliance for sidetrack hold point num procedure for obtaining prior approval for temporary speed restrictions hold point num monitoring and measurement procedures num traffic management inspection schedule num num incident reporting format num traffic incident reporting and investigation procedure num num records management procedures num daily diary num traffic management audit schedule num traffic management plan review specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numg staging requirements staging of the works must be as shown in the drawings or as summarised hereunder .
the contractor will program traffic management to accommodate the specified stages .
stage no .
description num num num num note add further stages as required .
consider the need for separable portions to the contract .
if there are no staging requirements denote as not used and delete this note specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numh traffic restrictions the contractor must include the following requirements in the traffic control diagram peak traffic periods no .
traffic lanes maintained in each direction minimum lane width available to traffic metres minimum width temporary traffic islands or medians metres other morning evening am to .am .pm to .pm to to note edit or add other traffic restrictions as required in the other column .
repeat all details for as many sections or stages of the works as necessary and delete this note specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is road safety policy manager .
num .
principal identified hazards annexure numa num edit the contract mandatory hazards to suit the works by deleting those not required and add any contract specific hazards as necessary .
num .
sidetracks and detours clauses num and num num where sidetracks or detours are required include clause num under the section contract specific requirements as a supplement to clause num .
complete annexure numc as required .
num project managers should consider the use of sealed sidetracks for the safe movement of traffic through the works .
problems have been experienced on works where traffic especially motorcyclists has been required to travel on wet unsealed sections of construction .
num design requirements annexure numc the tables must be filled in to ensure compliance with requirements .
please note that a constructionstaging plan should be developed along with the design such that the principal can prove that the construction of the works can be done .
the staging plan must be included in the information for tenderers book for contractors to be informed that the design was developed using this proposed staging .
the contractor may wish to approach staging differently as an innovation to the contract .
num exclusions for sidetracks must complement the environmental requirements .
num .
staging requirements annexure numg num the contractors traffic management plan will as required be based on the provisions contained in the staging requirements for the works as shown in annexure numg which could include the need for separable portions to the contract .
num these requirements should be inserted as necessary where complex traffic control measures are involved as may be the case for works in densely trafficked urban areas .
specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num annexure numg may also include diagrams as appropriate or simply refer to the drawings .
num if not a requirement delete annexure numg .
num .
traffic restrictions annexure numh num special requirements for traffic management can be inserted here such as may be required for densely trafficked urban situations .
num examples of typical requirements for inclusion in the contractors tcd could be as follows a work to traffic lanes will be confined to nonpeak traffic periods .
peak traffic periods for normal weekdays monday to friday will be taken as num am to num am for the morning peak num pm to num pm for the evening peak check peak traffic times for the particular works situation b the existing number of traffic lanes may need to be maintained at all times .
the minimum lane width available to traffic during the works will be num m. the minimum width of temporary traffic islands or medians will be num m. again check appropriate details c the maximum gradient for any temporary traffic ramp will be num and will be negotiable in safety by semitrailers and other large commercial vehicles .
d through traffic lanes may need to be maintained in a sealed condition at all times .
newlyconstructed through traffic lanes open to traffic without the final bituminous surface treatment will be provided with the surface treatment as specified in annexure numc .
this requirement will also apply at all weekends and public holidays .
e the column other could include the number of lanes required to be open for traffic during periods of no work longer than one day .
specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num sidetracks and detours num design num .
sidetracks shall provide for twoway traffic flow and shall be constructed to give a minimum clear width of four num metres for each lane of traffic .
width num .
all sidetracks shall be constructed to the alignment shown on the drawings otherwise the sidetrack shall generally be constructed outside the limits of earthworks but within the road corridor and comply with the requirements of the contract .
alignment num .
the sidetrack alignment shall be deviated as much as practicable to maximise the retention of trees and other significant vegetation .
deviations num .
the sidetrack alignment and general geometry shall be such that horizontal and vertical curves are designed to meet the speed limit posted for the sidetrack .
the first horizontal curve leading away from the existing road and into the sidetrack shall be designed to be a minimum of numkmh above the proposed design speed limit .
curve radii num .
sidetrack grades shall be limited to a maximum of num .
grades exceeding num shall be sealed .
an unsealed sidetrack shall have a maintained crossfall of between num and num to ensure dispersion of surface water .
maximum grades and crossfall num .
horizontal and vertical curves in combination shall be avoided especially on routes where high wide load vehicles or road trains are likely to traverse the sidetrack .
horizontal and vertical curves num .
the construction of sidetracks will not be permitted at the locations as indicated in table numc.num annexure numc .
sidetracks prohibited num .
unless otherwise approved by the superintendent the maximum length of unsealed sidetrack open to traffic in one continuous length shall not exceed five num km in any one direction followed by a sealed roadway not less than num km .
maximum length num .
the contractor shall stage the construction of the works to minimise the disruption to all road users .
the contractor shall adjust the staging as required to address the impacts of advertised events .
staging of the works num construction num .
at least num working days prior to commencing any work associated with the construction of sidetracks the contractor shall advise the superintendent in writing of the location design speed alignment and width of such tracks where such details are not specified .
hold point specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
clearing and topsoil removal for sidetracks shall be as specified in specification num clearing and specification num earthworks .
topsoil windrows shall be stockpiled within a twometre wide strip upstream of the sidetrack to avoid creating a dam effect .
clearing and topsoil removal num .
after removal of topsoil and completion of the formation and shaping operation the sidetrack foundation shall be compacted in accordance with specification num earthworks embankment foundation .
embankment construction shall be constructed in accordance with specification num earthworks .
compaction num .
where necessary borrow material or other material provided for sidetrack construction shall be imported for sheeting purposes in locations where the insitu material does not produce the specified driving surface .
the minimum compacted depth shall be num mm num mm .
clay soils with a plasticity index pi exceeding num shall not be used as a surface material .
sheeting materials and depth num .
the contractor shall provide drainage to sidetracks including off road drainage to prevent ponding of water on or adjacent to the sidetrack .
culverts shall be installed at creeks streams and welldefined low points as necessary in accordance with specification num culverts .
culverts shall be designed for an average recurrence interval ari of one num year .
drainage num .
sidetracks shall be sealed to provide an allweather surface at those locations nominated in this annexure .
sealing shall be in accordance with specification num bituminous surfacing .
sealing num .
the traffic management representative shall sign a certificate of compliance that certifies the sidetrack meets the requirements of the contract .
the certificate shall be presented prior to detouring traffic onto newly constructed sections of sidetrack .
certification num maintenance num sidetracks num .
the contractor shall maintain all constructed sidetracks in their specified condition for the duration of the contract .
maintenance num existing roads num .
the contractor shall maintain existing roads used for diverting road users during the contract to the conditions specified in the contract or to the condition existing at the commencement of the contract whichever is the greater standard until traffic is transferred to completed sections of the works or onto a constructed sidetracks .
num .
the contractor shall undertake a condition survey and road safety audit of the existing road to be used and submit to the superintendent a detailed report of the condition of the road prior to it being utilised .
approval num .
the contractor shall submit a road condition report for the existing portion of the road network to be utilised including the approval to use the road network from the road asset owner e.g .
local authority dpaw main roads .
road condition report specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num rehabilitation num .
where sections of sidetrack are no longer required the surface shall be rehabilitated in accordance with specification num earthworks .
rehabilitation specification num traffic num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title traffic revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num occupational safety and health copyright main roads western australia specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by date num added management and control of asbestos in the workplace to list of codes of practice mps num num clause added allowing main roads to determine the rating of incidents annexure numa added asbestos and fire to principal identified hazards annexure numd updated cross reference to num previously num whole document reformatted to corporate branding guidelines and numerous typographical and grammatical corrections mps num num num website reference updated num serious incidents added num added reference to division num of part num of osh regulations num updated references to reporting forms and registers num flashing beacons added num references to heavy vehicle services and traffic operations centre updated num monthly reporting requirements changed num incident reporting and investigation requirements changed num osh management plan review requirements changed annexure numa tiltup construction added annexure numb risk classification and rating tables changed annexure numd references and names changed and serious incidents added specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num osh policy num num contractors osh policy num num osh commitment statement num num num not used num planning num num hazard identification risk assessment and control num num legal and other requirements num num objectives and targets num num osh management plan num num num not used num implementation num num structure and responsibility num num training and competency num num consultation and communication num num documentation num num document and data control num num hazard identification risk assessment and controls num num emergency preparedness and response num num num not used num measurement and evaluation num num monitoring and measurement num num incident investigation corrective and preventative action num num records and records management num num osh surveillance and audit num specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num num not used num management review num num review num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num principal identified hazards num annexure numb num occupational health and safety risk classification num annexure numc num osh risk context num annexure numd num contractors osh management plan cross reference key num specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the management of the contractors osh obligations and standards under asnzs num and the establishment and implementation of an osh management plan .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below acts and regulations occupational safety and health act num occupational safety and health regulations num environmental protection act num environmental protection noise regulation num explosives and dangerous goods act num dangerous goods regulationnum mines safety and inspection act num mines safety and inspection regulations num road traffic code num australian standards as num traffic control devices for works on roads australiannew zealand standards asnzs iso num guidelines for quality andor environmental management system auditing asnzs iso num risk management principles and guidelines asnzs num occupational health and safety management systems specification with guidance for use specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name main roads standards code of practice traffic management for works on roads internet address httpwww.mainroads.wa.gov.au go to the web page our roads temporary traffic management workzones on roads main roads specifications specification num quality systems specification num traffic specification num environment num definitions num .
the meaning of terms and definitions in this specification shall be as defined in as num .
the following particular definitions will apply num .
osh means occupational safety and health or occupational health and safety .
osh num .
the osh management plan shall be the documented plan established by the contractor detailing the contract osh objectives and targets and specifying the necessary operational processes and procedures and the related resources to achieve the specific requirements of the contract .
osh management plan num .
osh risk assessment and treatment register shall be the document that contains the contractors identified contract specific osh hazards hazards identified by the principal the assessment of the risks associated with the identified hazards and details of the control measures that shall be put in place to manage the hazards .
risks num .
osh management representative osh mr shall be the person the contractor has nominated as having primary responsibility for ensuring that the approved osh management plan is implemented and managed over the term of the contract .
osh mr num .
incident means any unplanned event resulting in or having the potential for injury ill health damage or other loss .
incident num .
serious incident means any incident with an actual consequence of minor or above or any incident with a potential outcome of high or very high .
serious incident num .
personnel shall include all employees of the contractor and all persons deemed to be employees of the contractor under the osh act num .
personnel specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num .
surveillance shall mean conformity evaluation by observation and judgement accompanied as appropriate by measurement testing or gauging .
surveillance num num not used osh policy num contractors osh policy num .
the contactor shall have an osh policy in accordance with asnzs num and include a copy of the policy in the osh management plan .
the contactors osh policy must support main roads safety health and wellbeing policy statement located on the main roads web site internet address httpwww.mainroads.wa.gov.au go to the web page building roads contracting to main roads occupational safety health .
osh policy num .
the contractor shall prominently display a copy of the companys osh policy on the osh notice board for the duration of the contract and include it in information provided to persons at the contract induction .
a copy of the policy shall also be supplied to each subcontractor .
communication num osh commitment statement num .
the contractor shall develop a contract specific osh management commitment statement based on the companys osh policy .
contract specific num .
the contractors representative and the osh mr shall sign the commitment statement and prominently display a copy on the osh notice board for the duration of the contract .
a copy of the commitment statement shall be included in information provided to persons at the contract induction and a copy shall also be supplied to each subcontractor .
communication num num not used planning num hazard identification risk assessment and control num .
the contractor shall prepare an osh risk assessment and treatment register in accordance with annexure numb for osh hazards associated with the contract .
assessment and register specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num .
the osh risk assessment and treatment register shall be prepared using competent occupational safety and health persons .
the osh risk assessment and treatment register shall be authorized by the contractors representative and the osh mr. assessment team num .
the completed osh risk assessment and treatment register shall form part of the osh management plan .
num .
the osh risk assessment and treatment register shall address all contract hazards including the hazards listed in annexure numa principal identified hazards .
if the superintendent directs that additional hazards be considered then the contractor shall incorporate these additional hazards into the osh risk assessment and treatment register .
the contractor must also comply with occupational health and safety regulations num division num of part num section num identification of hazards and division num of part num construction industry consultation on hazards and safety management .
the contractor must include the hazards reported in the design report in their osh management plan .
principal identified hazards num legal and other requirements num .
the contractor shall at least maintain current published editions of the following documents at the contractors site office for the period of the contract mandatory documents a occupational safety and health act num and regulations num b codes of practice manual handling prevention of falls at workplaces excavation managing noise at workplaces first aid workplace amenities working in the vicinity of overhead power lines the safety and health of children and young people in workplaces management and control of asbestos in the workplace and personal protective equipment c guidance notes general duty of care in western australian workplaces plant in the workplace electricity residual current devices safe movement of vehicles in the workplace d standards asnzs num occupational health and safety management systems specification with guidance for use asnzs iso num risk management principles and guidelines specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num .
application of the contract requirements standards and codes of practice in no way relieves the contractor from undertaking any activity function process or procedure necessary to meet its duty of care obligations as prescribed in the osh act num or other relevant legislation or standards .
num .
the contractor shall detail and implement procedures for the engagement of subcontractors which ensures all subcontractors that are engaged to carryout work under the contract are competent to carry out the work safely .
sub contractors num .
the osh management plan shall detail the procedure for resolving osh issues raised by personnel during the contract .
the procedure shall be included in the site induction process and be prominently displayed on the osh notice board .
osh issue resolution num objectives and targets num .
the contractor shall determine the contract occupational safety and health objectives and targets for the contract in accordance with asnzs iso num and clearly detail these contract objectives and targets in the osh management plan .
num .
the contractor shall detail the procedure that ensures the contractors representative and oshmr regularly reviews the contract osh performance including subcontractor performance against the prescribed osh objectives and targets .
num osh management plan num .
the osh management plan shall address all the work under the contract and shall detail all procedures processes work practices and information required by the contract .
num .
the contractor shall complete the information requested in annexure numc and include it as part of the osh management plan .
risk content num .
if not submitted and explicitly approved in writing during the tendering process the contractor shall submit a suitable fully documented osh management plan to the superintendent for approval prior to commencement of work under the contract .
hold point num .
any person engaged to undertake any work under the contract including subcontractors shall be required to comply with the approved osh management plan while undertaking the work .
application of the osh management plan num .
subcontractor osh management plans established under other than the contractors certified osh management system shall not be permitted to form part of the approved osh management plan .
specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num .
once the superintendent has approved the osh management plan it shall not be amended without the approval of the superintendent .
any proposed amendments to the approved osh management plan shall be submitted to the superintendent for approval .
amendments num .
where any of the following events occur the contractor shall review its approved osh management plan and submit suitable amendments to the superintendent for approval within one num week or other timeframe directed by the superintendent whichever is the lesser mandatory changes a a nonconformance b the contractors practice no longer reflecting the approved osh management plan or c an incident occurring .
num .
where the contractor fails to submit suitable amendments to the superintendent for approval within the specified timeframe the superintendent may direct the contractor as to what amendments are necessary .
amendments directed by the superintendent shall be implemented forthwith at the contractors cost .
failure to amend osh management plan num .
the contractor shall promptly provide the superintendent with a controlled copy of the approved osh management plan .
the superintendents copy of the osh management plan shall be controlled under the contractors quality system for the duration of the contract .
num num not used implementation num structure and responsibility num .
the contractor shall appoint in the osh management plan a competent osh mr in accordance with the requirements of asnzs numfor the duration of the contract .
the osh mr shall be on site at all times activities relating to the execution of the work under the contract are taking place and have the necessary authority and resources to meet hisher responsibilities .
osh mr num .
the contractor shall clearly define document and communicate the osh responsibilities and accountabilities of all contract management personnel employees and subcontractors .
the contractor shall detail the osh reporting hierarchy for the contract in the osh management plan .
responsibilities num .
the contractor shall ensure that the legislative duties of employers and employees as outlined in section num num and num of the occupational safety and health act num are detailed and communicated to personnel as part of the site induction process .
legislative duties specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall be directly responsible for the osh management and control of all activities relating to the execution of the work under the contract including work under the contract undertaken by subcontractors .
contractor num .
the osh management plan shall detail the procedures and processes that the contractor shall implement to ensure subcontractors at all times comply with the requirements of the approved osh management plan .
sub contractors num .
the contractor shall provide each subcontractor with all relevant contract information and the parts of the approved osh management plan that are relevant to the work to be undertaken by the subcontractor .
relevant information num .
the contractor shall ensure that all subcontractors who will be undertaking work under the contract have documented safe systems of work in place prior to commencing work .
safe systems of work num .
the osh mr shall review and approve in writing all subcontractor safe systems of work and any other osh documentation produced by subcontractors in accordance with the approved osh management plan to verify its compliance prior to the subcontractor commencing work .
num .
subcontractors shall not amend or deviate from the approved safe system of work without the approval in writing of the osh mr. num .
the contractor shall ensure that subcontractors suitably complete and promptly return all documentation required by the approved osh management plan for the work being undertaken by the subcontractor .
num .
the contractor shall be responsible for ensuring subcontractor compliance with both the approved osh management plan and approved safe systems of work and the maintenance of records to demonstrate subcontractor compliance .
sub contractor compliance num .
the contractor shall maintain safe access to each portion of the works until the superintendent has undertaken audit and surveillance of that portion of the works .
where plant or equipment is used by the contractor to provide the safe access the contractor shall make this plant and equipment including operators available to the superintendent at all reasonable times to undertake audit and surveillance .
safe access num training and competency num .
the contractor shall detail the osh competencies and training received by its contract management personnel .
specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num .
the osh management plan shall have a detailed register of the skills and competencies for all personnel for the activities that the personnel will undertake under the contract e.g .
mobile plant operators crane operators traffic controllers doggers etc ..
skills register num .
the contractor shall demonstrate and maintain documentary evidence of competencies on site for the duration of the contract .
documentary evidence shall be made available to the superintendent within num hours upon request .
records num .
the contractor shall develop and detail a site induction training program as part of the osh management plan that includes as a minimum site induction training a training related to hazards likely to be encountered on site and control measures that have been developed in response to these hazards b roles and responsibilities and c the requirements of the approved osh management plan .
num .
the contractor shall conduct sitespecific occupational safety and health induction training for all personnel the superintendent and its agents and all visitors not escorted on site by inducted persons .
num .
the contractor shall evaluate all persons undertaking the site induction training through a written test to ensure that inductees have an understanding of the osh requirements for the contract .
the written tests shall be signed and dated by the person undertaking the induction training to attest to their understanding and be retained by the contractor as a record that the training has been completed .
evaluation num consultation and communication num .
the contractor shall detail procedures that will ensure that personnel are suitably consulted and communicated with during the planning and application of work activities associated with the contract .
consultation num .
the contractor shall detail procedures for the identification assessment and control of hazards associated with the daytoday work activities .
these procedures shall include requirements for consultation with personnel involved in the work activity .
num .
the contractor shall have procedures for ensuring that osh information is communicated to and from its personnel .
the contractor shall hold an osh meeting with all personnel or their representatives at the site at least on regular fortnightly intervals .
communication num .
minutes shall be recorded for all osh meetings and posted on the osh notice board within num hours of the meeting .
meeting minutes specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall maintain at the site an osh notice board located in a prominent position and accessible to all personnel for the distribution of osh information .
osh notice board num .
the contractor shall as a minimum establish and implement procedures for reporting relevant and timely information in accordance with asnzs num and the following reporting a monthly safety indicators msi report form b safety and health incident report form and c incident and risk register .
the msi and safety and health incident report forms can be obtained from main roads website internet address httpwww.mainroads.wa.gov.au under building roadscontracting to main roadscontractor reporting forms .
the superintendent will provide a blank incident and risk register to the contractor upon commencement of the contract .
the contractor shall use these forms or any updated versions as advised by the superintendent for all osh reporting required under the contract .
if the superintendent advises that a main roads electronic reporting system is implemented then the contractor shall use that electronic reporting system for all osh reporting .
num documentation num .
the contractor shall establish implement and maintain a controlled copy of all contract osh documentation on site .
controlled copies num .
where the osh management plan references other documentation including but not limited to the contract the contractors osh quality system the osh act and regulations australian standards worksafe codes of practice these references shall be explicit and unambiguous .
the contractor shall ensure that section and clause numbers are clearly denoted in the osh management plan .
all documentation referenced in the osh management plan shall be available on site for the duration of the contract .
referenced documents num .
the contractor shall complete annexure numd which cross references the requirements of specification num to the osh management plan .
the osh management plan shall utilise section and clause numbers so that crossreferences are explicit and unambiguous .
num document and data control num .
the control of documents and the control of records shall be in accordance with specification num quality systems .
quality system specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num .
osh data resulting from works under the contract shall be controlled in accordance with asnzs num for document and data control .
num hazard identification risk assessment and controls num .
the contractor shall detail and implement procedures that will identify hazards assess risks and determine suitable control measures as they arise throughout the term of the contract .
these procedures shall both comply with and be implemented and managed in accordance with the specification .
jsas and safe work practices num .
where the contractor intends to utilise standard safe work practices as part of a control for identified hazards they shall be explicitly referenced in the osh management plan and copies kept on site for the duration of the works .
num .
the contractor shall detail and implement procedures that ensure control measures are evaluated for effectiveness and modified as necessary .
the evaluation procedure shall detail the responsibilities timelines and records that will be kept as part of the process .
evaluation num .
where a hazard risk rating in accordance with annexure numb is controlled through administrative risk control measures the contractor shall ensure that the administrative measures are control measures a clearly documented and those personnel responsible for implementation and management are explicitly defined b understood by all relevant personnel through training and assessment c implemented as documented and promptly reviewed for effectiveness following initial implementation d amended and authorised as required e adequately supervised managed and audited to ensure continuing compliance and f available at all times wherever the measures are being implemented .
num .
all plant and equipment used to undertake work under the contract shall comply with all statutory and manufactures requirements at all times .
plant and equipment num .
the contractor shall demonstrate that for all plant and equipment specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name a certificates licences and permits required by the osh act and regulations are current prior to commencing work on site plant certificates b there is documentary evidence that plant is fit for use and purpose prior to commencing work on site inspection c records of inspections for daily routine and programmed service cleaning andor maintenance are maintained for the duration of the contract and records d operators of plant or equipment are trained experienced and competent to operate the particular item and that they hold the required licence or certificate where necessary .
operator num .
the contractor shall mount and operate amber rotating or flashing beacons to all moving road plant and vehicles that shall be used by the contractor or subcontractors on the site in accordance with as num .
the contractor shall ensure that the amber rotating or flashing beacons are operating and clearly visible by all persons from all directions for a distance not less than num metres in any environment .
amber rotating or flashing beacons num .
any piece of plant or equipment not complying with the specification shall cease operating until the contractor can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the superintendent that the piece of non conforming plant or equipment conforms to these requirements .
non conforming plant num .
traffic management hazards shall be addressed in accordance with specification num traffic .
traffic hazards num .
all of the personnel including subcontractors subject to the contractors osh management plan shall wear at all times high visibility safety garments or vests complying with asnzs num while on worksites that are subject to either construction equipment or the travelling public .
to increase visibility the contractor is encouraged to use full torso high visibility safety garments i.e .
rather than using garments that only satisfy the minimum requirements of asnzs num .
high visibility vests num .
the contractor shall use either fluorescent red fluorescent orange or fluorescent yellow coloured vests to obtain the best visual contrast against the prevailing background particularly for workers in vulnerable locations such as traffic controllers .
vest colour num .
for nighttime and low light conditions all personnel shall wear high visibility retroreflective safety garments or vests in accordance with asnzs num .
nighttime num .
high visibility safety garments or vests which in the opinion of the superintendent do not comply with the contract for whatever reason shall be replaced by the contractor with compliant safety garments or vests at no cost to the principal .
non compliance specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num .
no firearms or lethal weapons shall be allowed on any part of the work under the contract including camps .
no firearms num .
the contractor shall meet their obligations under the osh regulations num in respect to the exposure standard for noise .
noise exposure num .
all pesticides including herbicides insecticides rodenticides fungicides molluscides and algaecides shall only be applied by operators licensed in accordance with the health act num health pesticides regulations num .
pesticide operators num .
the contractor shall address the osh issues detailed under the heading contract specific requirements .
other hazards num emergency preparedness and response num .
all potential emergency situations that arise out of site work or impact on the site including emergencies that may arise from site locations shall be identified and detailed in the osh management plan .
emergency situations num .
the osh management plan shall include an emergency preparedness and response plan for the site which details emergency procedures for preventing and mitigating all potential emergency situations .
emergency response plan num .
the emergency preparedness and response plan shall document the nominated key personnel for the associated emergency situation with their contact details and the contact details of the emergency service providers .
contact details of relevant main roads organisation personnel shall be included where the emergency could significantly affect the operation of any part of the road network .
emergency contacts num .
the main roads organisation defines those personnel not part of the contract responsible for the operation of the road network such as the regional manager heavy vehicle services or the traffic operations centre .
num .
the site induction program shall address the identified issues in the emergency preparedness and response plan to ensure that all site personnel are aware of procedures in the event of an incident or emergency occurring .
communication num .
the contractor shall practice their emergency preparedness within six num weeks of the commencement of work and at least four num monthly intervals thereafter .
emergency drills num .
the contractor shall review then revise where necessary their emergency preparedness and response procedures following the practice or the occurrence of incidents .
review num .
an industrial first aid kit shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the western australian code of practice first aid workplace amenities and personal protective equipment .
first aid kit specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall ensure that a minimum of two of its personnel holding a current senior first aid qualification that meet the australian resuscitation council guidelines and polices are on site at all times for the duration of the contract .
first aiders num .
the contractor shall render first aid to a the contractors employees b any subcontractor and their employees c the superintendent and the superintendents staff d main roads employees agents contractors and subcontractors and e any other person on site if needed .
num .
the contractor shall ensure that a copy of the material safety data sheets relating to all hazardous substances at the site is kept at the first aid station .
msdss num num not used measurement and evaluation num monitoring and measurement num .
the contractor shall establish implement and maintain detailed procedures in the osh management plan for the monitoring and measurement of osh practices to achieve the contract occupational safety and health objectives and targets and relevant osh legislation .
procedures num .
the monitoring and measurement of osh practices shall be undertaken by the contractor through regular inspection of workplace activities .
workplace inspections shall be undertaken on at least a two num weekly interval and the results of the inspection documented .
workplace inspections num .
within num days of the end of each month the contractor shall submit to the superintendent a completed monthly safety indicator msi report and updated incident and hazard register using the forms provided by the superintendent .
monthly reporting num incident investigation corrective and preventative action num .
nonconformances shall be managed in accordance with the requirements of specification num quality systems for the control of nonconforming product .
specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num .
corrective and preventative actions shall be managed in accordance with the requirements of specification num quality systems for the improvement of the osh management plan .
corrective actions num .
all serious incidents associated with the contract works shall be immediately notified to the superintendent and a preliminary incident report provided within num hours .
the contractor shall investigate all serious incidents and provide a detailed incident report within num days using the form provided by the superintendent including copies of all reports and information associated with the incidents .
serious incident reporting num .
except for serious incidents the contractor shall provide to the superintendent within num days of the incident occurring a detailed report of all incidents using the form provided by the superintendent including copies of all reports and information associated with the incidents .
other incident reporting num .
to ensure consistency of incident and hazard reporting within main roads safety management system the superintendent may make a determination on the classification or rating of an incident .
where the superintendent has made such a determination the contractor shall provide an updated incident report and update the incident and risk register to reflect main roads determination .
incident rating num .
the osh management plan shall detail the reporting and investigation procedures for incident investigation .
the procedures shall include the investigating officer responsible and the time limits imposed for reporting and investigating incidents and to closeout the incidents in a timely manner to prevent a recurrence .
incident investigation num .
the superintendent may participate in or undertake an investigation into the incidentinjury or illness at its discretion and the contractor shall cooperate with and provide assistance to the investigation organised or undertaken by the superintendent .
num .
where the contractor has been notice a served with a prohibition or improvement notice under the osh act or b required to comply with any order issued by an inspector under the energy coordination act numwa or c required to notify the worksafe western australia commissioner or the director of energy safety of any matter the contractor shall immediately supply a copy of that notice order or notification to the superintendent .
specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num .
where the contractor has been served with a summons or is convicted of any offence in relation to occupational safety and health the contractor shall immediately supply a copy of that summons to the superintendent or notify the superintendent of the conviction and any penalty imposed .
num .
where the contractor has been served a prohibition or improvement notice in accordance with the osh act num for osh issues associated with work under the contract the contractor shall immediately supply a copy of the notice to the superintendent and this notices shall constitute a nonconformance in accordance with specification num quality systems .
notice num records and records management num .
the control of records shall be in accordance with the contractors approved quality plan for the contract and these procedures shall be supplemented with procedures that are osh specific for records and records management in accordance with asnzs num .
num .
records shall be registered ordered and retained on site for the duration of the contract .
minimum osh records num osh surveillance and audit num .
the superintendent shall reserve the right to conduct surveillance and second party audits on the contractor and any subcontractor undertaking work under the contract .
surveillance and audit num .
the contractor shall promptly provide the superintendent upon request any documentation records or assistance during the surveillance or audit activity .
num .
the contractor shall develop and maintain an audit schedule that details the audits planned to be undertaken by the contractor of the work under the contract including subcontractors for the duration of the contract in accordance with asnzs num .
the audit schedule shall form part of the osh management plan .
osh audit schedule and audit reports num .
the contractor shall fully implement its approved audit schedule and produce a documented report for each audit .
the report shall detail the scope of the audit the audit questions and audit findings .
the superintendent shall be promptly provided with copies of all audit reports and with other documentation to show all matters raised have been appropriately addressed .
num .
unless otherwise directed by the superintendent the contractor shall undertake its initial osh audit within num weeks of commencement of work .
the contractor shall undertake subsequent osh audits at a frequency not less than once every num months .
minimum osh audit frequency specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name num .
all contractor osh audits shall include an assessment of subcontractor compliance with the approved osh management plan .
compliance num num not used management review num review num .
the contractor shall undertake an independent review of the osh management plan for the contract in accordance with the requirements of asnzs num .
compliance num .
a review of the osh management plan shall be undertaken num months after the commencement of the contract work and every num months thereafter for the duration of the contract .
the superintendent may also direct the contractor to review the osh management plan earlier in the event of a serious incident occurring .
system review num .
following the completion of the review the contractor shall submit a written report that details the suitability adequacy and effectiveness of the osh management plan and to certify that the site procedures practices and operations are in accordance with the contract .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements note pm may determine to include hazards detailed in the design report within this section refer clause num responsibilities of designers and delete this note .
num num not used specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name annexure numa principal identified hazards the contractor shall assess the risks and determine suitable control measures utilising the hierarchy of control for at least the following hazards and incorporate the assessment into the contract osh management plan .
contract mandatory a traffic including pedestrians cyclists and access for people with disabilities b personnel working around mobile plant c plant and machinery including overturn falling objects and noise d all trenches and excavations e dust f hazardous substances including pesticides and asbestos manufactured products and naturally occurring g hot bituminous works h subcontractors i manual handling j waste management k hazards identified from the design report l fire including the risk of fire caused by plant and machinery contacting rock e.g .
ground engaging tools excavator tracks etc .
contract specific m cranes crane drivers and dogmen n contact with services and energy sources o fall from heights p fatigue specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name q working in isolation r working in remote areas s working in confined spaces t working in vicinity of railways u propping tiltup construction v micropiling note amend or add to the above list of hazards as required by the nature of the works and delete this note specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name annexure numb occupational health and safety risk classification num .
in order to clearly understand the risks associated with this contract and thence outline the manner in which identified risks will be managed the contractor shall undertake an assessment of all significant foreseeable risks associated with the contract and determined the treatment measures that so far as practicable minimise the risk .
num .
the identification and assessment process must be undertaken in accordance with asnzs iso num and the likelihood and consequences rated before the application of risk treatments primary risk and after residual risk the determined controls utilizing table numb.num and table numb.num of this annexure numb .
asnzs iso num num .
the contractor shall so far as practicable control or reduce identified risks in accordance with the hierarchy of control as defined by asnzs num .
treatment measures shall be authorised and managed by the contractor in accordance with table numb.num management approach for residual risk rating .
risk control and reduction num .
the superintendent may direct the contractor as to the primary risk rating and the residual risk rating to apply to any risk .
the contractor shall reassess authorise and manage its risk control measures in accordance with the level of risk directed by the superintendent .
num .
a residual risk rating of very high is not permissible under the contract .
specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name table numb.num risk classification matrix rating health safety transport services financial reputation trust political stakeholders community business operations legal compliance insignificant no treatment required service infrastructure receives minimal damage minor rectification required .
services only temporarily unavailable or remain operational .
minor impact to customers e.g .
minor drop in patronage or minor congestion .
greater of less than num or deviation from project budget within num .
isolated local community or individuals issuebased concerns .
low profile media attention .
some insignificant delays to business activities .
up to num variation in kpi or objective .
guidance required for legal compliance issues managed through routine procedures .
legal action unlikely .
minor first aid treatment required one or a number of services are unavailable or operating with restrictions but can be resumed within acceptable timeframes .
short term impact to customers e.g .
short term drop in patronage or isolated congestion .
greater of num to num m or deviation from project budget between num .
local community impacts concerns .
occasional once off negative media attention .
trust issues raised .
minor delays to business activities .
num to num variation in kpi or objective .
complex legalnon compliance issue to be addressed .
legal action andor public liability claim possible .
moderate medical treatment required or lost time injury one or a number of services including critical services are unavailable for an extended length of time .
moderate impact to customers e.g .
complaints and moderate drop in patronage or moderate level of shortterm congestion .
greater of num m to num m or deviation from project budget between num .
sectional community impacts concerns publicly expressed .
increased negative media attention .
loss of confidence trust by community stakeholders in agency processes capability .
ministerial concern .
some moderate delays to business activities .
num to num variation in kpi or objective .
one or more projects is significantly impaired .
noncompliances with regulation andor probity infringements which may result in some processes repeated .
legal action probable .
major single fatality or major injuries or severe permanent disablement a number of critical services are cancelled with extensive rectification required before resumption of services .
noncritical service infrastructure is not operational and can not be rectified .
substantial impact to customers e.g .
major drop in patronage or major level of congestion .
greater of num m to num m or deviation from project budget between num .
considerable prolonged community impact dissatisfaction publicly expressed .
consistent negative media attention .
criticism loss of confidence trust by community stakeholders in agency processes capability .
ministerial intervention .
major delays to activities .
num to num variation in kpi or objective .
one or more critical programs or projects can not be delivered .
major non compliance with regulation which may result in termination of a process or imposed penalties .
legal action taken against agency andor major public liability claim or potential class action .
catastrophic multiple fatalities critical service infrastructure is not operational and can not be rectified .
significant impact to customers e.g .
sustained drop in patronage or sustained level of significant congestion .
greater of greater than num m or deviation from project budget num .
significant adverse community impacts condemnation .
extreme negative media attention .
consistent ongoing community loss of confidence trust in agency capabilities and intentions .
government intervention .
activities ceased .
more than num variation in kpi or objective .
multiple critical programs or projects can not be delivered .
major non compliance with legislation andor regulation which may result in criminal charges andor loss of required accreditation .
significant legal consequences class action against agency .
specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name table numb.num likelihood consequence and risk ranking tables likelihood consequence insignificant minor moderate major catastrophic almost certain l h h vh vh likely l m h vh vh possible l l m h h unlikely l l l m h rare l l l l m risk ranking definitions likelihood of an incident occurring consequence how severe almost certain more than once per month catastrophic refer to risk classification matrix numb.num likely more than once per year major possible once every num num years moderate unlikely once every num num years minor rare less than once every num years insignificant important note the likelihood of an event or hazard occurring shall first be assessed over the duration of the activity i.e .
period of exposure .
for risk assessment purposes the assessed likelihood shall then be proportioned for a period of exposure of one year .
example an activity has a duration of num weeks i.e .
period of exposure num weeks .
the event or hazard being considered is assessed as likely to occur once every num times the activity occurs i.e .
likelihood or frequency num eventnum times activity occurs num times per activity .
assessed annual likelihood or frequency num times per activity x num weeksnum weeks num times per year .
assessed likelihood c i.e .
possible table numb.num management approach for residual risk rating retained risk rating required treatment vh very high unacceptable risk .
hold point .
work can not proceed until risk has been reduced .
h high high priority osh mr must review the risk assessment and approve treatment prior to its implementation .
m medium medium risk standard work practice subject to review jsa prior to implementation .
specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name l low managed in accordance with the approved osh management plan procedures and standard safe work practices .
specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name annexure numc osh risk context the contractor shall define the context of the risk environment in which the contract is undertaken and shall use the following headings as a minimum for inclusion into the osh management plan num .
the location of the contract incorporating a location plan where possible .
num .
key features in respect to terrain including specific local features such as rivers creek lines steep ground etc .
that may impact on osh issues associated with the contract num .
climatic conditions that may be expected over the term of the contract num .
the timing and duration of the contract num .
likely numbers of personnel on site and how the contract will be resourced i.e .
subcontractors employeesday labour etc .
num .
key work processes and likely associated hazards num .
requirements for work camps fuel storage facilities workshops explosive storage facilities .
num .
location of material supply or dumping pits in respect to the worksite .
specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name annexure numd contractors osh management plan cross reference key this reference key table shall form part of the contractors osh management plan and shall be placed at the front of the osh management plan .
this table will be used by auditors and must be filled in accurately by the contractor .
specification num reference contractors osh management plan reference clause headings ref headings num contractors osh policy num inclusion of osh policy in induction num osh commitment statement num inclusion of osh commitment statement in induction num osh risk assessment and treatment register num schedule of mandatory documents num issue resolution procedure num osh objectives and targets num osh performance review procedure num annexure numc information num management of amendments to osh management plan num osh management representative num roles and responsibilities num legislative duties num subcontractor compliance num management competencies and training num skills register num site induction training program num written evaluation of site induction num consultation procedures num communication procedures num osh reporting procedures num referenced system documents specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name specification num reference contractors osh management plan reference clause headings ref headings num document and data control procedures num operational hazard identification assessment and control procedures num standard safe work practices num risk treatment evaluation procedure num plant management procedures num high visibility vests num emergency preparedness and response plan num emergency plan review num nominated first aiders num monitoring and measurement procedures num workplace inspection schedule num monthly safety reports num serious incident reporting num incident reporting num incident investigation procedures num records management procedures num audit schedule num osh management plan review specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name specification num guidance notes delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference all edits to downloaded tdp documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
deletions shall be struck through e.g .
example .
insertions shall be in italics e.g .
example .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted then the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
the custodian of this specification is the manager project services .
note specification num is applicable to major works contracts only as the minor works tender document carries its own osh specification .
num .
general as part of the prequalification process contractors engaged on major works contracts are required to have osh management systems that have been certified to asnzsnum occupational health and safety management system .
num principal responsibilities under the osh act num the principal has the capacity to exercise control and is also responsible for ensuring a safe and healthy working environment on construction sites .
a key element of that responsibility is to identify hazards assess the risks and determine suitable controls .
num national standard for construction work under the osh regulations num division num of part num construction industry consultation on hazards and safety management outlines the responsibilities of designers clause num main contractors clause num and clients clause num .
num responsibilities of designers clause num designers must forward to the client a written report that identifies all hazards arising from the design specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name assessment of the risks arising from the hazards action taken to reduce the hazard risks and any hazards identified but have not been resolved .
the pm must ensure that they receive a detailed report from the designer appropriate for the nature of the hazard and degree of risk for each design .
the pm must then determine how the hazards detailed in the design report are communicated to the contractor in contract specific requirements in the principals identified hazards in annexure numa andor to include the design report in the information for tenderers .
the hazards identified in the design report must be addressed in the contractors osh management plan .
num responsibilities of main contractor clause num the main contractor must as far as practicable ensures that all hazard records are maintained assess the risk of injury from the hazards take action by means to reduce the risks .
it is therefore a requirement of this specification that a the project manager or superintendent shall ensure appropriate risk assessment for all foreseeable hazards have been identified and risk potential determined by competent team members in sufficient detail b based on the outcome of the risk assessment the specification will be added to in prescribed clauses to reflect the risk profile and c the risk assessment will be forwarded to the superintendents numnd party osh auditor when the contract osh management plans suitability is assessed to ensure the auditor is aware of the critical issues associated with the contract .
num responsibilities of the client clause num the client must consult with the designer and main contractor that persons doing the construction work may do so without risk to their health and safety .
the client must ensure that information given to the client meets workplace safety requirements part num division num of the osh regulations num construction industry consultation on hazards and safety management etc .
num .
principal identified hazards annexure numa num annexure numa outlines a schedule of common hazards associated with main roads contracts .
the contractor is required to at least address this list of hazards in its specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name risk management plan and include the assessment together with prescribed control measures into the contract osh management plan .
num action any unlisted hazards should be added to the list as necessary in accordance with the project teams risk assessment .
num .
hazard identification clause num num this section looks to ensure that issues associated with key osh hazards are addressed in detail by the contractor as part of the contract osh management plan .
specific requirements in respect to plant and equipment and traffic hazards have been included in the specification and are mandatory for all contracts .
other requirements may be added based on issues that come out of the project risk assessment .
num action add specific requirements relating to identified hazards e.g .
asbestos dust etc .
in contract specific requirements .
it is worth noting that risk requirements relating to dust and vibration management property damage and some environmental issues such as waste management have significance under the occupational safety and health legislation and have therefore been referenced as part of this specification .
these requirements also have environmental implications and the requirements for dealing with these environmental issues are dealt with in specification num environment .
traffic management is almost entirely an osh management issue and is dealt with comprehensively through specification num traffic .
num .
cyclone preparedness num project managers preparing project documentation for projects located within the regions most likely to be affected by cyclones are reminded that they shall consider the risks associated with this factor and ensure all tenderers are made fully aware of main roads cyclone procedures and requirements to allow them to consider them in relation to annexure numc item num .
num the joint resources safetyworksafe safety bulletin issued on num april num provides recommendations that shall be included into existing cyclone procedures and is accessible through the following link httpwww.worksafe.wa.gov.aunewsiteworksafemediapdfalertsjoint_safety_bulletinnum num.pdf specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name contract specific requirements to add or delete the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
note after inserting the clauses into the relevant section you will need to alter the clause number and heading to hnum dsb style so that the newly inserted clauses will be included in the contents table .
num exposure to asbestos num .
the locations of any known or suspected deposits of asbestos in the vicinity of the works are as detailed in table num asbestos deposits .
deposits table num asbestos deposits location slk or ne coordinates of area nature of deposit comments from to no known deposits num .
in the event that other deposits or suspected deposits of asbestosbearing materials or naturally occurring asbestos are encountered during the work under the contract the contractor shall immediately report the occurrence to the superintendent and to worksafe wa .
other deposits num .
special measures shall be undertaken by the contractor in accordance with worksafe wa requirements to protect the health and safety of all persons involved in the works and to the public .
typical measures which may be required include the following special measures a provide written notification of the occurrence and required protective measures to all persons on the site b suppression of all visible dust to the extent reasonably possible in the affected areas c prohibit persons from working in dust clouds in or near the affected areass specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name d provide machines working in the affected areas with sealed airconditioned cabs fitted with appropriate filters e provide personal protective equipment to persons as deemed necessary by worksafe wa f develop work procedures to avoid exposure of unprotected persons to dust clouds and g machines used in the identified areas to be washed down upon i completion of work ii removal of the machine from the areas and iii prior to machine maintenance .
specification num occupational safety and health num issued num document no dxxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxxx contract name specification amendment checklist specification num occupational safety health revision no ______ project manager name _______________signature _____________date________ checked by name _______________signature _______________date________ contract no _______contract description __________________________________ item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked change mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materialsproductsclauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager contracts num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection testing parameters included in spec num test methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date _______________ main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num environment copyright main roads western australia main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num environment revision register date clause number description of revision authorised by num may num num environment management plan cmpm num apr num num num annexure numa annexure nume reference made to asnzs iso num added requirement for the contractor to submit incident occurrence form disturbance to rare florathreatened ecological communities added to contract specific stockpile sites included in the environmental management plan me num jul num num amended requirement for contractor to have published versions of ep act etc .
on site .
added requirement for contractor to determine how their legal and other requirements apply to their env aspects .
genv num.b added timeframe requirement for objectives and targets .
num added g to list at subclause num .
num subclause num amended .
num subclause num amended .
main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contents clause page no general.num num scopenum num referencesnum num definitionsnum num num not used.num environmental policy.num num contractors environmental policynum num environmental commitment statement.num num num not usednum planning num num environmental aspectsnum num legal and other requirementsnum num objectives and targetsnum num environmental management plansnum num not usednum implementation num num structure and responsibilitynum num training and competency.num num communication.num num documentationnum num document and data control .. num num operational control .. num num emergency preparedness and response num num num not usednum measurement and evaluation num num monitoring measurement .. num num non conformance and corrective and preventative actionnum num records and records managementnum num environmental surveillance and auditnum num num not used .. num management review num num reviewnum num num not used .. num as built and handover requirements num num num not used .. num contract specific requirements num num num not used .. num annexure numa num principal identified aspects .. num annexure numb num environmental risk classificationnum main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numc num contract commitments.num annexure numd num not used.num annexure nume num environmental risk context.num annexure numf num contractors environmental management plan .. num cross reference key.num annexure numg num contract specific requirementsnum annexure numh num aspects and impacts register.num main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num environment general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the principals minimum requirements for establishing implementing and managing an environmental management plan for the work under the contract and sets out minimum environmental management standards through the implementation of an environmental management system based on asnzs iso num .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below acts and regulations environmental protection act num environmental protection regulations num aboriginal heritage act num wildlife conservation act num australiannew zealand standards asnzs iso num environmental management systems specification with guidance for use .
asnzs num risk management main roads specifications specification num quality systems specification num clearing specification num earthworks main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num definitions num .
the meaning of terms and definitions in this specification shall be as defined in asnzs iso num .
the following particular definitions will apply num .
notwithstanding the definition in asnzs iso num environmental aspect shall mean a component of all activities associated with the contract that has the potential to cause changes to the environment .
aspect num .
notwithstanding the definition in asnzs iso num environmental impact shall mean any change to the environment due to work under the contract that can bring about either undesirable or desirable effects .
impact num .
the environmental management plan shall mean the approved document detailing organizational structure planning activities responsibilities practices procedures processes and resources for developing implementing achieving reviewing and maintaining the environmental policy .
environmental management plan num .
environmental aspects and impacts register shall be the document that contains the contractors identified environmental aspects and impacts the assessment of the risks associated with the identified aspects and impacts and details the control measures that shall be put in place to manage the impacts .
aspects and impacts register num .
environmental management representative emr shall mean the person the contractor has nominated as having primary responsibility for ensuring that the environmental management plan is implemented and managed over the term of the contract .
emr num .
incidents shall mean any unplanned event resulting in or having the potential for environmental damage or other loss .
incident num .
surveillance shall mean conformity evaluation by observation and judgement accompanied as appropriate by measurement testing or gauging .
surveillance num .
administrative control measures shall mean those measures that control impacts of risks through implementation of policy and procedures rather than physical controls .
control measures num num not used main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num environmental policy num contractors environmental policy num .
the contactor shall have an environmental policy in accordance with asnzs iso num and include a copy of the policy in the environmental management plan .
the contactors environmental policy must support main roads environmental policy statement located under environment on the main roads web site httpwww.mainroads.wa.gov.au policy num .
the contractor shall prominently display a copy of the companys environmental policy on the site office notice board for the duration of the contract and include it in information provided to persons at the contract induction .
a copy of the policy shall also be supplied to each subcontractor .
communicating the policy num environmental commitment statement num .
the contractor shall develop a contract specific environmental management commitment statement based on the companys environmental policy .
this statement shall be relevant to the environmental impacts of the contract activities .
num .
the contractors representative and the emr shall sign the commitment statement and prominently display a copy on the site office notice board for the duration of the contract .
a copy of the commitment statement shall be included in information provided to persons at the contract induction and a copy shall also be supplied to each subcontractor .
num num not used planning num environmental aspects .
num .
the contractor shall identify all aspects and impacts in accordance with asnzs iso num for all activities associated with the contract and record these on the aspects and impacts register .
where the contractor can demonstrate that the companys aspects and impact register meets or exceeds the requirements of the specification it may be used subject to the superintendents approval .
aspects and impacts num .
impacts shall be assessed for the likelihood and consequence of events occurring during the contract period in accordance with annexure numb and the level of risk assessed and recorded in the aspects and impacts register .
risk assessment main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the aspects and impacts register shall be prepared using competent environmental professional personnel .
the aspects and impacts register shall be authorized by the contractors representative and the emr .
impact assessment num .
the completed aspects and impacts register shall form part of the environmental management plan .
num .
the aspects and impacts register shall address all aspects and impacts that have the potential to pose a risk to the environment and as identified as being associated with the contract including principal identified aspects and impacts detailed in annexure numa and contract commitments detailed in annexure numc .
if the superintendent directs that additional aspects and impacts be considered then the contractor shall incorporate these additional aspects and impacts into the aspects and impacts register .
mandatory aspects and impacts num .
the contractor shall so far as practicable control or reduce identified impacts in accordance with the hierarchy of control as defined by asnzs num .
risk control num .
the aspects and impacts register shall be in the form as shown on annexure numh .
num legal and other requirements num .
the contractor shall identify and have access on site to all relevant legal and other requirements that are applicable to the environmental aspects of the activities associated with the works undertaken in the contract .
mandatory documents num .
the contractor shall determine how these relevant legal and other requirements apply to the environmental aspects of the activities associated with the works undertaken in the contract .
num .
application of the contract requirements standards and codes of practice in no way relieves the contractor from undertaking any activity function process or procedure necessary to meet obligations as prescribed in the environmental protection act num or other relevant legislation or standards .
num .
the contractor shall detail and implement procedures for the engagement of subcontractors which ensures all subcontractors that are engaged to carry out work under the contract are competent to carry out the work .
sub contractors num objectives and targets num .
the contractor shall determine the contract environmental objectives and targets for the contract in accordance with asnzs iso num and clearly detail these contract objectives and targets in the environmental management plan .
objectives and targets .
num .
the contractor shall establish and document a programme for achieving objectives and targets and clearly detail these contract objectives and targets in the aspects and impacts register .
the aspects and impacts register shall include main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num a clearly defined responsibilities for achieving objectives and targets b the resources and timeframes required for achieving objectives and targets and c cross referenced procedures work instructions and processes required to achieve the objectives and targets .
num .
the contractor shall detail the procedure that ensures the contractors representative and the emr regularly reviews the contract environmental management performance including subcontractor performance against the prescribed environmental objectives and targets .
num environmental management plans num .
the environmental management plan shall address all the work under the contract and shall detail all procedures processes work practices and information required by the contract .
environmental management plan num .
the contractor shall complete the information requested in annexure nume and include it as part of the environmental management plan .
risk context num .
if not submitted and explicitly approved in writing during the tendering process the contractor shall submit a suitable fully documented environmental management plan to the superintendent for approval prior to commencement of work under the contract .
hold point num .
any person engaged to undertake any work under the contract including subcontractors shall be required to comply with the approved environmental management plan while undertaking the work .
application num .
subcontractor environmental management plans established under other than the contractors certified environmental management system shall not be permitted to form part of the approved environmental management plan .
num .
once the superintendent has approved the environmental management plan it shall not be amended without the approval of the superintendent .
any proposed amendments to the approved environmental management plan shall be submitted to the superintendent for approval .
amendment num .
where any of the following events occur the contractor shall review its environmental management plan and submit suitable amendments to the superintendent for approval within num week or other timeframe directed by the superintendent whichever is the lesser mandatory changes a detecting a nonconformance b the contractors practice no longer reflecting the approved environmental management plan c an incident occurring .
main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
where the contractor fails to submit suitable amendments to the superintendent for approval within the specified timeframe the superintendent may direct the contractor as to what amendments are necessary .
amendments directed by the superintendent shall be implemented by the contractor forthwith at no cost to the principal .
failure to amend num not used implementation num structure and responsibility num .
the contractor shall appoint in the environmental management plan a competent emr in accordance with the requirements of asnzs iso num for the duration of the contract .
the emr shall be on site at all times when activities relating to the execution of the work under the contract are taking place and have the necessary authority and resources to meet their responsibilities .
emr num .
the contractor shall clearly define document and communicate the environmental responsibilities and accountabilities of all contract management personnel employees and subcontractors .
the contractor shall detail the environmental reporting hierarchy for the contract in the environmental management plan .
responsibilities num .
the contractor shall be directly responsible for environmental management and control of all activities relating to the execution of the work under the contract including work under the contract undertaken by subcontractors .
sub contractors num .
the environmental management plan shall detail the procedures and processes that the contractor shall implement to ensure subcontractors at all times comply with the requirements of the approved environmental management plan .
compliance num .
the contractor shall provide each subcontractor with all relevant contract information and the parts of the approved environmental management plan that are relevant to the work to be undertaken by the subcontractor .
relevant information num .
the contractor shall ensure that subcontractors suitably complete and promptly return to the contractor all documentation required by the environmental management plan for the work being undertaken by the subcontractor .
num .
the emr shall review documentation produced by subcontractors to verify its compliance with the environmental management plan prior to the subcontractor commencing the work .
document review num training and competency num .
the contractor shall detail in the environmental management plan the environmental management competencies and training received by its contract management personnel .
main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the environmental management plan shall have a detailed register of the skills and competencies for all personnel performing tasks which can cause significant environmental impacts .
skills register num .
the contractor shall demonstrate and maintain documentary evidence of competencies on site for the duration of the contract .
documentary evidence shall be made available to the superintendent within num hours upon request .
records num .
the contractor shall develop and detail a site induction training program as part of the environmental management plan that includes as a minimum site induction training a awareness of the importance of conformance with the environmental policy .
b awareness of importance of conformance with the contract specific environmental commitment statement .
c awareness of importance of conformance with the approved environmental management plan .
d roles and responsibilities .
e the significant environmental impacts actual or potential of work activities associated with the contract .
f the potential consequences of departure from specified operating procedures .
g the environmental benefits of improved personal performance .
num .
the contractor shall conduct sitespecific environmental induction training for all personnel the superintendent and its agents and all visitors not escorted on site by inducted persons .
num .
the contractor shall evaluate all persons undertaking the site induction training through a written test to ensure that inductees have an understanding of the environmental requirements for the contract .
the written tests shall be signed and dated by the person undertaking the induction training to attest to their understanding and be retained by the contractor as a record the training has been completed .
evaluation num communication num .
the contractor shall have procedures for ensuring internal communication of environmental information to personnel .
num .
the contractor shall have procedures for receiving documenting and responding to relevant communication from external interested parties .
num documentation num .
the contractor shall establish implement and maintain a controlled copy of all contract environmental documentation on site .
main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
where the environmental management plan references other documentation these references shall be explicit and unambiguous .
the contractor shall ensure that section and clause numbers are clearly denoted in the environmental management plan .
all documentation referenced in the environmental management plan shall be available on site for the duration of the contract .
referenced documents num .
the contractor shall complete annexure numf which cross references the requirements of specification num to the environmental management plan .
the environmental management plan shall utilise section and clause numbers so that crossreferences are explicit and unambiguous .
num document and data control num .
the control of documents and the control of records shall be in accordance with specification num quality systems .
quality system num .
environmental data resulting from works under the contract shall be controlled in accordance with asnzs iso num for document and data control .
num operational control num .
the contractor shall establish implement and maintain procedures and work practices to appropriately manage the impacts identified .
num .
where the contractor intends to utilise standard procedures and work practices as part of operational controls for identified impacts they shall be explicitly referenced in the environmental management plan .
num .
the contractor shall establish implement and maintain procedures that ensure control measures are evaluated and amended as required .
the evaluation procedure shall detail the responsibilities timelines and records that will be kept as part of the process .
evaluation num .
where an impact is controlled through administrative control measures the contractor shall ensure that the administrative measures are control measures a clearly documented and those personnel responsible for implementation and management are explicitly defined b understood by all relevant personnel through training and assessment c implemented as documented and promptly reviewed for effectiveness following initial implementation d amended and authorised as required e adequately supervised managed and audited to ensure continuing compliance and f available at all times wherever the measures are being implemented .
main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
vehicle servicing shall only take place in workshops and in the camp areas except for daily servicing on site at contractor nominated and superintendent approved locations .
no oil changes will be permitted on site and all filter cartridges shall be accounted for and returned to the workshops for disposal .
workshop servicing num .
the contractor shall address the environmental issues where detailed under the section contract specific requirements .
other aspects num emergency preparedness and response num .
the environmental management plan shall include an emergency preparedness and response plan for the site which details emergency procedures for preventing and mitigating and responding to all potential emergency situations including emergencies that may arise from the site location or specific work activities .
emergency situations identified num .
the emergency preparedness and response plan shall document the nominated key personnel for the associated emergency situation with their contact details and the contact details of the emergency service providers .
contact details of relevant main roads organisation personnel shall be included where the emergency could significantly affect the operation of any part of the road network .
emergency contacts num .
the emergency preparedness and response plan shall document the resources required to respond to environmental emergencies .
resources num .
the site induction program shall address the identified issues in the emergency preparedness and response plan to ensure that all site personnel are aware of procedures in the event of an incident or emergency occurring .
communication num .
the contractor shall practice their emergency preparedness within six num weeks of the commencement of work and at least four num monthly intervals thereafter unless otherwise approved by the superintendent .
alternative timings may be considered subject to the contractor demonstrating that specific drills are likely to be more effective at other than the specified timings .
emergency drills num .
the contractor shall review then revise where necessary their emergency preparedness and response procedures following the practice or the occurrence of incidents .
num .
the contractor shall ensure that copy of the material safety data sheets msds relating to all hazardous substances at the site is kept at the site office .
msds num num not used main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num measurement and evaluation num monitoring measurement num .
the contractor shall establish implement and maintain detailed procedures in the environmental management plan for the monitoring and measurement of environmental practices that can have a significant impact on the environment on a regular basis .
this shall include the recording of information to track performance relevant operational controls and conformance with the contract environmental objectives and targets .
monitoring num .
all requirements for monitoring shall be documented in the aspects and impacts register .
num .
the contractor shall establish implement and maintain a documented procedures for periodically evaluating compliance with relevant environmental legislation regulations and other requirements the contractor shall keep records of the results of these evaluations .
num .
the contractor shall submit to the superintendent a completed performance report within num days of the end of each month .
reporting num non conformance and corrective and preventative action num .
detected nonconformances shall be managed in accordance with the requirements of specification num quality systems for the control of nonconforming product .
num .
corrective and preventative actions shall be managed in accordance with the requirements of specification num quality systems for the improvement of the environmental management plan corrective actions num .
all environmental incidents associated with work under the contract shall be immediately notified to the superintendent .
incident reporting num .
the contractor shall provide a detailed report of all incidents using the form obtained from main roads web site internet address httpwww.mainroads.wa.gov.au under environment incident reporting and investigation .
the contractor shall submit the completed form to the superintendent within num days of the incident occurring and provide copies of all reports and information associated with the incidents to the superintendent .
num .
the environmental management plan shall detail the reporting and investigation procedures for incident investigation .
the procedures shall include the investigating officer responsible and the time limits imposed for reporting and investigating the incident and to closeout the incidents in a timely manner to prevent a recurrence .
incident investigation num .
the superintendent may participate in or undertake an investigation into the incident at its discretion and the contractor shall cooperate with and provide assistance to the investigation organised or undertaken by the superintendent .
main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num records and records management num .
the control of records shall be in accordance with the contractors approved plan for the contract and these procedures shall be supplemented with procedures that are environmental specific for records and records management in accordance with asnzs iso num .
num .
records shall be registered ordered and retained on site for the duration of the contract .
registry num environmental surveillance and audit num .
the superintendent shall reserve the right to conduct surveillance and second party audits on the contractor and any subcontractor undertaking work under the contract .
surveillance and audit num .
the contractor shall promptly provide the superintendent upon request any documentation records or assistance during the surveillance or audit activity .
num .
the contractor shall develop and maintain an audit schedule that details the audits planned to be undertaken by the contractor of the work under the contract including subcontractors for the duration of the contract in accordance with asnzs iso num .
the audit schedule shall form part of the environmental management plan .
audit schedule and reports num .
the contractor shall fully implement their approved audit schedule and produce a documented report for each audit .
the report shall detail the scope of the audit the audit questions and audit findings .
the superintendent shall be promptly provided with copies of all audit reports and with other documentation to show all matters raised have been appropriately addressed .
num .
unless otherwise directed by the superintendent the contractor shall undertake its initial environmental audit within num weeks of commencement of work .
the contractor shall undertake subsequent environmental audits at a frequency not less than once every num months .
minimum audit frequency num .
all contractor environmental audits shall include an assessment of subcontractor compliance with the approved environmental management plan .
compliance num num not used main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num management review num review num .
the contractor shall undertake an independent review of the environmental management plan for the contract in accordance with the requirements of asnzs iso num .
compliance num .
a review of the environmental management plan shall be undertaken at least num months after the commencement of the contract work and at least every num months thereafter for the duration of the contract .
system review num .
following the completion of the review the contractor shall submit a written report that details the suitability adequacy and effectiveness of the environmental management plan and to certify that the site procedures practices and operations are in accordance with the contract .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numa principal identified aspects the contractor shall assess the risks and determine suitable environmental management measures utilising the hierarchy of control for at least the following aspects and incorporate the assessment into the contract environmental management plan .
contract mandatory a accidental spill of hazardous substances .
b hydrocarbon spills .
c alteration to drainage flows and water levels .
d accidental clearing of vegetation .
e inappropriate disposal of wastes .
f generation of vehicle emissions and or smoke .
g generation of vibrations .
h contaminated sites .
i noise nuisance .
contract specific a disturbance to aboriginal heritage sites .
b stream flow restrictions .
c generation of dust .
d inappropriate dewatering practices .
e soil disturbance or erosion .
f spread of dieback .
g spread of declared and invasive weeds .
h control of soil erosion and sedimentation .
i disturbance to rare florathreatened ecological communities .
note amend or add to the above list of aspects as required by the nature of the works and delete this note main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numb environmental risk classification num .
in order to clearly understand the risks associated with this contract and thence outline the manner in which identified risks will be managed the contractor shall undertake an assessment of all significant foreseeable risks associated with the contract and determined the treatment measures that so far as practicable minimise the risk .
num .
the identification and assessment process must be undertaken in accordance with asnzs num and the likelihood and consequences rated before the application of risk treatments primary risk and after residual risk the determined controls utilizing table numb.num table numb.num and table numb.num of this annexure numb .
asnzs num num .
the contractor shall so far as practicable control or reduce identified risks in accordance with the hierarchy of control .
treatment measures shall be authorised and managed by the contractor in accordance with table numb.num management approach for residual risk rating .
risk control and reduction num .
the superintendent may direct the contractor as to the primary risk rating and the residual risk rating to apply to any risk .
the contractor shall reassess authorise and manage its risk control measures in accordance with the level of risk directed by the superintendent .
num .
a residual risk rating of extreme is not permissible under the contract .
main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num table numb.num qualitative measures of consequence or impact level descriptor description num insignificant no lasting effect of significance very short term impact num months .
num minor minor localised impacts short term impact num num months num moderate localised local significance medium term impact num num months num major severe of moderate size long term impact num months num years num catastrophic severe and extensive permanent or very long term num years evaluate in terms of the scale andor degree of impact change from preimpact conditions or state and permanency of impact .
table numb.num qualitative measures of likelihood level descriptor description the event a almost certain is expected to occur in most circumstances can be expected to occur on every similar type project .
b likely will probably occur in most circumstances .
will probably occur every second similar type project .
c moderate should occur at some time .
should occur once in num similar type projects .
d unlikely could occur at some time .
could occur once in num similar type projects .
e rare may occur only in exceptional circumstances .
may occur once in num similar type projects .
main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num table numb.num qualitative risk analysis matrix risk rating consequences likelihood insignificant num minor num moderate num major num catastrophic num a almost certain .
h h e e e b likely m h h e e c moderate l m h e e d unlikely l l m h e e rare l l m h h table numb.num management approach for residual risk rating retained risk rating required treatment e extreme risk unacceptable risk .
hold point .
work can not proceed until the risk has been reduced .
h high risk high priority emr must review the risk assessment and approve treatment prior to its implementation .
m moderate risk medium risk standard work practice or procedure subject to review prior to implementation .
l low risk managed in accordance with approved management procedures and standard safe work practices main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numc contract commitments the contractor is required to include all of these commitments and conditions into the aspects in the aspects and impacts register .
the commitments and conditions should be referenced to aspects and impacts and should include specific procedures work instructions and processes necessary to satisfy the commitments and conditions .
item environmental impact contract commitment .
note complete as required by the nature of the works and delete this note main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numd not used main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure nume environmental risk context the contractor shall define the context of the risk environment in which the contract is undertaken and shall use the following headings as a minimum for inclusion into the environmental management plan num .
the location of the project incorporating a location plan where possible .
num .
key features in respect to terrain including specific local features such as rivers creek lines steep ground etc that may impact on environmental issues associated with the project .
num .
climatic conditions that may be expected over the term of the contract .
num .
the timing and duration of the project .
num .
likely numbers of personnel on site and how the contract will be resourced i.e .
subcontract employeeday labour etc .. num .
key work processes and likely associated hazards .
num .
requirements for work camps fuel storage facilities workshops explosive storage facilities .
num .
location of material supply stockpile sites or dumping pits in respect to the worksite .
main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numf contractors environmental management plan cross reference key this reference key table shall form part of the contractors environmental management plan and shall be placed at the front of the environmental management plan .
this table will be used by auditors and must be filled in accurately by the contractor .
specification num reference contractors environmental management plan referenced clause headings reference headings main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numg contract specific requirements table numg num aboriginal sites known locations of aboriginal sites are as follows location of site description of site dia site number requirementscomments table numg num threatened flora and fauna sites .
known locations of threatened flora threatened ecological communities andor fauna are as follows location type flora or fauna species requirements note may include nestingbreeding sites for fauna delete this note main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num table numg num dieback control the works site is classified for dieback infection as follows location dieback classification required controls table numg num acid sulphate soil ass locations the works site contains acid sulphate soils as follows location required controls table numg num nominated weed locations the works site contains nominated weed species for control and disposal as follows coordinates northeast or chainage include lhsrhs or both weed species main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numh aspects and impacts register aspect impact risk rating objective target operational control residual risk rating responsibility monitoring main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num guidance notes delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference all edits to downloaded tdp documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
deletions shall be struck through e.g .
example .
insertions shall be in italics e.g .
example .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted then the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
the custodian of this specification is the senior environment officer .
num .
general this specification lays out the principals minimum environmental requirements that the contractor must develop and detail in the contract specific environmental management plan to deliver the works .
all prequalified tenderers must have in place an environment management system conforming to asnzs iso num to tender for major works contracts .
the approach of this specification is to follow the structure of asnzs iso num to assist the contractors development of the contract specific environmental management plan based on their prequalified submission .
in this way audits can be done to ensure compliance to the standardised systems and ensure that the principals obligations are met under the act and associated regulations .
the specification has been structured to allow contractors to use management system elements from established systems such as environmental management systems or integrated management systems where generic approach to management is applicable .
the specification does require the contractor to prepare a contract specific aspects and impacts register annexure numh which addresses the elements that are unique to the project .
the contractor is required to provide a register in the form shown in annexure numh which has been developed to follow a systematic approach to impact identification assessment and treatment .
the flow chart below outlines the key stages in the processes .
main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num stage in preparation of the register example comment num identify aspect .
dewatering .
the contractor is required to identify all aspects that may have an effect on the contract .
num identify impact associated with the aspect high acid content water discharges into watercourse resulting in fauna deaths the contractor is required to identify all impacts associated with each identified aspect .
more than one impact may be associated with a number of aspects .
num assess the risk associated with the impact likelihood b consequence num risk level high reference is made to annexure numb to determine the level of risk associated with the impact .
the risk determined at this stage should be the risk that would be present if no control was put in place .
the contractor is required to provide a realistic assessment of risk .
num set objective .
no untreated spills into watercourse num set target within the life of the project num detail management operational control a treat dewatering water prior to discharge into watercourse .
b use licensed dewatering contractor .
c refer work practice wp.num d refer procedure pronum .
operational and management controls can be specific requirements nominated on the register as demonstrated by a and b in the example or by reference to work practices procedures as demonstrated by c and d in the example .
main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num determine residual risk low .
the residual risk is the risk that remains after all operational and management controls are in place .
the contractor is required to realistically assess the level of control that the operational and management controls are expected to have on the impact .
num assign responsibility project supervisor .
the responsibility for ensuring management actions are completed must be assigned to a person with the experience and authority to ensure management occurs .
num determine monitoring requirements .
a daily inspection and visual assessment .
b water sampling and analysis weekly in accordance with procedure prnum the contractor is required to nominate the monitoring that is necessary to ensure that the objectives and targets are achieved .
the monitoring must be consistent with the level of risk that the impact poses .
num .
acid sulphate soil clause num num annexure numg table num gnum should outline known locations of acid sulphate soil ass as applicable to the contract .
typically these locations will be known from previous environmental management plans or from conditions set on the contract as part of the environmental approval process .
num action in the absence of previous identification of ass locations or requirements the wapc planning bulletin no .
num should be referred to and any associated plans to determine whether or not the site is likely to be ass prone maps are available at httpsuatnum.landgate.wa.gov.aubmvfappwaatlas .
num include clause num .
num .
dieback control clause num num with respect to the dieback disease phytophthora species the works site shall be classified to contain one or more of the following dieback classifications a dieback infected where all plant and equipment shall be cleaned free of soil before exiting the site at cleandown sites nominated by the contractor .
b uninterpretable for dieback where all plant and equipment shall be cleaned free of soil before entering or exiting the site at cleandown sites nominated by the contractor .
main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num c dieback free where all plant and equipment shall be cleaned free of soil before entering the site at clean down sites nominated by the contractor .
num the dieback classifications applicable to the works should be detailed on specific drawings or shown in annexure numg table num gnum .
num include clause num .
num .
water course pollution clause num num include clause num as required .
num .
contaminated soil clause num num include clause num as required .
num .
property damage and nuisance clause num num include clauses in contract specific requirements in respect of property damage and nuisance as required .
the example clauses may be edited and modified to suit the requirements of the project e.g .
property inspections within num metres of the limits of the work site .
num .
principal identified aspects annexure numa num annexure numa outlines a schedule of common aspects associated with main roads contracts .
the contractor is required to include all of these aspects in the aspects and impacts register .
should an aspect be not applicable to a specific contract the aspect should be included but noted accordingly .
the contractor should use this list to identify associated impacts prior to conducting risks assessment and determining control measures .
the risk assessment together with prescribed control measures shall be listed in the contract environmental management plan .
num action add to the list if it has been identified that other aspects have been identified as being relevant .
num .
contract commitments annexure numc num annexure numc outlines a schedule of commitments that are applicable to the contract .
typically these commitments will be sourced from project environmental management plans conditions of approval received from various authorities such as department of environment and conservation swan river trust local government authorities department of water etc .
the contractor is required to include all of these commitments and conditions into the aspects in the aspects and impacts register .
the commitments and conditions should be referenced to aspects and impacts and should include specific procedures work instructions and processes necessary to satisfy the commitments and conditions .
num action add to the list all known commitments and conditions that are required to be included in the environmental management plan .
main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contract specific requirements to add or delete the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
note that the clause numbers may be varied within the range allocated to this section to suit the requirements of the project and the remaining not used numbers adjusted accordingly .
also the clause number and heading style should be altered to hnum dsb so that it will be included in the specification contents page .
num aboriginal sites num .
the locations of known sites of aboriginal significance are detailed in table num g.num in the annexure .
the contractor shall develop implement and maintain procedures that protect nominated sites and ensure that all persons undertaking work under the contract are inducted in the care and handling of aboriginal significant sites .
known sites num .
the contractor shall engage a trained and competent person in the field of identifying aboriginal artefacts to monitor all work under the contract in the vicinity of the nominated sites .
monitoring requirements are to be specified by the contractor and incorporated into the environmental management plan and the aspects and impacts register .
monitoring of works num .
if the presence of a site of possible aboriginal significance is discovered the contractor shall immediately cease work at that location and shall notify the superintendent and the department of indigenous affairs .
discovery of new site num flora and fauna num .
the locations of known sites of populations of declared rare flora threatened ecological communities and or fauna are detailed in table num gnum in the annexure .
the contractor shall develop implement and maintain procedures that protected nominated sites and ensure that all persons undertaking work under the contract are inducted in the care and handling of threatened flora and fauna sites .
known sites num .
if the presence of a site of possible rare flora threatened ecological communities and or fauna is discovered the contractor shall immediately cease work at that location and shall notify the superintendent num waste disposal num .
the contractor shall only use authorised waste disposal sites meeting the requirements of current wa state regulations and or local government bylaws and shall submit to the superintendent the location and written evidence confirming these authorised sites prior to use .
waste disposal sites num .
septic tank and effluent disposal systems shall be designed to meet the requirements of the health regulations of the local government authority .
effluent main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num dewatering num .
where any excavation is at or below insitu water table levels the excavation shall be dewatered by pumping or well point dewatering prior to commencing construction and shall be kept free from water until work has been completed or sufficiently set or protected and the construction and backfilling is far enough advanced to permit dewatering operations to be discontinued .
water table levels num .
prior to the commencement of any dewatering operations the contractor shall obtain a dewatering licence and submit a copy of the licence to the superintendent .
where a licence is not required by the relevant authority the contractor shall submit documentary evidence to this effect .
hold point num .
the contractor shall avoid damage to existing structures including water bores or vegetation during the operation of any dewatering system caused by changes to the water table level .
num .
temporary drainage systems may be required to be installed to carry surface water away from the areas where excavation and foundation construction work is taking place or from any other area where the accumulation of water could cause delay or damage to the work .
these drainage systems shall be maintained in proper working order at all times .
the contractor shall be responsible for the design of all dewatering systems .
num where a wellpoint system is used care shall be exercised during dewatering to avoid an upward seepage pressure from the ground water into the excavation .
adequate standby pumping equipment and continuous supervision shall be provided to ensure that no uncontrolled rise in the water table level occurs during construction operations .
num .
discharge of water from excavations into sanitary sewers will not be permitted .
silt traps shall be installed to reduce the discharge of silt into existing drainage systems .
num .
the contractor shall provide for disposal of all water pumped from excavations or any part of the works in such a manner that at no time shall waste water interfere in any way whatsoever with the use of adjacent land by the public or other persons .
where the contractors method of disposal requires drains to cross existing roads the cost of installation and removal of such drains including the resurfacing and sealing of all affected sections of road shall be met by the contractor .
num .
prior to the shutdown of any dewatering system the contractor shall provide to the superintendent details of the proposed shutdown procedure .
hold point num .
any consequence of either ground water or surface water against any structure or construction process shall be the sole responsibility of the contractor .
num .
if waste water from dewatering plant is discharged into existing water courses traps shall be provided to prevent any silt entering these systems .
all discharge shall comply with the requirements of the relevant authorities .
water courses num acid sulphate soils main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
acid sulphate soils ass are soils rich in iron sulphides which when exposed to air by drainage or excavation react with oxygen resulting in the release of sulphuric acid .
ass locations num .
where the worksite is determined to contain acid sulphate soil the locations are shown in table num gnum in the annexure .
num .
where ass is indicated the contractor shall prepare a detailed acid sulphate management strategy for all excavation and dewatering works in accordance with the department of environment and conservations ass guidelines .
num .
where ass not nominated in table num gnum of the annexure is uncovered during excavation drainage dewatering or construction operations work activities shall cease and a detailed approved acid sulphate soil management plan developed in accordance with the department of environment and conservations ass guidelines shall be submitted to the superintendent prior to work continuing .
other ass discoveries num .
prior to commencing work the acid sulphate management plan shall be prepared by an appropriately qualified person and shall be submitted to the superintendent for approval .
hold point num die back control num .
the contractor shall treat the site as being dieback infected unless otherwise detailed in table num gnum .
num .
where dieback infection is present or suspected to be present the works shall be carried out under strict hygiene controls to prevent any further spreading of the disease .
the contractor shall prepare a contract specific hygiene management plan and shall observe the requirements of the managing phytophthora dieback guidelines for local government num .
num water course pollution num .
the contractor shall develop implement and maintain processes and procedures to prevent hydrocarbons site erosion and sedimentation from polluting watercourses caused by work under the contract .
num contaminated soil num .
contaminated soil shall only be disposed of at authorised waste disposal sites meeting the requirements of current wa state regulations and or local government bylaws .
the contractor shall supply to the superintendent the location and evidence confirming these authorised sites prior to use .
main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num property damage and nuisance num .
the contractor must write to the owneroccupants of properties within at least num metres of the limits of the work site informing them of the nature and timing of the works and providing contact details for complaints .
prior to the commencement of the works the superintendent must approve a copy of the letter mailing list and delivery dates .
hold point num .
the contractor shall arrange for preconstruction property inspections to be carried out on all properties within a num metres of the limits of the work site and for an individual report in respect of each inspected property .
a copy of each report shall be provided to the superintendent .
num .
the contractor must also provide occupants of properties adjacent to the works site with at least num hours warning when construction work is planned outside the hours of numam and numpm or on sundays or public holidays after hours work num .
the contractor must detail in the environmental management plan procedures for dealing with complaints regarding public nuisance dust noise or property damage .
these procedures must ensure that the superintendent is informed in a timely manner of any such complaint the progress made in dealing with it and of the reinstatement or repairs to damage carried out .
complaints num dust control num .
the contractor shall employ construction methods that will keep dust to a minimum .
the contractor shall as required provide for the control of dust such as by watering of the works and of roads and other areas affected by the work under the contract .
control of dust num .
the contractor shall take appropriate action to eliminate dust raised on any temporary driving surface when this dust constitutes an inconvenience or hazard to workers road users or nearby residences andor property .
temporary driving surfaces num erosion and sedimentation control num .
the contractor shall develop implement and maintain processes and procedures to prevent site erosion and sedimentation within and adjacent to the contract areas .
erosion and sedimentatio n control num weed control num .
the contractor shall develop implement and maintain processes and procedures to identify and control declared and invasive weed species within the contract areas .
weed control num .
the contractor shall prepare and implement a weed control program as part of the contract environmental management plan to include but not be limited to the listing in annexure numg table num gnum of nominated weed species for control and disposal .
weed control program main roads western australia specification num environment page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification amendment checklist specification details no num revision no __________title environment project manager name ______________signature _____________date ________ checked by name _______________signature _______________date ________ contract no __________contract description ________________________________ item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked change mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materialsproductsclauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from mcp .
num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection testing parameters included in spec num test methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date _______________ main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num clearing copyright main roads western australia main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num clearing revision register date clause number description of revision authorised by num num num guidance notes engagement of environmental specialist amended amended pders num num health pesticide regulations num added to references la num amended num new clause added annexure numa table numa.num amended guidance notes note num amended num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num environmental controls num num dieback control num num weed control num num erosion control num num num not used num operations num num limits of clearing num num clearing num num treatment of cleared vegetation num num culverts drains and levees num num demolition num num disposal of other materials num num stockpile sites num num waste disposal sites num num damage num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num clearing requirements for vegetation num annexure numb demolition requirements num annexure numc principals stockpile locations num annexure numd principals spoil site locations num main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num clearing general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of clearing demolition and the management of site vegetation required to undertake the work under the contract .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below acts and regulations environmental protection clearing of native vegetation regs num environmental protection act num health pesticide regulations num australian standards as num pruning of amenity trees main roads specifications specification num general requirements specification num quality systems specification num traffic specification num environment specification num earthworks specification num pits and quarries specification num revegetation and landscaping specification num dismantling demolition num num not used main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num environmental controls num dieback control num .
clearing operations shall be undertaken in accordance with the procedures for dieback control as specified in specification num environment .
dieback control num weed control num .
clearing operations shall be undertaken to meet the requirements for weed control as specified in specification num environment .
weed control num .
the contractor shall prepare submit to the superintendent for approval and implement a weed control program to satisfy the weed control requirements as nominated in annexure numa.num prior to undertaking any other works .
any proposed changes to the timing and sequence of weed control operations shall be confirmed with the superintendent .
advice on appropriate herbicide use should be sought from an environmental specialist working in that area .
an environmental specialist is a person who is engaged by the permit holder for the purpose of providing environmental advice who holds a tertiary qualification in environmental science or equivalent and has experience relevant to the type of environmental advice that an environmental specialist is required to provide under the clearing permit .
weed control program num .
the contractor shall identify and tag all areas within the limits of clearing containing weeds in accordance with the weed control program for the superintendents inspection and approval .
the superintendent may require additional areas for removal to be included that were not identified by the contractor .
areas of nominated weeds num .
the contractor shall avoid spreading weeds during the clearing operations and shall remove all weeds as nominated in the weed control program from the ground surface as a separate operation including disposal to an authorised waste disposal site prior to the clearing operation .
num .
all persons engaged in spraying herbicides on site shall have a current pesticide operators licence in accordance with the health pesticide regulations num .
the contractor shall forward a copy of all pesticide operator licences to the superintendent .
operators licence num erosion control num .
clearing operations shall be undertaken to meet the requirements for erosion and sedimentation control as specified in specification num environment .
erosion control main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num num not used operations num limits of clearing num general num .
the limits of clearing as nominated in the drawings or table numa.num shall be in accordance with the definition of designated and other areas required to undertake works under the contract and shall be pegged on site for the superintendents inspection prior to the submission for a clearing hold point release .
limits of clearing num .
clearing of vegetation shall not exceed the limits of clearing and mature trees especially shall be conserved as far as practicable and shall not be disturbed for such temporary works as sidetracks access tracks temporary storage areas campsites spoil areas or site offices .
minimum clearing num .
the contractor shall take all precautions necessary to prevent damage to all vegetation within the limits of clearing tagged to be retained and protected .
no clearing or disturbance of topsoil shall occur within the canopy of this vegetation .
vehicles and equipment shall not be parked or driven over tree roots .
if necessary the contractor shall install fence palings or other protective measures around the trunks of trees tagged for retention to prevent damage .
protective measures shall be confirmed with the superintendent prior to any clearing operations .
protection of retained vegetation num .
the contractor shall take all precautions necessary to prevent damage to all existing services within the limits of clearing .
clearing within num metres of any service or the distance nominated by the service provider shall be carried out so that the service is not affected by the removal of the vegetation .
if necessary the contractor shall use only hand held equipment and install protective measures to prevent damage .
proposed work proceses and protective measures shall be confirmed with the superintendent prior to any clearing operations .
protection of existing services .
num designated areas num .
the designated area for clearing along the road alignment for the works shall be the minimum required to accommodate the earthworks as shown in the drawings .
designated areas main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings the clearing allowance for stockpiling topsoil in windrows parallel to the road alignment shall not exceed two num metres beyond the limit of the earthworks .
clearing width num other areas num .
the clearing of temporary storage areas campsites water supply points site offices and similar work areas in the site shall be approved by the superintendent .
the clearing of any other areas outside the site shall be in accordance with specification num general requirements entry to land .
other areas num .
clearing of temporary access tracks for the works shall be carried out as necessary to provide a maximum cleared width as defined in specification num traffic .
where necessary hand pruning of tree branches in accordance with as num shall be undertaken to obtain the required width .
sidetracks and access tracks num .
drains levees and guide banks shall be cleared to a distance of no more than one num metre beyond edge of earthworks .
drains levees num .
clearing for borrow pits access tracks to borrow pits pavement material pits and similar features shall be undertaken in accordance with specification num pits and quarries .
borrow pits num .
the contractor shall obtain written approval from the superintendent prior to undertaking any clearing or pruning of overhanging branches along any existing roads or tracks outside designated or other areas .
pruning num clearing num .
clearing shall include but not be limited to a the felling cutting and removal of all trees standing or fallen b the removal of all brush shrubs grasses and other vegetation c the removal of rubbish and debris d the removal of surface boulders and boulders dislodged during vegetation removal and e the grubbing out of all stumps and roots larger than nummm diameter or with any dimension greater than nummm to a depth of nummm below either the existing surface or the finished subgrade surface whichever is the lower .
main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the contractor shall identify and tag the vegetation required for transplanting as nominated in the drawings or in table numa.num .
the lifting and temporary storage of the nominated vegetation shall be carried out in accordance with the specification num revegetation and landscaping prior to the main clearing operations .
transplanting of vegetation num .
the contractor shall identify and tag and take all necessary precautions to protect all declared rare flora and nominated vegetation to be retained within the limits of clearing as nominated in table numa.num .
protection of vegetation num .
depressions caused by grubbing out tree roots and stumps in cleared areas with no topsoil removal shall be promptly backfilled with clean fill and compacted to the density and surface levels of the surrounding undisturbed ground .
filling of grub holes num .
all pruning operations of any vegetation for hazard reduction and or selective thinning of branches shall be undertaken in accordance with as num .
pruning of vegetation num .
branches protruding into the cleared area shall be neatly pruned by hand back close to the bole of the tree or main branches to minimise the disturbance to vegetation growing outside the limits of clearing .
protruding branches num machines used for pushing and heaping operations shall be fitted with root rakes or similar equipment and operated in a manner such that as little soil as possible is removed and heaped with the cleared vegetative material .
equipment num .
trees to be removed shall be felled in such a manner that they fall within the limits of clearing .
tree felling num .
prior to the commencement of any clearing operations the contractor shall certify for the superintendents verification and approval that hold point a the limits of clearing are correctly pegged on site in accordance with the environmental approvals .
b the locations of existing features to be demolished are correctly tagged on site .
c trees and other vegetation identified for transplanting are clearly tagged on site .
d all nominated vegetation to be retained and protected is clearly tagged .
e protective measures are in place for retained vegetation and declared rare flora .
f areas of nominated weeds are identified and tagged on site .
g the stockpile locations for cleared vegetation rubble or debris are identified and pegged on site .
h the location of culverts has been verified in accordance with specification num culverts .
main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num i environmental controls are in place in accordance with specification num environment .
j the locations of authorised waste disposal sites are confirmed and the list of sites is included in the hold point submission .
k the proposed clearing shall be undertaken in accordance with the conditions detailed in the clearing permit or exemption .
num treatment of cleared vegetation num .
burning of cleared vegetative materials or burning within the road reserve shall not be permitted under any circumstances .
fire ban num .
timber species within the limits of clearing and identified for milling shall be felled and trimmed of branches in accordance with timber milling industry standards and practice and the trunks stacked in neat manageable stockpiles in approved locations .
millable timber num .
all tree trunks nominated for salvage as fauna habitat logs shall be cut into transportable logs not less than num metres in length and stockpiled clear of any construction areas for later placement in accordance with specification num revegetation and landscaping .
large tree trunks .
all remaining timber that is not required for milling or use as fauna habitat logs and not nominated for disposal offsite shall be cut or split to a size to facilitate chipping or incorporation into the existing topsoil as specified .
other timber num .
cleared vegetation as nominated in the drawings or annexure numa to be incorporated into the existing topsoil shall be rolled mown slashed or chipped insitu as specified and dropped to ground .
inclusion of cleared vegetation with topsoil num .
unless specified otherwise the mixing of cleared vegetation into the existing topsoil shall occur during the topsoil operations and prior to the removal and stockpiling in accordance with specification num earthworks .
num .
vegetation as nominated in the drawings or annexure numa to be cleared and stockpiled shall be stacked in neat manageable stockpiles at approved locations and carted to the final stockpile location within num days after clearing .
removal and cartage of cleared vegetation num .
stockpiling operations shall occur in a manner to ensure that the properties of the cleared vegetation are not degraded and made unsuitable for use in the revegetation works .
num .
stockpiles of vegetation shall be free from stones soil rubbish and other materials and shall not be contaminated with matter toxic to plant growth .
stockpiling of cleared vegetation main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
cleared vegetation as nominated in the drawings or annexure numa for chipping into organic mulch material shall be reduced to an average grade size of between nummm nummm with no individual pieces greater than nummm .
num .
chipping of cleared vegetation shall be undertaken within num days of the vegetation being cleared to avoid excessive drying out of the vegetation and loss of seed stock .
chipping of cleared vegetation num .
stockpiles of chipped vegetation shall be placed and managed in accordance with figure numc.num typical cross section for stockpiles of chipped vegetation in annexure numc.num .
stockpiling of chipped vegetation num .
the contractor shall maintain the vegetation stockpile sites weed free for the duration of the stockpiling period .
the contractor shall treat all weed infestation of the vegetation stockpiles as many times as necessary to control weed species .
weed control shall be in accordance with specification num revegetation and landscaping .
weed control of vegetation stockpile sites .
num .
all vegetation as nominated in the drawings or annexure numa for disposal or not required for dropping to ground stockpiling and or chipping shall be cleared and disposed of in the nominated spoil sites or other authorised waste disposal sites disposal of unwanted vegetation num culverts drains and levees num .
prior to any clearing operations associated with culverts drains and levees the contractor shall peg the extents of the clearing required for the works for the superintendents verification and approval .
hold point num demolition num .
existing features shall be demolished either to the extent as shown on the drawings or as otherwise detailed in table numb.num .
demolition work includes the removal of existing nonvegetative material such as but not limited to drainage structures kerbing pipes the removal of rubbish site debris and the like .
during the demolition care shall be taken so as not to damage surrounding works and existing retained structures .
any such damage shall be made good by the contractor at no cost to the principal .
demolition work num .
demolition or dismantling of existing bridges and associated highway structures shall be undertaken in accordance with specification num dismantling demolition .
existing bridges num disposal of other materials num .
all debris and material resulting from the demolition or other clearing that has not been identified for use in the works shall be disposed offsite to authorised waste disposal sites .
disposal of debris main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num stockpile sites num .
the contractor shall prepare sites for the stockpile of vegetation or any other materials at the principals nominated stockpile locations as nominated in the drawings or in table numc.num .
stockpile locations num .
the contractor may nominate alternative stockpile sites to be developed at no cost to the principal subject to the superintendents approval that the site complies with these specifications .
alternative stockpile sites num .
stockpile sites shall be located away from drainage lines and shall be positioned to allow for ease of transport of materials at any time .
num stockpile sites for the storage of chipped vegetation shall be prepared and managed in accordance with figure numc.num typical cross section for stockpiles of chipped vegetation in annexure numc .
management of chipped vegetation stockpiles num .
stockpiles shall not impinge on drivers sight lines or affect road safety .
num .
stockpile sites shall be rehabilitated in accordance with specification num earthworks .
num waste disposal sites num .
the contractor shall only use authorised waste disposal sites meeting the requirements of current wa state regulations and or local government bylaws and shall supply to the superintendent the location and evidence confirming these authorised sites prior to use .
waste disposal sites num .
the principals nominated onsite and offsite spoil sites are listed in annexure numd .
principals nominated spoil sites num .
the contractor may nominate alternative spoil sites subject to the superintendents approval that the site complies with these specifications .
num damage num .
the contractor shall take all precautions necessary to prevent damage to any property and vegetation identified for retention andor transplanting within the limits of clearing and for all property and vegetation outside the limits of clearing .
main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
any damage that occurs shall constitute a non conformance in accordance with specification num quality systems and the contractor shall advise the superintendent within num hours of the damage occurring detailing the extent of the damage the affected stakeholders and the proposed corrective and preventive action .
num .
any damage caused by the contractor to vegetation landforms or fauna habitat shall be rehabilitated by the contractor at no cost to the principal .
num .
rehabilitation work shall be carried out under the direction of an approved professionally qualified environmental consultant engaged by the contractor .
alternatively an environmental officer may be engaged by the principal to direct the work and all costs associated with this provision shall become a debt due from the contractor to the principal .
environmental adviser num .
the work shall involve whatever tasks are required or recommended by the environmental adviser in order that the damaged areas may be restored to preexisting condition within the shortest possible time .
examples of particular tasks may include deep ripping or hand scarifying and raking of wheel tracks and compacted soil reinstatement of rocks or stones planting of seeds or seedlings together with subsequent nurturing repairs to foliage or root systems of trees and shrubs reinstatement of fauna habitat and whatever other works as may be deemed necessary by the environmental adviser .
reinstatement num .
in the event that an incident involving environmental damage is identified the principal shall withhold payment of monies due to the contractor on the basis of a performance undertaking .
the amount of performance undertaking shall be determined as follows performance undertaking a for damaged trees greater than numm in height num num each .
scale of damages b for damaged trees and shrubs up to numm in height num each .
c for damaged grassland including spinifex open soil areas rock faces and landforms and habitat in general num per square metre .
in the case of vehicle wheel track damage the area shall be calculated as the product of the distance of the path travelled and the width of the vehicle .
num .
the minimum undertaking applicable to any particular occurrence of damage shall be num .
minimum damages num .
in the event that the contractor failure to rehabilitate a does not undertake or partially completes or fails to complete rehabilitation measures within a reasonable time period or main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num b can not achieve a sufficient degree of rehabilitation to provide a comparable environment to that which existed immediately prior to the damage occurring the superintendent shall arrange for outstanding work to be completed by others and all costs associated with this provision shall become a debt due from the contractor to the principal num .
damage to private property public services and similar facilities shall be rectified by the contractor to the owners requirements at no cost to the principal .
property and services num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numa clearing requirements for vegetation table numa.num locations and treatment of vegetation to be cleared vegetative clearing shall be carried out to the following widths chainage or slk maximum clearing width metres treatment details from to table numa.num location of vegetation to be transplanted details of the locations of vegetation to be transplanted are as follows coordinates typedescription treatment details north east table numa.num location of vegetation to be protected .
details of the locations of vegetation to be protected are as follows coordinates typedescription treatment details north east main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num table numa.num weed control requirements the weed control program shall be based on a survey of all weed species within the limits of clearing to include all designated areas and other areas undertaken by personnel with demonstrated competency in site weed assessment .
the weed control program shall include but not be limited to a complete description of weeds on site and summary of distribution .
control methods proposed for all declared and invasive weed species and total areas ha to be treated herbicides to be used application methods material safety data sheets application timing application rates .
program timeframes and number of applications required .
proposed monitoring .
the weed control program shall include but not be limited to the listing below of known locations of nominated weed species for control and disposal .
coordinates weed species timing of control treatment details north east main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numb demolition requirements table numb.num location of demolition works details of the demolition of existing works are as follows location demolition item disposal details main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numc principals stockpile locations table numc.num nominated stockpile locations details of the locations of nominated stockpile locations are as follows coordinates type treatment details north east figure numc.num typical cross section for stockpiles of chipped main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numd principals spoil site locations table numd.num nominated onsite locations for spoil materials details of the onsite spoil sites nominated by the principal are as follows coordinates type treatment details north east table numd.num nominated offsite locations for spoil materials details of the offsite locations for disposal of spoil materials nominated by the principal are as follows spoil site namelocation comments main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num guidance notes delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference all edits to downloaded tdp documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
deletions shall be struck through e.g .
example .
insertions shall be in italics e.g .
example .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted then the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
the custodian of this specification is the principal design engineer regional support .
num .
general when setting out the extent of clearing and demolition works it is important to carefully consider the management of the existing site vegetation .
clearing must be conducted in accordance with the clearing permit and the area approved in the preliminary environmental impact assessment peia .
num .
clearing permit the environmental protection clearing of native vegetation regulations num and associated amendments to the environmental protection act num includes limits and conditions on obtaining permits for the clearing of native vegetation .
for more details on the requirements and on the clearing exemptions refer to the main roads environmental guideline native vegetation clearing regulations and permits document no .
num .
the project manager must ensure that an authorised clearing permit is secured for the clearing works and a copy of the permit is provided to the contractor in the information for tenderers or at contract award .
the clearing permit shall be for all works under the contract including the clearing of sidetracks and temporary work areas and be referenced in specification num traffic .
the contractor shall be required to include a copy of the clearing permit with the hold point submission .
the contractual implications of not having a permit prior to the start of the clearing works include time delays and costs .
num .
vegetation clearing table numa.num should be completed to provide a specific schedule of clearing widths and the treatment of cleared vegetation if these details are not clearly shown in the drawings .
main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num a detailed schedule is critical in environmentally sensitive areas and diebackaffected areas where it is important to minimise the impacts and extent of clearing .
clearing and topsoil management drawings should be prepared as part of the design documentation for all work projects .
ensure the sidetracks are also pegged out .
num .
extent of clearing and limitation it is important to ensure that the drawings clearly show the full extent of clearing necessary at the top of the batter e.g .
to allow for windrow of topsoil and to include a typical cross section showing the limit of the clearing .
the drawings must include only the extent of clearing described in the clearing permit environmental approvals .
num .
treatment of cleared vegetation num general one or more of the following treatments for cleared vegetation may be applicable as determined by the specific site conditions e.g .
soil and vegetation type and project requirements .
disposal of unwanted vegetation off site e.g .
disease and or weed infected or excess to the quantity of mulch required for the works .
chipping of vegetation and or shrub rolling of vegetation shrubs and groundcovers and incorporation of the vegetation disease and weedfree into the existing topsoil for stockpiling and later respread .
chipping and stockpiling of cleared vegetation disease and weedfree for later respread as mulch over batter slopes and cleared surfaces .
in some locations e.g .
in sandy heath vegetation the most cost effective treatment is by rolling over the existing shrub and understory vegetation insitu and in the process roughly incorporating the vegetation into the existing topsoil with suitable land clearing equipment .
the appropriate treatment must be determined in the design process and be documented in the drawings e.g .
clearing and topsoil management plan or as an annexure .
num salvageable material if the salvage and disposal of timber logs to timber mills is to form part of the clearing operations undertaken by the contractor it is suggested a provisional sum be provided to cover the costs over and above the clearing operations to cover felling of the trees any handling temporary storage and transport to a timber mill .
include a clause under the treatment of cleared vegetation to cover any necessary arrangements to be made and the salvage value of the timber .
num cartage and stockpiling of cleared vegetation cleared vegetation shall be removed and shall be stacked in neat manageable stockpiles at approved locations .
the temporary stockpiling of the cleared vegetation shall be minimised and cartage to the final stockpile location shall be undertaken as main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num soon as possible after the clearing operations and within num days after clearing to minimise drop of viable seed material that is useful for revegetation to the ground .
num chipping of cleared vegetation all diseasefree and weedfree cleared vegetation as nominated in the drawings or annexure numa for chipping into organic mulch shall be reduced in size by chipping splitting cutting mowing slashing grinding etc .
to useable mulch material .
the average grade size shall be between nummm nummm with no individual pieces greater than nummm .
no woody and herbaceous weed species shall be included into the chipped material .
chipping of vegetation shall be undertaken as soon as possible after the clearing operations and within num days after clearing to avoid excessive drying out of the material .
num .
transplanting where appropriate transplanting of certain desirable vegetation e.g .
grass trees can be used to preserve a scarce or attractive native plant type local to the area .
lifting and temporary storage of the target species can be carried out prior to the main clearing operations and transplanting to final location can be made part of specification num revegetation and landscaping .
insert a listing of the locations of any individual plant to be transplanted as annexure numa num .
a suggested clause for the transplanting of grass trees xanthorrhoea is given in specification num revegetation and landscaping .
requirements for other species would be similar but should be checked for accuracy with the main roads landscape architect .
include a measure and payment items and note the hold point for temporary storage .
num .
protection of existing vegetation insert a listing of the locations of any vegetation to be retained and protected during the clearing operations include protection details as table numa num .
num .
demolition items annexure numb should be completed to provide a specific schedule of demolition item locations and details .
particular items for demolition should also be listed e.g .
old kerbing fencing stock grids etc .
note that specification num dismantling demolition should be used where existing bridges and associated structures are involved .
num .
suitable stockpile locations insert a listing of suitable stockpile locations for the storage of cleared vegetation as annexure numc .
it is recommended that the preferred locations for stockpiling of materials be identified by the principal to minimise potential environment impacts .
the contractor may nominate alternative sites subject to the superintendents approval that the sites comply with the specifications .
main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num sites for the stockpiling and storage of vegetation must be managed to ensure that the properties of the vegetation are not degraded and made unsuitable for use in the revegetation and landscaping works e.g .
by weed infestation of the stockpiles .
refer to figure numc.num typical cross section for stockpiles of chipped vegetation .
stockpiling and storage of cleared vegetation must not occur on uncleared native vegetation .
num .
estimating the volume of vegetation to be cleared an estimate of the expected volume of cleared vegetation will provide an estimate of the required stockpile area .
the following estimates are based on prior experience in the local land clearing industry .
heavy vegetation forest well timbered num nummnumha medium vegetation banksia woodland num mnumha light vegetation scrubland wattles num nummnumha area mnum of stockpile required estimate of total volume of cleared vegetationheight of stockpiles numm .
allow for access for placing materials and management of stockpiles of chipped vegetation to be in accordance with figure numc.num typical cross section for stockpiles of chipped vegetation in annexure numcnum .
for mixed vegetation cover i.e .
varied across the project area the estimate of volume should be based on the above rates and the area of cover .
in south west forest areas the vegetation cover may get heavier up to nummnumha .
chipping machinery numhp can chip up to nummm diameter tree trunks .
num .
erosion and sedimentation control erosion and sedimentation control measures may be a requirement in advance of or in conjunction with clearing and grubbing operations .
note that a separate erosion and sedimentation control plan should be prepared where erosion control operations are required .
refer to guidance notes in specification num earthworks .
num .
weed control the control of undesirable weed species e.g .
declared species may be a requirement prior to clearing operations .
insert a listing of any known locations for weed control include details as annexure numa.num and include a note that weed species may include but are not limited to any listing of nominated weed species identified in table numa.num .
the contractor must identify all weed species within the contract area and prepare a weed control program for approval by the superintendent .
advice on appropriate herbicide use should be sought from an environmental specialist in the area .
acceptance criteria for weed control shall be as a minimum the approved weed control program has been implemented to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num refer to specification num revegetation and landscaping for more detailed clauses and guidance notes on weed control measures including herbicide use and completion criteria for weed control .
contract specific requirements to add or delete the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
none at this time .
main roads western australia specification num clearing page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification amendment checklist specification name no num revision no ________ title clearing project manager name _______________signature ____________date________ checked by name _______________signature _______________date________ contract no __________contract description _______________________________ item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked change mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materialsproductsclauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from mcp .
num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection testing parameters included in spec num test methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date _______________ main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num earthworks copyright main roads western australia main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num earthworks revision register date clause number description of revision authorised by num whole document formatting and font change pm num num numb.num num annexure numb num num and annexure numb num num num num num num num num num num num num guidance notes num num guidance note num amended added glass cullet added glass cullet specification added organic matter limit amended moisture content during construction .
compacted thickness amended amended trial requirements amended rework amended lime demand requirements pm num num num annexure numb numb.num amended amended added numb.num pm main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num num amended cement registration specification pm num num amended psm guidance notes new guidance note num for clauses num num num added rework clause guidance note num added rework advice num num num num num num num num amended to construction characteristic moisture content plus clause num has been added psm num num amended cmc criteria replaced the term modification with stabilisation added wss spnum psm main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num associated requirements num num num not used num products and materials num num general num num use of materials num num imported material for embankments num num select fill num num recycled materials num topsoil removal num num definition num num general num num topsoil removal within limits of clearing num num topsoil stockpiles num num not used num survey num num digital ground survey num num num not used num excavations num num general num num existing pavement num num rock excavation num num num not used num blasting num num general requirements num num blasting records num num num not used num unsuitable material num num definition num num contaminated soil num num removal replacement num num num not used num oversize material num num definition num num disposal num num num not used num embankment foundation num main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num general num num compaction end product specification num num compaction contractors developed method specification num num compaction principals method specification num num num not used num subgrade preparation num num general num num compaction end product specification num num compaction principals method specification num num surface width num num surface shape num num surface levels num num num not used num noise bunds num num definition num num construction num num num not used num spoil num num definition num num spoil areas num num use of surplus materials num num num not used num rehabilitation num num general num num finishing of batters and ground surfaces .
num num topsoil respread num num mulch respread num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa summary of earthworks quantities num annexure numb num numb.num .
imported material for embankments inclusive of subgrade num numb.num .
embankment foundation num numb.num .
compaction requirements end product specification num numb.num batter slope tolerance .num annexure numc rock in table drain num annexure numd topsoil operations num contract specific requirements to add or delete num main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure nume num nume.num .
lime stabilised subgrade num nume.num .
cement stabilised subgrade num annexure numf num cementitious materials for concrete num main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num earthworks general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of all stages of work associated with earthworks for road construction to the profiles levels and surface finishes as specified or as shown in the drawings .
num .
earthworks at bridge sites including excavations foundations backfill at abutments and associated requirements are covered in specification num excavation and backfill for structures .
bridge sites num .
where provided estimated earthworks quantities are shown at annexure numa .
estimated quantities num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num parts num and num rules of storage transport and use of explosives as num building limes main roads test methods wa num random sample site location wa num moisture content convection oven method wa num moisture content microwave oven method wa num particle size distribution sieving and decantation method wa num particle size distribution abbreviated method for coarse soils wa num linear shrinkage wa num dry densitymoisture content relationship modified compaction fine medium grained soils wa num dry densitymoisture content relationship modified compaction coarse grained soils wa num dry density ratio wa num layer thickness direct measurement main roads standards mrs num main roads western australia survey and mapping standard num digital ground survey main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num mrs num main roads western australia survey and mapping standard num earthwork volume calculations road note num engineering road note num statistically based quality control for density in road construction october num main roads specifications specification num general requirements specification num quality systems specification num environment specification num clearing specification num pits and quarries specification num revegetation and landscaping specification num excavation and backfill for structures other standards australian technical infrastructure committee atic specification spnum cementitious materials for concrete num associated requirements num stockpile sites num .
the contractor shall prepare and manage all stockpile sites in accordance with specification num clearing .
stockpile sites num .
the principals nominated stockpile sites for topsoil are listed in table numd num .
the contractor may nominate alternative stockpile sites subject to the superintendents approval that the site complies with the contract requirements .
principals topsoil stockpile sites num .
stockpile sites for the storage of topsoil shall be prepared and managed in accordance with figure numd.num typical cross section for stockpiles of topsoil shown in annexure numd .
management of topsoil stockpiles num dieback control num .
earthworks operations shall be carried out in conjunction with any specified dieback control measures as detailed in specification num environment .
dieback num weed control num .
earthwork operations shall be undertaken to meet the requirements for weed control as specified in specification num environment and in accordance with specification num clearing .
num .
the contractor shall implement an approved weed control program as shown in annexure numd and as necessary to control all weed species prior to undertaking any other works .
weed control program main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num erosion control num .
earthwork operations shall be undertaken to meet the requirements for erosion and sedimentation control as specified in specification num environment .
num completion of work num .
at completion of work including pavement construction all table drains and batters and adjacent areas within the limits of clearing shall be cleared of all surplus material rocks and rubbish and removed to nominated spoil sites .
num num not used products and materials num general num .
unless specified otherwise earthworks material for embankments shall be suitable material extracted from cuttings in the works or should such material be totally exhausted or not available be imported onto the site by the contractor from other sources .
other sources shall include borrow pits nominated by the principal in accordance with specification num pits and quarries or from the contractors own sources .
embankments num .
material for embankments shall be free from boulders having any dimension as detailed in the oversize material clause and shall be free from clods stumps roots sticks vegetable matter or other deleterious materials .
properties num .
material for noise bunds may include material otherwise deemed unsuitable for embankments but shall be free of large objects such as old car bodies and similar sized debris concrete slabs and the like .
all allowable material shall be incorporated into noise bunds with sufficient cover as shown on the drawings .
where no such detail is shown on the drawings the cover to any unsuitable material incorporated in noise bunds shall be a minimum of one num metre .
noise bunds num use of materials num .
the contractor shall be responsible for any assumptions made by the contractor in relation to the nature and types of materials encountered in excavations and the bulking and compaction characteristics of materials incorporated in embankments .
material characteristics num .
the summary of the estimated quantity for general earthworks provided includes all types of materials that may be encountered in the cuttings .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
where material from excavations is suitable for use in embankments but the contractor elects to election of material usage a spoil it or b use it for the contractors own purposes or c use it as a source of pavement materials or d construct embankments with dimensions other than those shown on the drawings or to dimensions as otherwise authorised by the superintendent and a deficiency of material for embankment construction is thereby created the contractor shall make good that deficiency from sources of suitable material .
the making good of such deficiency of material shall be affected at no cost to the principal .
num imported material for embankments num .
imported material for embankments inclusive of subgrade shall be in accordance with annexure numb .
num select fill num .
unless otherwise specified or approved by the superintendent select fill shall be noncohesive granular material complying with the particle size distribution of table num below .
table num select fill particle size distribution sieve size mm passing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
the linear shrinkage for the portion of the material passing the nummm sieve of the distribution of the select fill shall not exceed num .
linear shrinkage main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the source for the select fill material shall be clean and free from vegetation contamination and be certified as diebackfree .
num .
the material shall contain no more than num organic matter .
num .
the material may contain up to num recycled glass cullet complying with the requirements in num .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num recycled materials num glass cullet the following requirements shall apply to recycled glass cullet used in embankment construction num.glass shall be sourced from food and beverage containers and building or window glass .
glass that shall not be used includes recycled glass classified as hazardous waste laboratory equipment televsions computers cathode ray tubes porcelain products or cook tops .
num .
limits of contaminants in glass cullet are outlined in table num .
table num glass cullet contaminant limits material maximum retained by mass on nummm sieve high density materials brick glass etc .
num low density materials plastic plaster etc .
num wood and other vegetable matter num asbestos num num .
the cullet shall be cleaned to ensure that undesirable odours are eliminated .
num .
a shape crushing plant eg barmac impactor or equivalent shall be included in the process to produce glass cullet .
num .
the cullet shall be well graded and comply with the particle size distribution in table num num .
the retained nummm material shall not contain more than num of particles with a maximum dimension ratio greater than num .
table num glass cullet particle size distribution sieve size mm passing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num topsoil removal num definition num .
suitable topsoil shall only be the top surface layer that consists of diseasefree and weedfree surface soil and vegetable matter stripped and stockpiled after clearing for later respreading .
definition of suitable topsoil num .
suitable topsoil may include processed vegetative material incorporated during the clearing operations as specified in specification num clearing .
num general num .
during the removal of topsoil the contractor shall take all precautions necessary to prevent damage to any retained vegetation within or adjoining the limits of clearing in accordance with specification num clearing .
retained vegetation shall not be covered or buried with topsoil .
protection of retained vegetation .
num .
the pruning of tree roots greater than num millimetre diameter from retained vegetation shall be promptly carried out by a qualified tree surgeon engaged by the contractor to prevent tree damage .
pruning of tree roots .
num topsoil removal within limits of clearing num .
prior to the commencement of the removal of topsoil from all designated and other areas the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that hold point a topsoil to be stripped and stockpiled or removed to spoil is correctly pegged on site b the location of stockpile sites for topsoil and other materials are correctly pegged on site including any alternative locations as nominated by the contractor c areas of weed infestation have been identified and pegged for removal to spoil d identified vegetation to be retained and declared rare flora have protective measures in place and e environmental controls are in place in accordance with specification num environment .
num .
cleared vegetation dropped to ground during the clearing operations and not to be removed shall be mixed into the existing topsoil using suitable cultivation equipment or land conditioners prior to the removal and stockpiling of the topsoil .
vegetation with topsoil num .
topsoil shall be removed to the depth as specified in the drawings or table numd num .
if not specified a nominal depth of nummm of topsoil shall be removed unless otherwise approved by the superintendent .
depth of topsoil main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the contractor shall ensure that appropriate plant and equipment are utilised by competent operators to ensure that the subsoil and topsoil layers are not mixed and the subgrade integrity is not affected during the stripping and stockpiling process .
stripping of topsoil num .
all topsoil and vegetation from identified weed infested areas shall be stripped separately to the nominated depth and deposited in the nominated spoil sites or authorised waste disposal sites in accordance with specification num clearing .
removal of weed infested topsoil to spoil num .
the contractor shall ensure that all machinery used in the removal of weedinfested topsoil shall be cleaned down before and between operations to prevent the introduction and spread of weeds outside weed infested areas across the site num .
the burial on site of weed infested topsoil may only occur if the contractor can demonstrate that appropriate control of the weed infestation will occur to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
burial of weed infested topsoil on site num .
topsoil containing weeds if approved by the superintendent for burial on site shall be placed at least one metre below the finished ground surface level within num days of the commencement of stripping operations .
num .
all machinery used in weedinfested areas shall be wash down in approved wash down bays prior to moving to other areas of the site .
num .
all areas of topsoil to be stockpiled or windrowed shall be as shown in the drawings or table numd.num topsoil removal .
num .
topsoil to be windrowed shall be stripped to the nominated depth and bladed outwards away from the centreline of the alignment or from other areas of excavation within the limits of clearing .
for other areas of excavation the topsoil shall be windrowed to the downstream side of the area wherever practical to avoid creating a dam effect for surface drainage .
topsoil to windrow num topsoil stockpiles num .
stockpiling operations shall occur in a manner to ensure that the properties of the topsoil are not degraded and the topsoil made unsuitable for use in revegetation .
topsoil stockpiling operations num .
stockpiles of topsoil shall be free from stones soil rubbish and other materials and shall not be contaminated with matter toxic to plant growth .
num .
except for shortterm storage during cartage operations all stockpiles of topsoil shall be placed and managed in accordance with figure numd.num typical cross section for stockpiles of topsoil in annexure numd .
num .
the contractor shall protect and stabilise stockpiles by appropriate measures to minimise erosion and loss of materials as approved by the superintendent .
erosion control of topsoil stockpiles main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
all batter surface protection of stockpiles using erosion control matting mulch seeding or hydromulching shall be in accordance with specification num revegetation and landscaping .
num .
the contractor shall manage and maintain the topsoil stockpile sites weed free .
weed control of topsoil stockpiles num .
weed infestations shall be treated as many times as necessary to control the nominated weed species in accordance with the approved weed control program .
num not used survey num digital ground survey num .
after completion of clearing removal of topsoil and where applicable after removal of the existing seal andor existing pavement and after compaction of the embankment foundation but before the commencement of any other earthworks or culvert work the superintendent will undertake a digital ground survey in accordance with mrs num .
taking of levels num .
where rock is to be excavated from the alignment of the works the superintendent will undertake a digital ground survey in accordance with mrs num .
rocky ground num .
after the completion of foundation preparation work and prior to earthwork construction the contractor shall give the superintendent at least num hours notice of when a digital ground survey is required for the purpose of earthworks measurement .
hold point num num not used excavations num general num .
excavations in cut sections including benching shall be carried out to the shapes shown in the drawings and to the specified tolerances .
general requirements for benching of stepped cut batters are given in the drawings shape num .
cut batters other than in rock greater than three metres in height shall be benched or stepped to provide drainage and erosion control as shown in the drawings or in annexure numd .
cut batters main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
benches shall be maintained free of loose materials until the finishing of batters and ground surfaces .
num .
each bench shall drain back away from the lowest cut face and provide for longitudinal drainage .
num .
cut batters in rock shall be treated as shown in the drawings or in annexure numd .
num .
all suitable materials from excavations may be used in embankment construction .
no material resulting from cutting operations of the existing pavement shall be incorporated into the road pavement but may be utilised as oversize material .
utilisation num .
any overexcavation below the subgrade surface and table drains shall be backfilled with embankment quality material .
any backfilled material more than nummm below the subgrade surface shall be compacted as specified for embankment construction .
over excavation num existing pavement num road widening num .
the existing seal shall be cut where new pavement is to be blended into existing work or where widening is required .
in this context seal shall be deemed to mean the existing bituminous surfacing which may be a primerseal single or double coat seal or asphalt surfacing .
widening work num .
the existing seal shall be cut along a marked alignment and the area to be treated shall be excavated to the depth as detailed in the drawings and to the specified tolerances .
num .
the contractor shall mark the alignment of the cut by painting spots on the existing seal not exceeding nummm in width at intervals of not greater than num metres .
marking of seal num .
prior to any cutting of the existing seal the contractor shall mark out and indicate to the superintendent the position of the proposed line of cut of the seal .
hold point num .
the cut edges of the seal and the wall of the excavation shall be in a smooth straight line have no tears jagged edges or undercutting to the materials to be retained .
the sides of the cut shall be made at a slope of num vertical to num horizontal sloping down and away from the material to be retained .
there shall be no separation of the retained seal from its base material .
the cut edge shall be to a smooth alignment within nummm of its marked position .
the rate of change of the position of the cut edge shall not exceed num in num from the desired line .
the contractor shall ensure that the cut seal edge and the wall of the excavation are not damaged and remain in the specified condition until the pavement stabilisation has been completed .
cutting of seal main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
where any portion of existing pavement is shown on the drawings as unused the pavement shall be rehabilitated and the unused pavement including bituminous products and manufactured pavements shall be ripped and removed from the roadway .
natural gravels used in pavements may be left .
the removed material may be used in embankment construction provided the material complies with the oversize limitations for oversize material or otherwise shall be removed to spoil areas shown in annexure numb or where no such sites are listed the material shall be disposed to an authorised waste disposal site in accordance with specification num clearing .
redundant pavement num .
all removed seal is defined as spoil unless otherwise specified and shall be disposed to an authorised waste disposal site as detailed in specification num clearing .
disposal of removed seal num overlays num .
the existing bituminous seal shall be maintained for as long as practicable before its removal .
num .
the superintendent will measure the width of the existing seal in accordance with mrs num .
num .
prior to any measurement of the width of the existing seal and its subsequent removal the contractor shall give the superintendent at least num hours notice of when such measurement is required .
hold point num .
after the seal width has been measured the existing bituminous seal shall be removed from the roadway by grader blade methods only .
this removal shall be completed with as little disturbance to the underlying pavement as possible .
num .
following the removal of the existing seal the exposed surface of the retained pavement shall be prepared to provide a suitable surface prior to the addition of new pavement material .
this preparation work shall include but shall not be limited to watering rolling and trimming of high spots .
num .
after the surface has been prepared the contractor shall supply notice to the superintendent in accordance to the survey requirements of the specification for the superintendent to undertake a digital ground survey .
these levels will be used as the basis for the calculation of the volume of any additional pavement material required to complete the construction of the overlay pavement .
num rock excavation num .
prior to under taking a digital ground survey the top surface of rock shall be exposed and clear of all loose material as far as practicable .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
rock excavation material shall describe all material to be excavated to achieve the road design cross section including table drains which can not be ripped and excavated with a track dozer in good condition with matching hydraulic single shank ripper of combined mass not less than num tonnes e.g .
caterpillar dnumr or its equivalent at a rate in excess of numm solid per hour .
isolated boulders each greater than numm in volume shall be defined as rock excavation .
definition of rock num .
in rock cuttings a nummm compacted thickness subgrade layer shall be constructed using embankment material to the requirements for subgrade preparation .
the surface of the exposed rock shall be trimmed to allow free drainage to the table drains prior to the placement of subgrade .
improved subgrade num .
rock cuttings and exposed rock surfaces adjacent to the roadway shall be trimmed to provide a natural appearance similar to local cliff faces .
any overhanging loose or unstable material whether outside or behind the specified slope shall be removed .
trimming of the batters to the required standard shall be carried out by pulling down rock from a face excavated near the design line breaking the rock on natural joints where possible .
trimming of exposed faces num .
rock excavation in table drains including independently graded table drains is defined as that material that can not be ripped and excavated as specified above at an effective total rate in excess of numm solid per hour .
figure numc.num definition of rock in table drain shows a diagrammatic definition for rock in table drains .
table drains num .
rock excavation in other drains is defined as that material that can not be ripped and excavated as specified above at an effective total rate in excess of numm solid per hour .
other drains num .
rock excavation in trenches is defined as that material that can not be ripped and excavated by a combination loader backhoe in good condition capable of exerting a minimum breakout force of numkn at the bottom of the excavation with a nummm wide rock bucket fitted with teeth e.g .
case nume or its equivalent .
trenches num num not used blasting num general requirements num .
the contractor shall be liable for any accident damage or injury to any person property or thing resulting from the use of explosives .
the contractor shall conduct a survey of all structures within the region of influence of the proposed site of blasting to determine their preblast condition .
num .
all purchase manufacture handling transport storage and use of explosives shall be in accordance with specification num occupational safety and health and the provisions of a the western australian explosives and dangerous goods act main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num b bylaws of the relevant local authority and c as num parts num and num rules of storage transport and use of explosives .
num .
should any conflict of requirements occur between those provisions the requirements of the act shall take precedence followed by the bylaws of the relevant local authority .
num .
where explosives are used during the course of this contract or any works associated with this contract the use transportation and storage of explosives shall be under the direct control of and be the responsibility of an appointed qualified person who possesses a current shotfirers permit issued by the chief inspector of explosives for western australia .
shotfirers permit num .
at least three num weeks prior to any blasting or storage of materials on site the contractor shall submit to the superintendent details of all equipment materials and procedures to be used for blasting and storage magazines including the qualifications of the person in charge of blasting operations .
hold point num .
if the appointed shotfirer leaves the site the contractor shall notify the superintendent in writing of the name and permit number of the replacement shotfirer at least three days prior to any works associated with the use transportation and storage of explosives being carried out .
standin num blasting records num .
the contractor shall keep and maintain all necessary records of blasting as required by the relevant acts regulations and bylaws .
these records shall be made available to the superintendent on request .
availability num num not used unsuitable material num definition num .
material which the superintendent deems to be unsuitable for use in embankment construction subgrade preparation or embankment foundation shall be excavated and then disposed of in accordance with the waste disposal sites clause in specification num clearing .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num contaminated soil num .
soil which the superintendent deems to be unsuitable because it is contaminated shall be isolated from all other work under the contract and subsequently disposed of in a manner and to a site in accordance with specification num environment .
when the soil has been contaminated as a result of the contractors activities then its disposal in accordance with this clause shall be at no cost to the principal .
num removal replacement num .
a void created from the excavation of unsuitable material during embankment foundation or subgrade preparation shall be backfilled with suitable embankment quality material or as directed by the superintendent and compacted in accordance with the clause for embankment construction .
backfilling num .
prior to the backfilling of a void created from the excavation of unsuitable material the contractor shall give the superintendent at least num hours notice of when a digital ground survey is required for the purpose of unsuitable material measurement .
hold point num .
the superintendent will take levels of the excavation after the removal of any unsuitable material prior to its replacement with the suitable backfill material in accordance with mrs num .
num num not used oversize material num definition num .
all oversize material having any dimension greater than nummm shall be reduced in size or shall be removed from excavated material intended to be used as fill within nummm of the subgrade andor shoulder surfaces andor batter face .
num .
all oversize material having any dimension greater than nummm shall be reduced in size or shall be removed from excavated material intended to be used as fill within nummm of the subgrade andor shoulder surfaces andor batter face .
num .
notwithstanding the last subclause material having any dimension greater than nummm shall not be placed where other work under the contract is to be completed such as but not limited to the installation of underground drainage and services signs street lighting safety barrier systems etc .
num .
all oversize material having any dimension greater than num mm shall not be used as fill and shall be removed to spoil .
num .
oversize material not used in the embankment shall be stockpiled in uniformly shaped heaps in spoil areas .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num disposal num .
oversize material shall be disposed to the spoil sites as listed in specification num clearing annexure numd .
where no such sites are listed oversize material shall be disposed to an authorised waste disposal site in accordance with specification num .
num num not used embankment foundation num general num .
after the completion of clearing and topsoil removal the material upon which embankment is to be constructed shall be compacted as specified in this clause to the depth as shown in annexure numb .
num .
where the embankment is to be founded on the existing road the existing seal shall be cut and removed and the retained pavement prepared in accordance with the existing pavement clause .
num .
subject to the other requirements of the contract the existing seal may be incorporated into the embankment foundation by means of a stabiliser to pulverise the seal to size that passes the nummm sieve and compacted in a layer of not less than nummm .
num .
no seal material shall be placed within nummm of the subgrade surface or batter face .
num .
the embankment foundation shall be maintained in its conforming condition until embankment construction commences .
no embankment materials shall be placed until the embankment foundation has been levelled as specified in the embankment foundation section .
num compaction end product specification num .
where the material in the embankment foundation contains num or less by mass of material retained on a nummm sieve the compaction shall be to the characteristic dry density ratio as shown in annexure numb or greater .
end product specification num .
the characteristic dry density ratio rc shall be determined in accordance with specification num quality systems .
num .
during the compaction process the embankment foundation shall be lightly watered or dried as required to maintain appropriate moisture content in order to achieve the required density .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num compaction contractors developed method specification num .
where the material in the embankment foundation contains num or less by mass of material retained on a nummm sieve the contractor may develop a method of compaction with suitable controls that will demonstrate the achievement of the characteristic dry density ratio as shown in annexure numb or greater .
contractor method specification num .
where this option of compaction is chosen the effectiveness of the contractors proposed method shall be demonstrated to the superintendent prior to its implementation .
hold point num .
during the whole of the compaction process the moisture content at any point in the lot of the embankment foundation material shall be within num num of the optimum moisture content for that material as determined by wa num or num .
num .
where the embankment foundation is not of constant quality and consists of various types of embankment foundation material the contractor shall a establish a method of compaction for each type of foundation material and b select lots which are of constant quality without obvious changes in attribute values .
num .
during the compaction process the embankment foundation shall be lightly watered or dried as required to maintain the specified moisture content .
num compaction principals method specification num .
where the material in the embankment foundation contains more than num by mass of material retained on a nummm sieve the compaction shall be by a vibratory padfoot or grid roller or similar approved by the superintendent .
the area shall be scarified to the depth shown in annexure numb and shall be compacted by not less than five num complete coverage of the roller .
each roller pass shall overlap the previous one by not less than num .
principals method specification num .
during the whole of the compaction process the moisture content at any point in the lot of that portion of the embankment foundation material which would pass a nummm sieve shall be within num num of the optimum moisture content for that material as determined by wa num .
moisture content num .
the vibratory padfoot roller shall be a selfpropelled roller with a total static mass not less than ten num tonnes and a centrifugal force on the drum not less than numkn in the frequency range of num to num hertz .
the rolling speed for the vibratory roller shall not exceed numkm per hour .
only driven drum rollers shall be utilised .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the grid roller shall have an open mesh drum of approximately numm diameter and numm width .
the drum mesh shall be nummm x nummm .
the roller including ballast shall have a total mass not less than num tonnes .
the grid roller shall be towed by a rubber tyred tractor and each pass shall be made at speeds between num and numkm per hour .
num .
during the compaction process the embankment foundation shall be lightly watered or dried as required to maintain the specified moisture content .
num num not used embankment construction num general num .
prior to embankment construction the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the embankment foundation conforms to the requirements of the specification .
hold point num .
embankment materials shall be placed to the shapes and levels shown in the drawings and with the specified batter slope tolerance shown in annexure numb .
num .
embankment material shall be worked in compacted layers not greater than nummm or less than nummm for cohesive material and not greater than nummm or less than nummm for sand .
where less than nummm is required to be worked the underlying material shall be grader scarified or stabiliser mixed to such a depth that the resulting thickness of the layer to be worked is greater than nummm .
num .
each layer worked shall be generally parallel to the finished pavement surface and shall where practicable extend to the full width of the embankment at that particular level .
the contractor shall at all times prevent the ponding of water on the embankment .
no layer of embankment shall be placed until the preceding layer conforms to all requirements .
num .
embankment material shall be placed uniformly without abrupt changes in material type quality or size .
num compaction end product specification num .
where the embankment material contains num or less by mass of material retained on a nummm sieve then the embankment shall be compacted to the characteristic dry density ratios as shown in annexure numb or greater .
end product specification num .
the characteristic dry density ratio shall be determined in accordance with specification num quality systems .
num compaction contractors developed method specification main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
where the embankment material contains num or less by mass of material retained on a nummm sieve the contractor may develop a method of compaction with suitable controls to demonstrate the achievement of the characteristic dry density ratios as shown in annexure numb or greater .
contractor method specification num .
where this option of compaction is chosen the contractors proposed method shall be approved by the superintendent prior to its implementation .
hold point num .
during the whole of the compaction process the moisture content at any point in the lot of the embankment material shall be within num num of the optimum moisture content for that material as determined by wa num or num .
num .
where the embankment construction is not of constant quality and consists of various types of embankment construction material the contractor shall a establish a method of compaction for each type of embankment material and b select lots which are of constant quality without obvious changes in attribute values .
num compaction principals method specification num .
where embankment material contains more than num by mass of material retained on a nummm sieve then compaction of the embankment shall be deemed to be satisfactory when the fill has been compacted with not less than five num complete coverage of a vibratory padfoot roller followed by not less than four num complete coverage of a grid roller .
the roller shall be as specified in the embankment foundation compaction principals method specification clause and each pass shall overlap the previous one by not less than num .
principals method specification num .
during the whole of the compaction process the moisture content at any point in the lot of that part of the embankment material which would pass a nummm sieve shall be within num num of the optimum moisture content .
num num not used main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num subgrade preparation num general num .
subgrade preparation shall be completed in all areas where a pavement is to be constructed except where the pavement is to be placed directly onto any retained pavement surface .
num .
the subgrade surface shall be constructed to the shape and levels as shown in the drawings and to specified requirements and tolerances of this clause .
num .
during the whole of the compaction process the moisture content at any point in the lot of the subgrade material shall be within num num of the optimum moisture content for that material as determined by wa num or num .
num .
the completed subgrade layer shall be in a homogeneous uniformly bonded condition with no evidence of layering or disintegration .
num .
the completed subgrade surface shall be maintained in its conforming condition until pavement construction commences and shall be watered as necessary to prevent shrinkage cracking dusting or loosening of its surface .
num compaction end product specification num .
where material for a depth of nummm below the subgrade surface contains num or less by mass of material retained on a nummm sieve then that material shall be compacted to the characteristic dry density ratio as shown in annexure numb or greater .
num .
the characteristic dry density ratio rc shall be determined in accordance with specification num quality systems .
num compaction principals method specification num .
where material for a depth of nummm below the subgrade surface contains more than num by mass of material retained on a nummm sieve then that material shall be compacted as detailed in the embankment compaction principals method specification clause except that the vibratory padfoot rolling shall be followed by no less than six num complete coverage by a fully ballasted num tonne rubber tyred roller .
num surface width num .
the outer top edge of the subgrade shall be no closer to the road centreline and no more than nummm further from the road centreline than the position shown in the drawings .
num surface shape main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the shape of the subgrade surface shall be deemed to be conforming when the maximum deviation from a num metre straight edge placed in any position on the surface does not exceed nummm .
generally num .
additionally for widening of the existing roadway the crossfall measured at right angles to the road centreline shall be within num of the existing crossfall or within num of any crossfall detailed on the drawings .
widening sections num surface levels num construction or overlayreconstruction sections num .
the level of the completed subgrade surface shall be deemed to be conforming when the level measured at any point on the surface is within nummm nummm of the subgrade level at that point as determined from the drawings .
construction sections num seal widening sections num .
the level of the completed subgrade surface shall be deemed to be conforming when the levels at its junction with the existing pavement are within nummm nummm of the levels as determined from the total pavement depth making due allowance for the existing crossfall of the pavement .
widening sections num num not used noise bunds num definition num .
noise bunds shall comprise all fill material above the noise bund foundation .
the noise bund foundation shall be defined as either a the original ground level where the noise bund is located in a cut situation or cut situation b an imaginary horizontal line extending from the subgrade surface at the nearest edge of shoulder where the noise bund is located in a fill situation .
fill situation num construction num .
noise bund construction shall be undertaken in accordance with the section embankment construction except that controlled compaction is not required .
num num not used spoil num definition main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
spoil is defined as surplus material from excavations under the contract which is not required to complete the works or material from excavations under the contract whose quality renders it unacceptable for incorporation in the works .
num spoil areas num .
the principals nominated onsite and off site spoil sites are shown in specification num clearing annexure numd .
where no such areas are shown in annexure numd the contractor shall dispose spoil to an authorised waste disposal site in accordance with specification num clearing .
principals nominated spoil sites num .
the contractor may nominate alternative spoil sites subject to the superintendents approval that the site complies with the specifications .
num use of surplus materials num .
materials deemed surplus for road construction purposes may be used for revegetation and landscaping purposes as approved by the superintendent .
suitable surplus materials num .
spoil material that may be suitable for use in revegetation and landscaping shall not contain contaminated materials debris or rubbish or other deleterious materials that are considered environmentally hazardous or other materials as specified by the superintendent .
num .
to use any approved spoil material the final placement shall have a minimum of num millimetres cover of clean embankment material .
num .
the placement of surplus material in areas on the site designated for revegetation and landscaping shall achieve and or maintain the landform nominated in the drawings .
placement of surplus materials num .
material authorised by the superintendent for placement must remain stable and free draining in the long term and be compacted to a similar density to the surrounding ground .
num num not used rehabilitation num general num .
following the completion of construction operations all batter and ground surfaces as nominated shall be prepared for revegetation and landscaping .
num .
the finishing operations shall include as nominated the cultivation or ripping of soil surfaces the spreading of topsoil and or vegetation mulch and batter protection works .
num .
imported topsoil material shall be supplied in accordance with specification num revegetation and landscaping .
imported topsoil main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
imported mulch material where specified shall be supplied in accordance with specification num revegetation and landscaping .
imported mulch num finishing of batters and ground surfaces .
num .
except during the construction of benched or stepped batters batter slopes shall be smoothly shaped to a uniform plane from top to bottom and shall comply with annexure numb .
shaping of batter slopes num .
the top and toe of all batters shall be rounded where practical to match the shape of the surrounding topography as shown in figure numd.num typical cross section for rounding of batter line edges unless otherwise specified in the contract .
rounding of top and toe of batter slopes num .
the surface of all batters and other areas nominated for revegetation and landscaping works shall be excavated and filled shaped andor graded as necessary to achieve the finished soil levels and contours nominated in the drawings prior to any surface preparation and soil improvements .
shaping and grading num .
the toe of mounds shall be graded evenly to meet adjoining surface levels .
the ground surface shall be shaped andor graded evenly to avoid abrupt changes in levels abutting structures and paved surfaces .
num .
median or traffic island areas nominated for revegetation shall be prepared by ripping the soil surface to a depth of nummm at nummm spacing but not closer than nummm from the rear face of the kerb andor edge of paving .
soil preparation within nummm of the kerb andor edge of paving shall only be performed by hand .
medians num .
soil surfaces within nummm of a compacted shoulder rear face of kerb and edge of paving shall only be cultivated by hand .
near edges num .
unless shown otherwise in the drawings or in annexure numd all existing redundant pavement shall be ripped and removed as spoil to an authorised waste disposal site in accordance with specification num clearing .
redundant pavement num .
these areas shall then be prepared by grading or other means to form a loose and roughened surface .
num .
topsoil from windrows andor stockpiles shall be uniformly respread over these areas and these areas shall then be ripped to a depth of nummm and at no more than nummm spacing in a direction parallel to the natural contours of the surrounding surface .
num .
unless shown otherwise in the drawings or in annexure numd when all other areas are no longer required all soil surfaces and trafficked areas shall be cleared excavated and filled shaped and or graded to achieve and or maintain the landform nominated in the drawings .
other areas num .
topsoil from windrows and or stockpiles shall be uniformly respread over the areas .
the areas shall then be ripped to a minimum depth of nummm and at no more than nummm spacing in a direction parallel to the natural contours of the surrounding surface .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the contractor shall place any large rocks or boulders retained for use in landscaping as shown in the drawings ensuring that the rocks or boulders are not scarred or broken by equipment during placement .
placement of large rocks and boulders num .
unless specified otherwise in the drawings each rock or boulder shall be buried num below finished soil levels .
num .
as shown in the drawings or in annexure numd the contractor shall place nominated tree trunks salvaged from clearing operations and ensure that the tree trunks are not broken by equipment during placement .
placement of salvaged tree trunks .
num .
unless specified otherwise in the drawings each tree trunk shall be placed parallel to the contours .
num .
where nominated the contractor shall evenly spread sheeting grade gravel over all stepped and sand fill batters to a nominal depth of nummm over the surface unless otherwise in the drawings or in annexure numd .
gravel dressing of stepped and sand fill batters num .
sheeting gravel shall be naturally occurring gravel that is free from clods stumps roots sticks vegetative matter weed seed disease or other deleterious materials prior to loading and carting .
num .
where nominated the finished soil surface of sand or other suitable soil batters shall be marked by tracked vehicles running perpendicular to the contours of the slope unless shown otherwise in the drawings or in annexure numd .
tracking of batters num .
where nominated the contractor shall incorporate chipped vegetation mulch into sand or other suitable soils as shown in the drawings or in annexure numd .
the nominated depth of mulch shall be spread on the soil surface and incorporated into the soil with suitable equipment .
incorporation of mulch into soil surfaces num .
where nominated chipped vegetation mulch shall be tracked into the soil to a nominal depth of nummm by a tracked vehicle running perpendicular to the contour unless shown otherwise in the drawings or in annexure numd .
num .
the finished soil surface of all batters and embankment slopes shall be left in a roughened state to facilitate revegetation works unless shown otherwise in the drawings or in annexure numd .
surface preparation num .
unless shown otherwise in the drawings or in annexure numd the surface preparation and soil improvement of batters and other ground surfaces shall occur in accordance with specification num revegetation and landscaping .
num .
the contractor shall ensure that all finished surfaces are protected from soil erosion and weed infestation until the revegetation and landscaping works have commenced or a certificate of practical completion has been issued .
protection of finished surfaces num .
the contractor shall implement appropriate measures where necessary to divert upslope runoff and excessive surface water flows away from areas to be treated for revegetation and landscaping .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
all weed control measures shall be in accordance with the approved weed control program and as shown in annexure numd .
num .
any erosion or scouring of the surfaces nominated for revegetation shall be filled with embankment quality material and lightly compacted to match the surrounding ground level or nominated design levels .
erosion num .
the use of erosion control matting mulch seeding or hydromulching for soil surface protection and erosion control shall be in accordance with specification num revegetation and landscaping .
num topsoil respread num .
topsoil shall be placed as soon as practical following basecourse operations andor other construction operations unless shown otherwise in the drawings or in annexure numd .
timing num .
topsoil shall be placed to the depth shown in the drawings or in annexure numd .
depth num .
if a depth is not specified a nominal depth of nummm of topsoil but not more than nummm shall be placed unless otherwise approved by the superintendent .
num .
topsoil shall be uniformly spread over the nominated finished and prepared ground surfaces to the depth levels and slope as shown in the drawings or in accordance with annexure numd .
respreading topsoil num .
the finished surface of the placed topsoil shall be free from stones lumps and clods .
num mulch respread num .
unless shown otherwise in the drawings or in annexure numd approved mulch shall be placed as a soil cover as soon as is practical after finishing and preparation of batters and ground surfaces .
timing num .
mulch shall be placed to the depth shown in the drawings or in annexure numd .
depth of mulch num .
if not specified a nominal depth of nummm of mulch but not more than nummm shall be placed unless otherwise approved by the superintendent .
num .
mulch shall be uniformly spread over the ground surface to the depth levels and slope as shown in the drawings or in with annexure numd .
respreading of mulch num .
where shown in the drawings or annexure numd mulch shall be spread by hand machine or air blower unit over the areas and the surface raked as necessary to present an even surface .
num .
unless shown otherwise in the drawings or in annexure numd mulch shall not be mixed or buried in the soil during the spreading operations .
num num not used main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numa summary of earthworks quantities table numa num estimated earthworks quantities for information only chainages cut fill from to m solid m solid note num .
all volumes shown are solid volumes with no allowance for bulking .
num .
the above volumes include topsoil i.e .
before removal of topsoil or num .
the allowance in millimetres excluded from the above volumes for topsoil removal is delete which is not applicable main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numb numb.num .
imported material for embankments inclusive of subgrade numb.num imported material shall be certified as diebackfree free from the plant disease phytophthera cinnamomi and shall conform to the requirements for particle size distribution given in table numb.num .
numb.num the portion of the material passing the nummm sieve for imported material shall have a linear shrinkage not exceeding num .
project manager must insert appropriate value refer to guidance note num and delete this note table numb.num particle size distribution imported material as sieve size mm passing by mass num num num numbnum the material shall contain no more than num organic matter .
numbnum the material may contain up to num recycled glass cullet complying with the requirements in num .
numb.num .
embankment foundation numb.num the depth in millimetres of compaction for embankment foundation shall be num .
numb.num .
compaction requirements end product specification numb.num the required densities for the various earthworks elements shall be as follows table numb.num end product compaction requirements earthworks element characteristic dry density ratio embankment foundation embankment construction subgrade main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num project manager must insert appropriate value refer to guidance note num and delete this note numb.num batter slope tolerance numb.num batter slopes shall not at any point vary from the specified slope by more than nummm measured normal to the specified batter slope .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numc rock in table drain figure numc.num definition of rock in table drain main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numd topsoil operations table numd.num .
topsoil removal the depth of topsoil removal shall be as follows locationsection depth of topsoil removal mm comment on treatment to from table numd.num .
topsoil respread the depth of topsoil respread shall be as follows locationsection depth of topsoil respread mm comment on treatment to from table numd.num principals nominated stockpile locations nominated stockpile locations are as follows coordinates type treatment details north east table numd.num mulch respread the depth of mulch respread shall be as follows locationsection depth of mulch respread mm treatment details to from main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num table numd.num weed control requirements the contractor shall prepare and implement a weed control program in accordance with specification num clearing prior to undertaking any other works .
the weed control program shall include but not be limited to the listing below of known locations of nominated weed species for control and disposal .
coordinates weed species timing of control treatment details north east figure numd.num typical cross section for stockpiles of topsoil figure numd.num typical cross section for rounding of top and toe of batter slopes main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num guidance notes delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference all edits to downloaded tdp documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
deletions shall be struck through e.g .
example .
insertions shall be in italics e.g .
example .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted then the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
the custodian of this specification is the pavements manager .
num .
earthworks quantities annexure numa num due to inevitable discrepancies between estimated and remeasured actual earthworks volumes consideration could be given to issue any summary of earthworks quantities under the heading information for tenderers and reference to annexure numa deleted .
the issue of the detailed mx genio output may be another alternative perhaps even in electronic format either as part of the normal tender documentation or for inspection upon request .
num if inserted at annexure numa the earthworks summary should be limited to a summary of the major cuts and fills and certain qualifications should be stated with the data a volumes listed should be solid volumes as they are in the schedule of rates and should be stated as solid volumes i.e .
no bulking .
any assumptions about bulking when excavations are proposed to be used as fills should be left to the contractor to make .
b the allowance made if any for the removal of topsoil i.e .
do the volumes in the summary include topsoil or not note earthworks quantities given in the schedule of rates are usually given with the topsoil removed as topsoil removal is measured separately as an area .
num add extra sheets to this annexure as necessary .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
topsoil removal storage and respread num sufficient topsoil should be stripped from the site andor imported to provide a supply of suitable growing medium to support vegetation for use in revegetation and landscaping works .
num as num is the recommended standard for defining the requirements of soils for landscaping use and the testing of soil properties .
the conditioning improvement of topsoil and supply of imported topsoil is covered in specification num revegetation and landscaping .
num only the upper num to num millimetres of a site soil layer is usually biologically active and of the greatest value in revegetation and landscaping .
this is only the o and a soil horizons refer to australian soil and land survey field handbook mcdonald et al num .
it is important that a this active topsoil layer and the subsoil is not mixed in the stripping and stockpiling process b stockpiling is limited to the minimum practical period c the height of topsoil stockpiles and batter slopes are limited as per figure numd.num d the properties of stockpiled topsoil are not degraded by weed infestation and or erosion .
num the stripping and handling of topsoil should ideally only occur when the field soil moisture content is optimum for the particular soil texture class .
movement of soil that is too wet or dry may result in the loss of topsoil properties that are important for the effective use in revegetation and landscaping e.g .
stripping dry sandy soil will result in mixing of the topsoil and subsoil layers unless care is taken .
measures to improve the workability of the soil may be required i.e .
allowing the soil to dry out or watering to bind dry soil and control dust .
num sites for the stockpiling and storage of topsoil must be managed to ensure that the properties of the topsoil are not degraded and made unsuitable for use in the revegetation and landscaping works e.g .
by soil erosion and or weed infestation of the stockpiles .
refer to figure numd.num typical cross section for stockpiles of topsoil .
num control of soil erosion and weed invasion may require the consideration of onsite surface drainage the potential use of protective covers e.g .
hydromulch or seeding with a temporary cover crop or by spreading of insitu or imported vegetation mulch and weed control measures .
more details are provided in the specification num revegetation and landscaping .
num the rehabilitation of all batter and ground surfaces including respread of topsoil site topsoil andor imported topsoil shall be in accordance with specification clauses for rehabilitation .
num it is critical that soil used for revegetation is stable and the physical properties provide a suitable growing medium to support vegetation .
soil types vary across the state but as a general rule the proportion of oversized soil material larger than nummm in size should be limited to a minimum .
a for broad scale revegetation areas to be direct seeded or for planting by tube stock with native species most of the soil material num should ideally pass a nummm sieve .
b for general landscape plantings most of the soil material num should pass a nummm sieve and for grassed areas a nummm sieve .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num seek advice if required from the regional environment officer or environment branch .
num .
ground survey for volume and area calculations num typically all survey undertaken to perform volume and area calculations will be performed in accordance with mrs num digital ground survey .
the most up to date copy of this standard is located at www.mainroads.wa.gov.austandards.num num .
principals spoil sites num add any known details of tip fees if applicable restrictions on the nature of material dumped etc .
num .
imported material for embankments inclusive of subgrade clause num num the details shown below for particle size distribution are typical for imported material in the perth area commonly known as perth sand and annexure numb should be completed accordingly when the contract is situated in that area .
for contracts outside that area insert a similarly worded clause with appropriate parameters .
materials engineering branch staff should be contacted for assistance with this .
the portion of the material passing the nummm sieve for imported material shall have a linear shrinkage not exceeding num .
table numb.num particle size distribution imported material as sieve size mm passing by mass num num num num num num num num num num .
depth of compaction for embankment foundation num typically nummm .
other depths may be more appropriate depending on the type of material involved .
num .
compaction requirements annexure numb num typical values for characteristic dry density ratios are as follows for insertion into table numb.num earthworks element characteristic dry density ratio embankment foundation perth sands num other materials num embankment construction num num subgrade preparation num num num these values may be varied as required to suit local conditions and knowledge of existing materials .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
principals method specifications plant requirements num the types of rollers and number of passes given in the principals method specifications for embankment foundation embankment construction and subgrade are fairly typical but consideration could be given to providing project managers the opportunity in annexure numb to vary the rollers and number of passes .
annexure numb would then include a table showing the required types of roller and number of passes viz earthworks element type of roller number of passes embankment foundation embankment construction subgrade any further rolling ordered by the superintendent will be paid as daywork num .
overlay construction clause num num the preparatory work required on the retained pavement prior to the overlay being constructed could be paid as a provisional sum as the nature and extent of such work is very difficult to price .
this work will vary from contract to contract and could include such items as a trimming off high spots b filling in low spots with additional pavement material c watering and rolling to tighten the exposed pavement surface .
num possibly an allowance of num num per km could be used to assess the amount of the provisional sum .
num the questions whether the existing seal may be incorporated into the new pavement and whether any of the existing pavement will be incorporated into the new pavement needs to be considered .
is it prone to excessive degradation in the mixing process or are there cobbles present in the existing pavement that will lead to rapid wearing or damage of the mixing tynes num where the seal is not allowed to be incorporated and mixing is to be carried out by grader only .
clause num is applicable .
num where the seal is not allowed to be incorporated and mixing may only be carried out by stabiliser delete points num num. point num is not required as design levels will only be adjusted by the nominal thickness of seal and measurement will be by area .
num where the seal may be incorporated and mixing must be carried out by a stabiliser .
delete points num to num and num point num is not required as design levels are applicable and measurement will be by area .
num over riding the above considerations in terms of the applicability of stabiliser mixing of pavement materials is the nature of the material i.e .
is it prone to excessive degradation in the mixing process advice from pavement engineering branch should be sought .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
sequence of operations num unless specified otherwise in the contract the sequence of operations before commencing the topsoil removal shall be a confirm areas of topsoil to be removed with superintendent .
b scalp and remove topsoil areas with nominated weeds and or dieback .
c remove topsoil to be respread .
num dieback and weed infected soil shall be handled separately to minimise the risk of spreading weed species across the site or into other areas .
cleaning down of machinery before and between operations is essential to prevent the introduction and spread of weeds or dieback .
num weed control operations shall occur in accordance with specification num revegetation and landscaping .
num dieback control measures shall occur in accordance with specification num environmental requirements .
num .
erosion and sedimentation control num project environmental commitments include the requirements to control site erosion and sedimentation into natural drainage lines .
this may require the installation of temporary and or permanent control measures .
the project manager should arrange for an erosion and sedimentation control plan to be prepared for the works .
the contractor should be required to install and maintain the measures contained within the plan before any section of the earthworks proceeds .
seek advice if required from the environment branch .
num the project manager must ensure that the design slopes of batters are suitable for the proposed revegetation measures .
key locations for attention are steep batter slopes where subsoil rock and groundwater may cause instability of topsoil and vegetation .
num steep and long slopes increase surface runoff and downslope transport of surface soil .
surface roughening and benching of bare soil by creating furrows across slopes terracing or by surface roughing tracking the soil surface reduces erosion potential by decreasing runoff velocities trapping sediment and increasing infiltration of water into the soil and will facilitate effective mulching seeding and planting .
num during the formation layer compaction process leave nummm of rough and uncompacted soil at ends to assist in the revegetation of the batter surfaces num cut batters greater than num metre height shall be benched or stepped to provide drainage and erosion control and detailed in the drawings .
the floor of the bench shall not vary by more than the nominated tolerances and the bench must drain away from the lowest cut face and provide for longitudinal drainage .
benches shall be maintained free of loose materials until the finishing of batters and ground surfaces .
num where random rock outcrops occur leave these on the batter and bench up to both sides .
leaving the natural rock face exposed and revegetating the remaining benched batters can make a considerable improvement to the overall appearance of the cuttings .
num .
retaining trees in cut or fill slopes num if the retention of existing large trees in cut or fill is a requirement of the contract this work shall be undertaken in accordance with specification num main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num revegetation and landscaping and confirmed with the superintendent prior to any earthworks within the canopy of the vegetation .
num .
use of surplus materials num main roads often pays to have spoil carted off site that could have been used to improve the safety of the new road by reducing batter slopes and filling deep medians etc .
unsuitable road building material can often be used to enhance batter slopes or sheet grass affected verges to allow revegetation to be undertaken .
num where there is surplus material the superintendent may authorise the use of the excess material to flatten embankment batter slopes fill depressions or cover unwanted grassed areas to facilitate revegetation .
num contract specific requirements and the pm to identify suitable areas for use of surplus materials .
num .
spoil sites num only spoil sites that are authorised waste disposal sites are to be used for the disposal of contaminated soil and weedinfested soil .
num .
revegetation and landscaping num refer to the main roads environmental guideline revegetation planning and techniques document no .
num for guidance on the planning and implementation of revegetationlandscaping works .
num project requirements for the extent of revegetationlandscaping works will vary .
a in pastoral regions basic topsoil management and weed control would be the expected minimum level of treatment .
b in agricultural regions some level of seeding andor planting and weed control would be the expected minimum level of treatment .
c in urban areas a higher standard of revegetationlandscaping is the expected minimum level of treatment .
num revegetation and landscaping works may be managed as a separable portion of a roadwork andor bridgework construction contract or as a standalone minor works contract .
num where revegetationlandscaping works form part of a roadwork andor bridgework construction contract a ensure suitable specifications and drawings are prepared for incorporation into the main contract documentation .
b ensure the documentation includes any appropriate crossreferencing of specifications e.g .
clearing and earthworks requirements .
c ensure that a vegetation establishment period is nominated in the special conditions of contract to supplement the defects liability period in the conditions of contract .
num where the project works are limited to respreading topsoil and chipped vegetation as mulch and weed control then ensure adequate completion criteria are clearly nominated e.g .
erosion control and weed control as a basis for handover of the site for any additional revegetationlandscaping works .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num where revegetationlandscaping will occur as a standalone works contract refer to specification num revegetation and landscaping for further guidance .
num all mulching planting seeding and or weed control operations shall be undertaken in accordance with specification num revegetation and landscaping .
num all hydromulching operations shall be undertaken in accordance with specification num revegetation and landscaping .
num lime stabilisation refer to clause num num lime stabilisation of earthworks layers is not commonly used .
it can be applied to any earthworks layer but is typically only applied to the subgrade layer .
num if lime stabilisation of the subgrade is specified determine the following and insert into annexure numa in addition to required compaction at table numb.num a depth of stabilisation is typically nummm .
b lime content is determined by laboratory testing .
because lime varies in purity depending on manufacture and strength depending on whether it is quicklime hydrated lime or lime slurry the optimum lime content see num must be expressed as a percentage of equivalent pure hydrated lime calcium hydroxide by dry mass of the subgrade material .
num the process for determining whether lime stabilisation is appropriate and the required of pure hydrated lime for subgrade stabilisation is a refer to section num preliminary binder selection of the austroads guide to pavement technology part numd stabilised materials to determine if lime is a suitable additive for the selected material .
b undertake laboratory testing only applicable to expansive soil to determine the minimum of lime i.e .
the lime demand that must be added to achieve long term soil stabilisation .
determine the lime demand of the soil in accordance with vicroads manual of testing method rc num lime saturation point of soil ph method .
this method uses hydrated lime for the laboratory testing and includes reference to a methodology for determining the percentage of lime that must be added if another type of lime e.g .
quick lime is used in the field .
c determine the ucs of the stabilised material in accordance with main roads test method wa num. d the optimum lime content of the soil for stabilisation must satisfy both the minimum lime content to achieve long term stabilisation at step b only applicable to expansive soil and the of lime that must be added to the soil to produce a num day ucs at step c falling in the range nummpa to nummpa .
e should the lime demand test require a of lime that results in a numday cured ucs that exceeds nummpa then lime stabilisation must not be used only applicable to expansive soil .
the minimum practical spread rate that can be achieved by most lime spreaders is numkgmnum which equates to approximately num lime for laterite gravel stabilised to a depth of nummm .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num the safety aspects of using lime are referred to in clause num .
num in addition to incorporating clause num into the contract specific requirements section annexure nume refer to contract specific requirements details following will need to be completed and incorporated into the document following annexure numd .
num .
cement stabilisation num cement stabilisation can be applied to any earthworks layer but typically only to the subgrade layer .
num if cement stabilisation of the subgrade is specified determine the following and insert into annexure nume in addition to required compaction a depth of stabilisation typically nummm .
b cement content typical values are num to num by mass of the subgrade material .
c the cement content required will be determined from the unconfined compressive strength ucs of the material when tested in accordance with wa num .
the ucs specimens shall be compacted using general purpose type gp cement cured for seven num days in a controlled environment and immersed in water for four num hours prior to compression testing .
the specimens are to be compacted at the applicable characteristic dry density ratio and num of omc .
the ucs must be in the range of num nummpa .
num the minimum practical spread rate that can be achieved by most cement spreaders is numkgmnum which equates to approximately num cement for laterite gravel stabilised to a depth of nummm .
num padfoot rollers must be used for initial compaction in accordance with clause num .
num in addition to incorporating clause num into the contract specific requirements section annexure nume refer to contract specific requirements details following will need to be completed and incorporated into the document following annexure numd num .
contractors developed method specification clauses num num only retain clauses num and num if you are satisfied that the project embankment foundation and embankment construction material will be suitable for density compliance assessment using the contractors developed method specification .
this method of density compliance assessment is only suitable for homogeneous materials .
the compaction method may only be used if it is approved by the superintendent .
one in num lots must be tested by ndm and six moisture samples must be taken from each lot .
the moisture content must be in the range num num of omc and the approved compaction process applied to achieve density compliance for a lot .
it is recommended that clauses num and num are deleted if the project material will be variable or the level of surveillance required to verify density compliance using this methodology is not warranted .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contract specific requirements to add or delete the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required and the relevant clause numbers and headings corrected to hnum dsb style so that they will be included in the contents .
the details for the chosen stabilising material will need to be added to the relevant table in annexure nume following and the table for the material that is not being used can be deleted and the heading for the unused material marked as not used .
the annexure will then need to be incorporated into the specification following annexure numd .
num lime stabilisation num general num .
the subgrade material shall be stabilised with lime for the sections and to the compacted depths shown either in annexure nume or as detailed on the drawings .
num .
modification shall include any preliminary loosening of subgrade layers mixing and compacting the subgrade material as necessary spreading lime over the area to be treated and the thorough blending of insitu subgrade material lime and water as required to produce a homogeneous stabilised layer over the specified lengths and widths .
num .
the contractor shall handle and use the quicklimeslaked lime in a safe manner and shall provide adequate protection to the workforce the public stock and property .
safety requirements num materials num .
lime for stabilisation of subgrade shall comply with the requirements of as num .
the lime shall be sufficiently dry to flow freely during application .
lime num .
the contractor shall arrange lime delivery and have on site bulk storage facilities .
the contractor shall be responsible for all arrangements in regard to the transfer of lime between delivery vehicles on site bulk storage facilities and lime spreaders .
delivery num preliminary trial num .
the contractor shall carry out a preliminary trial of the proposed stabilising operations .
the trial shall determine a the effectiveness of the plant .
b the number of passes of the stabilising machine necessary to achieve the specified mixing .
c the compacted depth of layer being worked including the allowance for trimming to spoil and level tolerances .
num .
the trial section shall be located within the works area .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
prior to conducting such a trial the contractor shall agree with the superintendent the location length and width of trial sections within the works .
hold point num .
the contractor shall not change the method developed during the trial without first obtaining approval from the superintendent .
num plant and equipment a lime spreader lime spreader num .
the spreading equipment shall be a mechanical stabilising agent spreader that has been specifically designed for such work .
the spreader shall be capable of uniformly distributing lime and accurately controlling the spread rate such that when mixing is complete the lime content shall be in accordance with the requirements of the spreading of lime subclause .
num .
the spreader shall be equipped with gates to vary the width of spread and with electronic weigh scales to give daily totals of product use .
b stabilising machine stabilising machine num .
cutting pulverising mixing adding water and spreading of blended material shall be accomplished using a machine specifically designed for pavement recycling .
the stabilising machines rotor action shall be such that the rotor revolves in an upwards and forwards cutting direction .
the rotor shall be of the recycler type and fitted with bullet teeth cutting tips .
num .
rotary hoes and other implements normally used for agricultural work shall not be used .
the stabilising machine shall also satisfy the following requirements a be capable of producing a uniformly mixed material throughout the specified depth of the work .
b be equipped with a variable depth of cut control and an accurate gauge to measure depth of cut which is readily visible to the stabilising machine operator .
c have provision for adding water automatically through a system comprising a pump flow meter variable control valve and full width spray bar .
each nozzle on the spray bar shall be fully and independently adjustable and the water pump shall have the capacity to supply a minimum of num litres per minute .
num preliminary treatment num .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to determine whether pre loosening and mixing of any in situ material is necessary .
num .
where the depth length or width loosened exceeds the dimensions specified in the drawings the contractor shall add additional lime to the mix so that the specified percentage of lime is still achieved .
the contractor shall also add additional lime to allow for any depth cut to spoil during the trimming operation .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num spreading of lime num .
lime shall be spread uniformly at a controlled rate over the area to be stabilised using a suitable lime spreader .
num .
the lime stabilised subgrade layer shall contain an average of not less than the equivalent percentage of hydrated lime calcium hydroxide as shown in annexure nume .
the percentage stated is a percentage of the dry mass of the subgrade layer material .
the contractor shall keep daily records of the amounts of lime used and actual spread rates achieved per section treated and shall make such records available to the superintendent upon request .
composition num .
the actual spread rate of lime achieved shall be determined by either a placing three trays each of approximately one third of a square metre in area in front of the lime spreader and measuring the mass of lime deposited on the trays for each lot or b by the use of an onboard electronic weigh scale system .
num .
the percentage lime p shall be calculated thus p m x num a x t x mdd where m total mass of lime kg as determined by one of the following methods a on each tray b onboard electronic weight scale system .
a method a total area of the trays m method b total measured area spread m t thickness to be stabilised mm including allowances for tolerances and trimming mdd maximum dry density of the pavement material without the addition of lime kgm num .
the percentage lime determined for each tray in accordance with this clause shall be maintained within num by mass of the specified lime content throughout the stabilisation works .
num .
the use of an onboard electronic weighing scale system in determining the values m and a is subject to satisfactory calibration of the measuring device and the production of associated certification in accordance with the contractors quality system .
audits on this method shall be carried out using the measuring tray method .
num .
once the lime has been spread no other plant other than that needed for spreading or for mixing and spreading the mixed material shall be permitted to travel over the area to be stabilised .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num incorporation of lime num .
the spreading of lime shall not proceed when rain is imminent .
the spread lime shall be incorporated into the subgrade layer immediately following the spreading operation .
all spread lime shall be incorporated into the subgrade layer within the same working day .
lime shall not be spread when the prevailing wind velocity is sufficient to make the lime particles airborne .
num .
as a minimum cutting pulverising mixing adding water and spreading of mixed material shall take place by the stabilising machine in two separate operations .
the first operation shall incorporate num of the lime spread rate as specified into the full depth of the layer to be stabilised .
prior to incorporation of the remaining lime into the full depth of the layer to be stabilised the stabilised layer shall be compacted by not less than four num complete coverage of a vibratory pad foot roller of a size not smaller than specified in the embankment foundation compaction principals method specification clause .
num .
cutting pulverising mixing adding water and spreading of mixed material shall continue until the maximum size of all material other than rock is not greater than nummm and the lime and water are uniformly incorporated into the mixed material without streaks or pockets of lime .
num .
the depth of the stabilisation shall be judged to be acceptable when the depth after compaction is not less than the layer thickness specified in annexure nume determined by measuring six num sites per lot in accordance with main roads test method wa num .
num moisture content num .
the moisture content at any point in the lot shall be within num num of the optimum moisture content of the stabilised material .
num .
the contractor shall be responsible for achieving and maintaining the required moisture content by controlling the amount of water added during the mixing process within the stabilising machine .
num compaction num .
the mixed material shall be compacted to the characteristic dry density ratio as shown in annexure numb or greater .
num .
the contractor shall be responsible for any additional stabilising including the supply and incorporation of additional lime required as a result of noncompliance with this clause as directed by the superintendent .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num rework num .
if a completed section of lime stabilisation does not satisfy all of the requirements of the specification and has to be reworked the contractor shall rework the section without the addition of lime at no cost to the principal .
num .
rework shall include any disturbance to the surface of the lime stabilised layer during trimming to meet shape or level requirements and the rework depth shall not be less than the full depth of the affected layer .
num construction joints num .
when the stabilising work can not be completed in one continuous operation the contractor shall provide construction joints at each discontinuity in the operation .
num .
construction joints shall be made transverse to andor parallel to the direction of the stabilising run and shall be made just prior to the commencement of the next stabilising run .
num .
the joints shall be formed by cutting back into the compacted stabilised material to form a vertical face .
the loose trimmed material shall be removed from the joint before the next section is mixed and compacted and shall be disposed of to the contractors spoil area .
num cement stabilisation num general num .
the contractor shall cement stabilise the specified subgrade layer with the proportion of cement and to the depth of the subgrade layer as shown in annexure nume .
num .
the cement stabilised subgrade layer shall be constructed at the locations shown in annexure nume and to the tolerances and requirements specified for the subgrade layer .
num .
cement for stabilisation of any subgrade layer shall comply with the requirements of as num type lh .
any sampling and testing of cement shall be in accordance with as num .
the cement shall be dry to flow freely during application .
num .
cement for stabilisation of any subgrade layer shall comply with the requirements of australian technical infrastructure committee specification atic spnum .
the cementitious material registration scheme cmrs shall be used to confirm that the cement complies to atic specification spnum .
the standard application form for cmrs registration is located at annexure numf .
num .
prior to commencing cement stabilisation the contractor shall confirm that the cement complies with atic specification spnum and shall provide the cmrs registration number for the cement to the superintendent for approval of the cement .
cement certification holdpoint main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num trial section num .
the contractor shall carry out a preliminary trial of the proposed stabilising operations .
the trial shall determine a the effectiveness of the plant b the number of passes of the stabilising machine necessary to achieve the specified mixing and c the compacted depth of layer being worked including the allowance for trimming to spoil and level tolerances .
num .
the trial section shall be located within the works area .
num .
prior to conducting such a trial the contractor shall agree with the superintendent the location length and width of trial sections within the works .
hold point num .
the contractor shall not change the method developed during the trial without first obtaining approval from the superintendent .
num plant and equipment a cement spreader num .
the spreading equipment shall be a stabilising agent spreader which has been specifically designed for such work .
the spreader shall be capable of uniformly distributing cement and accurately controlling the spread rate such that when mixing is complete the cement content shall be in accordance with the requirements of the spreading of cement clause .
cement spreader num .
the spreader shall be equipped with gates to vary the width of spread and with electronic weigh scales to give daily totals of product used .
b stabilising machine stabilising machine num .
cutting pulverising mixing adding water and spreading of mixed material shall be accomplished using a stabilising machine specifically designed for stabilisation .
num .
the stabilising rotor action shall be such that the rotor revolves in an upwards and forwards cutting direction .
the rotor shall be of the recycler type and fitted with bullet teeth cutting tips .
num .
the stabilising machine shall also satisfy the following requirements a it shall be capable of producing a uniformly mixed material throughout the specified depth of the work .
b it shall be equipped with a variable depth of cut control and an accurate gauge to measure depth of cut which is readily visible to the stabilising machine operator .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num c it shall have provision for adding water automatically through a system comprising a pump flow meter variable control valve and full width spray bar .
each nozzle on the spray bar shall be fully and independently adjustable and the water pump shall have the capacity to supply up to num litres per minute .
num preliminary treatment num .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to determine whether preripping of any insitu material is necessary .
under no circumstances shall ripping to a depth exceeding the depth to be stabilised be permitted .
preripping num spreading of cement num .
the cement stabilised subgrade layer shall contain not less than the proportion of cement as a percentage of the dry mass of subgrade material as shown in annexure nume .
cement shall be spread uniformly at a controlled rate over the area to be stabilised using a suitable cement spreader .
cement content num .
the contractor shall keep daily records of the amounts of cement used and actual spread rates obtained per section treated .
calculation methods num .
the percentage cement shall be determined by either a placing three num trays each of one third one square metre in area in front of the cement spreader and measuring the mass of cement deposited on the trays for each lot or b by use of an onboard electronic weight scale system .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the percentage cement p shall be calculated thus m x num a x t x mdd where m total mass of cement kg as determined by one of the following methods a on each tray b onboard electronic weight scale system .
a method a total area of the trays m method b total measured area spread m t thickness to be stabilised mm including allowances for tolerances and trimming mdd maximum dry density of the subgrade material without the addition of cement kgm num .
the percentage cement determined for each tray in accordance with this clause shall be maintained within num by mass of the cement content specified in this clause throughout the stabilisation works .
num .
the use of an onboard electronic weighing scale system in determining the values m and a is subject to satisfactory calibration of the measuring device and the production of associated certification in accordance with the contractors quality system .
audits on this method shall be carried out using the measuring tray method .
calibration requirement num .
once the cement has been spread no other plant other than that needed for spreading or for mixing and spreading the mixed material shall be permitted to travel over the area to be stabilised .
num incorporation of cement num .
the spreading of cement shall not proceed when rain is imminent .
the spread cement shall be incorporated into the subgrade layer immediately following the spreading operation .
all spread cement shall be incorporated into the subgrade layer within the same working day .
cement shall not be spread when the prevailing wind velocity is sufficient to make the cement particles airborne .
num .
cutting stabilising mixing adding water and spreading of mixed material shall take place as a single operation within the stabilising machine .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
cutting stabilising mixing adding water and spreading of mixed material shall continue until the maximum size of all material other than rock is not greater than nummm and the cement and water are uniformly incorporated into the mixed material without streaks or pockets of cement .
num .
the depth of the stabilisation shall be judged to be acceptable when the depth after compaction is not less than the layer thickness shown in annexure nume determined by measuring six num sites per lot in accordance with main roads test method wa num .
num compaction num .
compaction of the mixed material shall be completed within six num hours of the completion of incorporation of cement into the subgrade layer and shall be compacted to the characteristic dry density ratio as shown in annexure numb or greater .
num .
the moisture content at any point in the lot shall be within num num of the optimum moisture content of the stabilised material .
time for compaction num .
the contractor shall achieve and maintain the required moisture content of the mixed material by controlling the amount of water added during the mixing process within the stabilising machine .
moisture content num .
initial compaction must be carried out with a vibratory pad foot roller of a size not smaller than specified in clause num .
num rework num .
if a completed section of cement stabilisation does not satisfy all of the requirements of the specification and has to be reworked the layer shall be reworked without the addition of cement at no cost to the principal .
rework num .
rework shall include any disturbance to the surface of the cement stabilised layer during trimming to meet shape or level requirements and the rework depth shall not be less than the full depth of the affected layer .
num construction joints num .
if the stabilised work is such that it can not be completed in one continuous operation the contractor shall provide construction joints at each discontinuity in the operation .
num .
all construction joints shall be made transverse to andor parallel to the direction of the stabilised run and shall be made just prior to the commencement of the next stabilised run .
num .
the joints shall be formed by cutting back into the compacted stabilised material to form a vertical face .
the loose trimmed material shall be removed from the joint before the next section is mixed and compacted .
main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure nume nume.num .
lime stabilised subgrade nume.num lime stabilised subgrade layers shall be constructed with the parameters as shown in table numenum table numenum lime modified subgrade section depth of stabilisation mm width of stabilisation m equivalent pure hydrated lime content by mass of from to subgrade layer nume.num .
cement stabilised subgrade nume.num cement stabilised subgrade layers shall be constructed at the locations and with the parameters as shown in table numenum table numenum cement stabilised subgrade section depth of stabilisation width of stabilisation cement content by mass of from to mm m subgrade layer main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numf cementitious materials for concrete request for registration by manufacturer cement or blend details product name type proportions manufacturer place of manufacture source of constituent materials cement clinker fly ash slag limestone gypsum grinding aids supply details dispatching supplier contact name contact phone no .
contact address suppliers abn send this form with the sample to rms chemical and materials laboratory att laboratory officer unit h num st. hilliers rd auburn nsw num for rms laboratory use only date of registration registration no main roads western australia specification num earthworks page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification amendment checklist specification name no num revision no ______ title earthworks project manager name _______________signature ____________date________ checked by name _______________signature _______________date________ contract no _______contract description _________________________________ item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked change mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materialsproductsclauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from mcp .
num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection testing parameters included in spec num test methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date _______________ main roads western australia specification num pits quarries page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num pits and quarries copyright main roads western australia main roads western australia specification num pits quarries page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num pits and quarries revision register date clause number description of revision authorised by num aug num whole document custodian reviewed specification no changes made .
me num aug num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp main roads western australia specification num pits quarries page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num operations num num general num num access tracks num num pit establishment num num pit and quarry reinstatement num num revegetation num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num principals pits and quarries num annexure numb num environmental management plan num main roads western australia specification num pits quarries page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num pits and quarries general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the clearing establishment and reinstatement of pits and quarries or sites for embankment material pavement materials and any other materials to be sourced for the works .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below main roads specifications specification num general requirements specification num environment specification num clearing specification num earthworks specification num revegetation and landscaping num num not used operations num general num .
where fill pavement or any other materials are to be obtained from pits or sites nominated by the principal site operations shall be in accordance with this specification .
details of pits or sites nominated by the principal are shown in annexure numa .
principals sites num .
for pits or sites arranged by the contractor the contractor shall obtain any necessary permits required for entry onto the land and for the payment of any royalty for such borrow material .
the contractor shall also comply with the entry to land requirements of specification num general requirements .
contractor s sites num .
where pits are known or suspected to be located in a diebackinfected area all pit operations shall be subject to procedures as specified in specification num environment .
dieback infected pits or quarries are noted in annexure numa .
dieback control num .
the contractor shall prepare an environmental management plan emp prior to the establishment of the pit .
the contractors emp shall address the requirements as detailed in annexure numb .
hold point main roads western australia specification num pits quarries page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num access tracks num .
access to pits quarries and water supply sites shall be made by following existing road alignments or access tracks wherever possible .
additional clearing to provide a maximum cleared width of four metres for one way tracks and eight metres for two way tracks shall be carried out by the contractor where approved by the superintendent .
existing alignments num .
access tracks shall be cleared in accordance with specification num clearing and topsoil managed in accordance with the requirements for access tracks as detailed in specification num earthworks .
clearing num .
all gates on access tracks shall be kept closed when not in use to ensure the safety of stock .
gates num pit establishment num .
pits shall be established by the contractor at the locations and within the limits as shown in the drawings or as detailed in annexure numa .
pits shall be cleared in accordance with specification num clearing .
clearing num .
any topsoil and vegetation from areas of declared weed species and or environmental weed species shall be cleared and stockpiled separately and disposed in the contractors spoil sites or other authorised waste disposal sites in accordance with specification num clearing .
weed control num .
topsoil shall be stripped and stockpiled in accordance with specification num earthworks .
topsoil num .
cleared vegetation shall be removed and stacked in neat manageable stockpiles at locations approved by the superintendent .
topsoil and overburden shall be removed to the depths as detailed in annexure numa and stockpiled on one side within the cleared area .
sufficient area shall be cleared to allow for topsoil and overburden removal and storage in separate stockpiles .
topsoil shall not be mixed with any underlaying material in the stripping and stockpiling process .
topsoil overburden num .
boulders and isolated rock formations contained within pits shall be ripped in order to render such material suitable for incorporation into the works .
rocky ground num .
any open gullet holes located within the boundaries of the cleared area shall be backfilled carefully to avoid contamination of the borrow material before clearing of the pit .
gullet holes num .
where such details are shown pits shall be excavated to the shape and levels indicated in the drawings .
where no such details are given the extent of excavation shall be the minimum necessary to provide the required material with least disturbance to the surrounding environment .
excavation main roads western australia specification num pits quarries page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num pit and quarry reinstatement num .
at the completion of operations the contractor shall rehabilitate used exhausted and obsolete pits and quarries .
num .
the sides and floors of pits shall be formed to a flowing finish with side slopes not steeper than num vertical to num horizontal .
pit shaping num .
during pit reshaping any material carted to the pit shall be spread uniformly over the entire shaped surface .
the order of spreading shall be declared weeds and undesirable vegetation if any removed bituminous surfacing lump form demolition material rock oversize material unsuitable material spoil overburden topsoil and vegetation litter .
order of respreadin g num .
topsoil shall be spread over the shaped batters filled areas and bare areas of the pits to a depth of not less than the depth shown in annexure numa .
topsoil num .
following the spreading of topsoil the entire pit shall be ripped along the contours to a depth of nummm and at not more than nummm spacing .
ripping num .
pits with rock bases shall be ripped and reinstated in accordance with this specification unless the contractor can demonstrate that the rock base meets the requirements for the definition for rock in accordance with specification num earthworks in which case reinstatement shall be in accordance with the environmental management plan .
rocky ground num revegetation num .
planting and direct seeding shall be carried out after the topsoil has been placed shaped and prepared for planting and seeding operations num .
the contractor shall prepare a plant and seed species list that is representative of the native vegetation trees and understorey species in adjacent areas and the list is to be included in the environmental management plan .
plant and seed species list num .
the plant and seed list shall nominate the plant size and spacing of all planting the quantities by seed species in a seed mix and the seeding rate kg per hectare to be used in any revegetation of the area to be rehabilitated .
num .
the contractor shall supply and handplant tube stock in good condition using the species and spacing nominated in the plant list .
tubestock num .
the contractor shall supply and direct seed the areas to be seeded using the seed species mix and seeding rate kg per hectare as nominated in the plant list .
direct seed num .
all planting seeding and or weed control operations shall be undertaken in accordance with specification num revegetation and landscaping .
num .
the completion criteria for revegetation shall be in accordance with the environmental management plan .
completion criteria num num not used main roads western australia specification num pits quarries page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used main roads western australia specification num pits quarries page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numa principals pits and quarries num .
details of pits and quarries num details nominated by the principal are as follows site material type purpose in works approx quantity available m depth of topsoil removal mm depth of overburden removal mm depth of topsoil respread mm other requirements main roads western australia specification num pits quarries page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numb environmental management plan the environmental management plan emp shall form part of the contractors environmental quality plan in accordance with specification num environment .
the environmental management plan shall be prepared by an experienced person in environmental management and shall be approved by the contractors environmental management representative .
main roads western australia specification num pits quarries page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num guidance notes delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference all edits to downloaded tdp documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
deletions shall be struck through e.g .
example .
insertions shall be in italics e.g .
example .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted then the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
the custodian of this specification is the senior environment officer .
num .
annexure numa insert requirements for borrow pit management into annexure numa .
the column other requirements could be used to indicate the need for dieback controls at particular pits .
num .
annexure numb insert the principals environmental management plan or the contractor requirements for preparing the plan in annexure numb .
the plan must be prepared by an experienced person and reviewed by the main roads regional environment officer or the main roads environment branch .
the plan must be prepared and approved prior to the start of pit site operations .
consultation with landholders or land managers must be included in the preparation of the plan and in determining completion criteria .
completion criteria give the superintendent something to measure against if the works are completed by contract .
on calm land main roads is required to achieve a certain plant coverage or survival rate .
other requirements may apply on private land e.g .
return to pasture or timber plantation or alternative crop .
if the environmental management plan does not nominate any rehabilitation completion criteria then the revegetation should be in accordance with the completion criteria in specification num revegetation and landscaping .
seek the advice of the environment branch to assist in the determination of the appropriate rehabilitation treatment and ensure the smm clauses include a suitable reference to any additional requirements .
for further guidance refer to the environmental guideline pits and quarries prepared by the main roads environment branch .
this document includes guidance on environmental approvals and on the expected contents of an environmental management plan .
num .
maintenance of existing roads main roads western australia specification num pits quarries page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num if a severe impact on a public road is anticipated due to heavy haulage maintenance of the road can be included i.e .
where a public road forms part of a major haul road the road shall be maintained to the same standard as at the date of possession of site .
insert a suitable clause in contract specific requirements .
num .
reinstatement of rocky ground in pits or quarries the treatment for extensive rock base that can not be ripped will depend on the pit location drainage and what revegetation is to occur .
usual practice is to build up the landform to allow vegetation to establish e.g .
num metre depth by the return of the overburden topsoil and vegetation cleared from the pit site .
the environmental management plan should identify the suitable treatment on a sitespecific basis e.g .
if rock outcrops naturally occur in the area then exposed rock may be acceptable .
include relevant requirements in annexure numb and insert a suitable clause in contract specific requirements .
main roads western australia specification num pits quarries page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contract specific requirements to add or delete the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
none at this time .
main roads western australia specification num pits quarries page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification amendment checklist specification name no num revision no ________ title pits and quarries project manager name _______________signature ________________date______ checked by name _______________signature _______________date______ contract no __________contract description _______________________________ item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked change mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materialsproductsclauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from mcp .
num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection testing parameters included in spec num test methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date _______________ main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num revegetation landscaping copyright main roads western australia main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num revegetation landscaping revision register date clause number description of revision authorised by num aug num whole document custodian reviewed specification no changes made .
me num aug num num num num num num num num num num num amended la num deleted refer clause num guidance note num tables updated num may num num num num num num num num num num num various amendments including the addition of some new subclauses and the transfer of topsoil respread soil surface preparation and soil improvement requirements to specification num eathworks la num aug num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num other requirements num num not used num products and materials num num general products and materials num num hard landscaping num num mulch weed and erosion control matting num num hydromulching and hydroseeding materials num num plant materials num num irrigation materials num num num not used num construction num num sequence of operations num num weed control num num clearing of site num num treatment of existing vegetation num num minor earthworks num num irrigation system num num temporary trickle irrigation num num hard landscaping num num preparation of batters and ground surfaces num num topsoil respread num num soil improvements num num weed control matting num num erosion control num num mulch respread num num hydromulching and hydroseeding num num direct seeding num num planting num num grassing num num watering system num num revegetation signs num num num not used num establishment period num num completion of works num num vegetation establishment num num monitoring program num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num handover requirements num num final completion num main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa specific requirements num annexure numb material requirements num annexure numc completion criteria num main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num revegetation landscaping general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply of all products materials and equipment all preparation and construction and all revegetation and landscaping operations required to complete the works as shown in the drawings or specified in the contract .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num installation of upvc pipe systems as num potting mixes .
as num soils for landscaping and garden use as num composts soil conditioners and mulches .
australiannew zealand standards asnzs num part num water supply acceptable solutions other publications natspec guide specifying trees isbn num num num num .
main roads test methods wa num random sample site location main roads standard drawings segmental paving details drawing no.num num num guide sign roadside revegetation .
standard drawing no .
mrgmnum main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num main roads specifications specification num traffic specification num clearing specification num earthworks specification num signs num definitions num .
the installation period shall mean the period starting from the commencement through to the end of the revegetation and landscaping works as specified in the contract .
installation period num .
the establishment period shall mean the period starting from the completion of the revegetation and landscaping works and extending for the duration as nominated in annexure numa of this specification .
establishment period num .
establishment shall mean the continuing care and maintenance of the revegetation and landscaping works by accepted horticultural practises as well as rectifying any defects that become apparent in the works under normal use .
for the duration of the establishment period the contractor is fully responsible for the continuing good appearance of the works .
establishment num .
the contractor is required to carry out all activities necessary to establish and promote the growth of all plant materials and maintain all works in good order and functional condition during the installation period .
num other requirements num personnel num .
the contractor shall ensure that personnel under the sole responsibility and supervision of the contractor shall be competent experienced and skilled in all aspects of the required landscape installation and establishment practices .
skilled personnel num traffic management num .
the contractor shall ensure that all traffic management and control measures necessary to undertake the works are implemented in accordance with specification num traffic .
traffic management num not used products and materials num general products and materials num .
the manufacturers published product details and instructions for use shall be provided to the superintendent upon request .
general num .
water used to establish and maintain vegetation shall be potable water where available or obtained from a source containing no substances toxic to seeds or vegetation growth .
water num .
timedrelease water if specified shall be manufactured for timed main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num the purpose and delivered in sealed biodegradable containers .
release water num .
fertilisers specified in the contract shall be delivered on site in unopened bags or containers bearing the manufacturers description analysis of constituents and quantity .
fertilisers shall be stored in waterproof sealed bags and sheltered away from water and direct sunlight .
fertiliser num .
unless otherwise specified in the contract the fertilisers shall be manufactured for the purpose used in the contract and shall be stored handled and applied in accordance with the manufacturers published specification .
num .
only pesticides and herbicides registered for the treatment of pests and weeds in western australia shall be used for the works .
the supply storage handling and use of any product shall comply with regulations restrictions and government policy relating to pesticides and herbicide use and in accordance with manufacturers published specification .
pesticides herbicides num .
soil wetting agents and water holding agents shall be active in the soil for a minimum of six months shall be nonionic nontoxic ph neutral range of num and shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers published specifications .
soil additives num .
soil bioamendments and inoculates shall be free of any substances detrimental to plant life and only be applied in accordance with the manufacturers published specifications .
num .
unless otherwise specified in the contract soil conditioners shall comply with as num and be applied in accordance with the manufacturers published specifications .
the contractor shall supply to the superintendent certified test reports that the soil conditioners to be used in the works comply with as num .
soil conditioners num .
the phosphate content of soil conditioners shall not exceed three percent and the ph shall be in the neutral range of num .
num .
the contractor shall use all topsoil stockpiled on site and nominated for reuse as topsoil in accordance with specification num earthworks .
insitu topsoil num .
imported material for use as topsoil shall comply with as num .
the contractor shall supply to the superintendent an analysis of its content undertaken by a certified laboratory to confirm that the imported topsoils to be used in the works are dieback free and comply with as num .
imported topsoil num .
selected fill material to be used in the works shall be clean embankment quality material in accordance with specification num earthworks and shall be free of any matter with a particle size greater than nummm weeds and materials toxic to plant growth .
contaminated soil shall not be used as fill within the works .
selected fill main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num hard landscaping num .
unless otherwise specified in the drawings all materials used for fixed items such as but not limited to rock pitching segmental paving concrete surfacing bollards fencing screen walls and other hard landscaping elements shall be in accordance with the relevant main roads specifications .
num mulch weed and erosion control matting num .
mulch refers to any chipped site vegetation composted organic materials or inorganic materials such as crushed rock coarse aggregate river pebbles or pea gravel spread as a soil surface protection measure and or decorative surface treatment .
definition num .
mulch materials shall be clean of any weed grass stolons seeds and other extraneous materials and free from all matter and substances toxic to plant growth .
general num .
inorganic mulch shall be clean and washed free of fines screened and composed of particle sizes in even proportions as shown in the drawings .
inorganic mulch num .
stockpiled chipped site vegetation or uncontaminated chipped vegetative material naturally occurring within the local area shall be approved as suitable by the superintendent prior to use as mulch .
site vegetation mulch num .
all imported chipped vegetation material shall be aged for at least twelve months be free of fine or fibrous particles and approved as suitable for use as mulch by the superintendent .
num .
all imported composted mulch materials shall comply with as num .
the contractor shall supply to the superintendent an analysis of its content undertaken by a certified laboratory to confirm that the imported mulch to be used in the works are dieback free and comply with as num .
imported composted mulch num .
straw for use in hydromulch operations weed control or erosion control shall be derived from cereal crops and certified free of viable seed and cured to lees than num moisture content by weight .
straw num .
mulch control netting shall be a lightweight woven biodegradable mesh product manufactured for the purpose of holding organic mulch surfaces in place .
mulch control netting num .
weed control matting shall be manufactured for weed suppression and made from stable nondegradable permeable materials such as polypropylene fabric jute or coir .
weed control matting num .
unless detailed otherwise in the drawings all erosion control matting blanket or netting shall be manufactured from organic fibre products and be biodegradable permeable to air and water and remain intact when wet and in contact with the soil .
erosion control matting num hydromulching and hydroseeding materials num .
cellulose fibre shall be biodegradable free of any contaminated materials and suitable for use in hydroseeding and hydro mulching to form a slope stabilisation mat .
cellulose fibre main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
binders tacifiers or emulsions used shall be manufactured for the purpose of hydroseeding and hydromulching used in the contract and shall be miscible in water free from components toxic to seed germination plant growth or aquatic life and applied according the manufacturers published instructions for use .
binder num .
all water used in hydroseeding and hydromulching shall be free from materials likely to be toxic to plant growth .
water num .
coloured dye used to aid visual application of hydroseeding and hydromulching shall be a nontoxic watersoluble biodegradable dye .
dye num .
dispersing agents shall be free from components toxic to seed germination plant growth or aquatic life and mixed according the manufacturers published instructions for use .
dispersing agent num .
equipment for the mixing and application of hydromulching and hydroseeding shall have the operating capacity to allow for the mixing of materials in continuous agitation to produce a homogeneous mixture and a discharge system to apply the mixture at a continuous and uniform rate .
the contractor shall demonstrate the capacity of the equipment to the superintendent upon request .
equipment num .
all machinery shall be in good working order to uniformly mix and apply hydromulch and hydroseed and the calibration of the equipment shall be demonstrated to the superintendent upon request .
calibration num plant materials num seed num .
the contractor shall undertake the collection and or purchase of all seed stock for use in direct seeding or for use in propagation of plants of the species and quantities listed in annexure numb .
seed list num .
the contractor shall notify the superintendent num days prior to the collection of seed stock to be supplied by the principal .
seed supplied by principal num .
prior to any seed collection the contractor shall ensure that all seed suppliers are holders of appropriate and current seed collection licences .
copies of current seed collection licences shall be provide to the superintendent upon request seed collection licence num .
all seed collected and or supplied by the contractor shall be clean dry and free from mould pest and disease to accepted industry practices for seed processing .
seed material num .
each batch of seed shall be supplied with a certificate signed by the contractor detailing the name of the suppliers species as nominated in annexure numb date and origin of seed collection and a guarantee that the seed is free of declared noxious plant seed or vegetative parts .
seed quality control num .
where specified certified test reports signed by the contractor shall be supplied for each batch of seed detailing the seed purity using accepted industry practices for seed testing .
seed purity testing main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
where specified certified test reports signed by the contractor shall be supplied for each batch of seed detailing the seed viability using accepted industry practices for seed testing .
seed viability testing num .
the contractor shall store all seed in secure dry well ventilated storage facilities protected from temperature extremes .
the seed material shall be stored in vermin proof containers above ground level .
seed shall be inspected for pest damage mould and fungus on a regular basis and action taken to avoid seed deterioration .
seed storage num .
the seed shall be sourced to meet the provenance requirements of the project as nominated in annexure numb .
the superintendent shall approve any variation .
seed provenance num plants num .
the contractor shall supply plants of the species size and number specified in annexure numb .
the contractor shall order or arrange for the propagation of all plant species and quantities to ensure that the correct numbers of plants will be available by the projected date of planting .
plant list num .
all plants supplied by the contractor shall only be obtained from nurseries accredited under the nursery industry accreditation scheme of australia .
plant supply and propagation num .
plant seed shall be germinated in sufficient time to ensure the suitable maturity of tube stock for mass planting at the optimum planting time for the region as nominated in annexure numb .
all seed used either in the initial supply or for substituted species shall meet the provenance requirements of the project as nominated in annexure numb .
any proposed variation to the nominated plant species shall be submitted to the superintendent for approval .
num .
plants shall be grown in potting mix meeting the requirements of as num potting mixes and supplied in industry approved containers .
soil in containers at the time of delivery shall be free of weeds insects and disease .
num .
all plants shall have been grown in their final containers for not less than eight weeks be true to species name wellformed and hardened off nursery stock .
num .
the superintendent shall inspect the development of seedlings during the period of propagation .
the superintendent reserves the right to inspect num of the total number of seedlings to be used in the works .
the presence of declared weeds in the soil accompanying plants or at the nursery shall be a cause for rejection of any or all plants .
inspection of nursery num .
all plants shall be hardened off by growing in open areas receiving sun for around num of the day and gradually reducing watering and fertiliser at least two weeks prior to delivery on site .
hardening off num .
the contractor shall ensure all supplied plants are in good condition and plant condition a the root system shall be fibrous and firmly established but not root bound and with no large roots growing out of the container main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num b the root mass shall retain its shape and hold num of the root ball material when removed from the container c leaves shall be of normal size colour and texture for the specified species .
d the quality of all supplied tree species shall conform to the requirements in natspec guide specifying trees appendix num .
num .
the contractor shall obtain written warrants from the nursery suppliers attesting that the plants are true to the specified species size and free from disease pests and weeds and forward the warrants to the superintendent .
warranty for plants num .
the superintendent shall be notified of any plant supply delays .
no extension of time for practical completion shall be granted if plant materials are not available due to late ordering .
delay in plant supply num .
no substitutions shall be made without written approval from the superintendent .
any proposed substitutions shall include details of the species size number and be forwarded to the superintendent for approval .
should the superintendent consider the substitutions not adequate then the originally specified plants shall be grown and planted in the following year .
substitution num .
all individual plant containers and trays of plant tubes shall have nametags that are water resistant and tied securely to the plant containers .
labelled trays shall contain only one species of plant .
unless otherwise specified in the drawings all stakes shall be durable hardwood straight free from knots and twists and pointed at one end .
plant ties shall be nummm black cloth reinforced rubber ties or other approved nonabrasive material .
plant labels num .
unless otherwise specified in the drawings all stakes shall be durable hardwood straight free from knots and twists and pointed at one end .
plant ties shall be nummm black cloth reinforced rubber ties or other approved nonabrasive material .
stakes and ties num grass num .
grass turf stolons or seed supplied by the contractor shall be of the species variety and quantities listed in annexure numb .
grass num .
all grass materials shall be free from weeds fungus insect pest or other deleterious matter .
the contractor shall obtain a written warranty from the grass suppliers attesting that the grass is true to the specified species size and free from disease pests and weeds and forward the warrants to the superintendent .
warranty for grass num .
only grass turf that is older than num months shall be supplied for use in the contract .
the grass turf shall be sourced from a commercial supplier and certified true to the specified variety the age and quality and date the turf was cut .
the turf shall be machine cut to a uniform thickness of nummm or more excluding the top growth and thatch in segments no less than num square metres of surface area .
broken pieces torn or uneven ends shall not be accepted by the superintendent .
turf main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
grass stolons runners sprigs or rhizomes shall be derived from shredded turf and shall be wellestablished fibrous length of num nummm with healthy leaf material .
the supplier shall certify that the grass stolons are true to specified variety and the date on which the cuttings were taken .
stolons num .
turf and grass stolons shall be kept continuously moist during transport and shall be planted within num hours of being cut .
transport num .
grass seed for use in hydromulching or direct seeding shall be certified to be not older than num months prior to the planting date and delivered on site in a standard sealed container labelled with the name of the supplier species and variety of seed by weight percent pure live seed date of testing origin of seed .
the seed shall not be sprouting mouldy or show evidence of having been wet or damaged .
grass seed num .
turf stolons or seed not meeting the specifications and deemed unsuitable by the superintendent shall not be accepted .
rejected materials shall be replaced by approved stock at no additional cost to the principal .
rejection of grass num irrigation materials num .
the contractor shall supply all equipment materials and accessories required in this contract to conform to asnzs num part num and as num and comply with local state and federal authorities requirements .
irrigation materials num num not used construction num sequence of operations num .
unless otherwise detailed the sequence of operations shall be sequence of operations a weed control .
b clearing and minor earthworks .
c irrigation and hard landscaping .
d preparation of batters and ground surfaces .
e planting seeding grassing .
f establishment of vegetation .
any changes to the sequence of operations shall be confirmed with the superintendent .
num .
the revegetation and landscaping works shall commence as early as practicable after completion of the earthworks and within the optimum time of year as nominated in annexure numb to minimise soil erosion and ensure the effective revegetation of all disturbed soil areas .
the contractor shall be responsible for ensuring adequate watering for any planting seeding or grassing operations undertaken outside this period at the contractors expense .
timing of works main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num weed control num .
revegetation and landscaping operations shall be undertaken to meet the requirements for weed control as specified in specification num environment and in accordance with specification num clearing .
num .
the contractor shall implement an approved weed control program as nominated in annexure numb and as necessary to control all weed species prior to undertaking any other works .
num .
any changes to the timing and sequence of weed control operations shall be confirmed with the superintendent .
num .
existing plants to be retained and new planting areas shall be protected during any herbicide spraying if necessary by fitting guards onto spray units .
protection of existing vegetation num .
the contractor shall exercise absolute care in the application of herbicide to avoid spray drift onto private property or public thoroughfares .
protection of other areas num .
a nontoxic watersoluble biodegradable coloured dye shall be added to the herbicide spray mix that will be clearly visible for at least num hours after the herbicide application .
dye num .
treated areas shall remain undisturbed for two weeks or as recommended by the herbicide manufacturer .
disturbance num .
treated areas shall display signs of dying off within num days of application as evidence of compliance .
if weed mortality rate is less than num the contractor shall repeat the application at their own expense until the desired rate is achieved .
compliance num clearing of site num .
existing vegetation shall be removed where nominated in the drawings .
all clearing stockpiling and treatment of cleared vegetation and removal of waste materials shall be undertaken in accordance with specification num clearing .
clearing num treatment of existing vegetation num .
where nominated in the drawings existing grass or vegetation shall be slashed to a nominal height of nummm using a mechanical slasher .
slashing num .
all chipping and stockpiling of site vegetation shall be undertaken in accordance with specification num clearing .
chipping and stockpiling num .
where nominated in the drawings or as specified in annexure numb the contractor shall undertake the lifting transport and storage of selected vegetation using accepted industry practices .
transplanting num .
the contractor shall remove tree trunks nominated for salvage as specified in the drawings or in annexure numb or if not specified in accordance with specification num clearing .
salvage and placement of tree trunks num .
unless specified otherwise in the drawings or in annexure numb the contractor shall place nominated tree trunks salvaged from clearing operations and retained for use in landscaping in accordance with specification num earthworks main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num minor earthworks num .
where nominated in the drawings the contractor shall undertake the stripping stockpiling and disposal of site topsoil in accordance with specification num earthworks .
topsoil management num .
the contractor shall dispose of all contaminated soil unsuitable and surplus materials in accordance with specification num earthworks .
disposal of materials num .
unless specified otherwise in the drawings or in annexure numb the contractor shall excavate and stockpile andor place any salvage materials nominated for use in landscaping in accordance with specification num earthworks .
salvage materials num .
the contractor shall prepare and manage all stockpiles of topsoil or mulch materials in accordance with specification num earthworks .
stockpiles of topsoil or mulch num .
unless specified otherwise the finishing of batter surfaces and other ground surfaces shall be in accordance with specification num earthworks .
finishing of surfaces num irrigation system num general num .
the contractor shall install flush test and commission an irrigation system as shown in the drawings and specified in the contract .
num .
all water supply connections bores and related work shall be installed in accordance with asnzs num part num .
connection num .
prior to commencing any installation works the contractor shall undertake flow and pressure testing to verify the flow rates and pressure .
flow rates num .
the contractor shall arrange for any necessary permits as required to install water connections and pay any application fees or charges .
num .
all piping installation connections and fittings and the use of primer and solvents for piping connections shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and comply with as num installation of upvc pipe systems .
piping installation num .
thrust blocks shall be placed at all points of deflection in the mainline and installed in accordance with the manufacturers specifications .
piping shall be laid in parallel straight lines without excessive bending of pipes and changes in the direction shall be with standard fittings .
num .
crossings of existing roads paths or paved areas shall be installed by horizontal boring using an approved heavy duty conduit of sufficient diameter to allow easy installation and removal of pipes wiring and other necessary lines .
conduits shall extend at least one metre beyond the toe of any embankments .
the ends of conduits shall project one metre above the ground surface in preparation for subsequent work .
crossings num excavation and trenching main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
prior to any excavation and trenching the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that hold point a all existing services are marked on the ground and the contractor has liaised with relevant authorities as required to locate services .
b the run of pipes valve locations sprinkler heads and other components as shown in the drawings are pegged on the site .
c completed surface levels are in accordance with the drawings .
num .
the contractor shall not carry out any excavations within the drip line canopy of all existing trees and care shall be taken to avoid any damage to tree roots exposed in trenches .
the contractor shall seek the direction of the superintendent if any tree roots greater than num mm diameter are in conflict with the installation of the irrigation system .
damage to tree roots num .
the contractor shall excavate by hand only within one metre of any existing underground services .
trenches near services num .
under no circumstances shall trenching running parallel to a road be allowed closer than nummm from the rear face of the kerb or road shoulder .
num .
the contractor shall notify and seek approval of the superintendent of any necessary rock excavation in trenches that can not be ripped and excavated by a standard trench digging equipment .
difficult excavation num .
the contractor shall fill any over excavation below the required depth with embankment quality material as detailed in specification num earthworks .
over excavations num .
topsoil from excavation shall be stripped and stockpiled separately on site and not mixed with any excavated subsoil material .
stripping topsoil num .
trenches shall be excavated to provide a minimum soil cover of nummm over all pipe work .
should laterals cross the mainline the trench depth shall be such that the lateral has a minimum of nummm cover over the mainline and nummm cover from the finished surface levels .
cover num .
the trench bottom shall be continuous firm smooth and free from rocks rubble and sharp objects .
trenching num .
the contractor shall install and connect all fixtures in a neat waterproof manner and in accordance with standards and the manufacturers published specifications .
spacing of sprinklers shall be as shown in the drawings unless otherwise approved by the superintendent .
installation of fixtures num .
the contractor shall set the top level of all sprinklers flush with the adjacent finished ground level .
the contractor shall undertake all replacement and connections to existing irrigation system components as shown in the drawings .
num flushing and testing main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
prior to backfilling the completed pipe work the contractor shall certify that the entire system is flushed clean and tested in accordance with the contract .
hold point num .
prior to testing of the completed irrigation system testing of system a the contractor shall flush the system .
b each water outlet device shall be removed to ensure that debris is flushed from the system .
c all joints and connections are to remain visible during the flushing and testing .
d all sections high pressure and low pressure of the irrigation system shall be tested to design operating for a minimum period of num minutes unless specified otherwise in the contract .
e the operation of each solenoid valve shall be tested from the controller .
num .
following acceptance the contractor shall undertake all backfilling compaction and levelling of trenches .
backfilling num .
the contractor shall notify the superintendent if the soil excavated from the trenches is not suitable as backfill and await approval to continue with the backfilling operation .
the unsuitable and surplus excavated soil shall be disposed offsite in accordance with specification num clearing .
unsuitable backfill num .
backfill material in contact with and immediately adjacent to pipes shall be clean sand free from rocks rubble or sharp objects .
pipes num .
only selected fill material in accordance with specification num earthworks and approved by the superintendent shall be used as backfill to replace the unsuitable excavated soil .
replacement backfill num .
subsidence of trenches after completion of the works shall be rectified at the expense of the contractor .
subsidence num tuning and commissioning num .
the irrigation system shall be tuned and balanced so that each outlet device delivers the designed quantity of water with the controller set at automatic operation or as specified .
tuning and commissioning num .
during the commissioning period the contractor shall be responsible for the repair of all leaks equipment malfunction surface erosion or any damage resulting from the operation of the system .
num .
any station affected by repairs to the system shall be re flushed out and retested after reinstatement .
num temporary trickle irrigation num .
where specified in the drawings the contractor shall install a temporary trickle irrigation system connected to a water supply outlet .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
prior to the commencement of the work the contractor shall test and verify the location of the nominated pressure water main and the performance of the water supply .
if connected to pressure water mains the irrigation system shall be capable of withstanding pressure surges associated with water authority rated services .
num .
the contractor shall supply all the necessary pipes fittings drippers and bubblers capable of suppling water to each plant at the nominal rate specified in the drawings .
if not specified the flow rate shall be a nominal rate of num litres per hour .
num .
unless detailed otherwise in the drawings temporary trickle irrigation piping shall be laid on the ground surface .
num hard landscaping num .
unless otherwise specified in the contract all hard landscaping elements shall be installed as detailed in the drawings and constructed in accordance with the relevant main roads specifications .
num .
garden edging for shrub beds tree wells and lawn areas shall be installed as detailed in the drawings .
all garden edging shall be set vertical with the top of the edging set flush with the adjoining surface or pavement .
curves where shown in the drawings shall be smooth and even .
edging shall be protected from damage during subsequent works under the contract .
garden edging num preparation of batters and ground surfaces num .
all areas nominated for revegetation and or landscaping shall be cleared of all surface rubbish and any material that may hinder plant growth before any further surface preparation works are commenced .
clearing surface num .
the contractor shall prepare all nominated finished soil surfaces where necessary by ripping disking harrowing tilling mounding furrowing raking tracking or other means to form a loose and roughened surface in preparation for other revegetation and landscaping works or as otherwise specified in the drawings or in annexure numb .
surface preparation num .
surface preparation shall be carried out along the contour unless detailed otherwise in the drawings or in annexure numb .
num .
surface preparation shall be carried out by hand within nummm of paths kerbs or structures and within the drip line of any retained vegetation .
num .
unless specified otherwise in the drawings or in annexure numb all batter surfaces with a slope of numvertical in num horizontal or flatter and more than nummm from a shoulder or rear face of kerb shall be prepared to a minimum depth of nummm to prepare a loose surface .
depth of cultivation num .
the contractor shall protect all finished and prepared soil surfaces from soil erosion and weed infestation as necessary in accordance with specification num earthworks until further revegetation and landscaping works as nominated can occur or a certificate of practical completion has been issued .
temporary protection measures main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num topsoil respread num .
topsoil shall be respread as soon as practical following construction operations .
timing num .
unless specified otherwise in the drawings or in annexure numb the contractor shall respread approved site topsoil andor imported topsoil as specified in accordance with specification num earthworks .
respreading topsoil num soil improvements num .
unless detailed otherwise in the drawings or in annexure numb the contractor shall incorporate soil conditioner into the top soil surface layer as necessary to prepare all nominated areas for seeding planting or grassing in accordance with specification num earthworks .
soil conditioner num .
the contractor shall incorporate soil additives in the topsoil and or individual planting holes as specified in the drawings or in annexure numb in accordance with the manufacturers published specifications .
soil additives num .
the contractor shall incorporate chipped vegetation mulch as an improvement to sand or other suitable soils as detailed in the drawings or in annexure numb .
unless specified otherwise the chipped vegetation mulch shall be spread on the soil surface to the nominated depth and anchored into the soil to a nominal depth of nummm with suitable equipment .
on steep batter slopes the chipped vegetation mulch shall be tracked into the soil to a nominal depth of nummm by a tracked vehicle running perpendicular to the contour .
improvement of soil surfaces num weed control matting num .
weed control matting sheets shall be placed and fixed in accordance with the manufacturers published specifications .
num .
surface obstructions and protuberances shall be removed prior to laying out the matting .
the matting sheets shall be laid loosely to make good contact with the soil surface and not stretched taut over the surface .
the matting shall be laid to provide a complete cover over the finished surfaces with no open spaces left along joins between sheets of matting .
matting around individual plants shall be cut and placed as detailed in the drawings .
laying of matting num .
unless detailed otherwise in the drawings the contractor shall spread a complete cover of suitable mulch over the matting sheets to a nominal depth of nummm so that the matting does not extend above the mulch .
mulch cover num erosion control num .
revegetation and landscaping operations shall be undertaken to meet the requirements for erosion and sedimentation control as specified in specification num environment .
num .
the contractor shall implement erosion control measures as detailed in the drawings or annexure numb .
erosion control measures main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the product shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers published instructions for the required site application and a copy shall be provided to the superintendent prior to installation .
installation of erosion control matting num .
unless detailed otherwise in the drawings or annexure numb the contractor shall place the matting within num hours of surface preparation .
num .
if a rainfall event occurs before the matting can be installed and results in soil erosion the contractor shall replace the eroded material and prepare the soil surface before installing the matting .
num .
erosion control matting sheets shall be anchored rolled out down slopes or along open drains overlapped and fixed in accordance with the manufacturers published specifications .
num .
disturbance of adjoining soil surfaces shall be minimised during installation .
num .
all surface obstructions and protuberances shall be removed prior to laying out the matting .
the matting sheets shall be laid loosely to make good contact with the soil surface and not stretched taut over the surface .
the matting shall be laid to provide a complete cover over the finished surfaces with no open spaces left along joins between sheets of matting .
laying of matting num .
fixing intervals shall be sufficient for the steepness and slope to maximise contact between the matting and soil and prevent runoff flows beneath the matting .
num .
once placed the matting shall be thoroughly soaked with a fine spray of water which may include rainfall .
num .
unless detailed otherwise in the drawings or annexure numb the contractor shall apply a binding agent and or a complete cover of approved mulch over the matting sheets to a nominal depth of nummm so that the matting does not extend above the mulch .
num mulch respread num .
unless otherwise shown in the drawings or in annexure numb the contractor shall respread approved site mulch andor imported mulch as specified in accordance with specification num earthworks .
num .
unless detailed otherwise in the drawings or annexure numb the contractor shall spread approved mulch as specified as soon as is practical after surface preparation topsoiling soil improvements and the placement of weed control or erosion control matting .
timing num .
unless otherwise specified or detailed in the drawings dry mulch shall be placed before any planting .
num .
if a rainfall event occurs before the mulch can be spread creating soil erosion the contractor shall replace the eroded material and prepare the soil surface before spreading the mulch .
num .
mulch shall be spread to an even depth by hand machine or blower unit over the areas as nominated in the drawings or annexure numb and the surface raked to present an even surface .
even depth of mulch main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
unless specified otherwise the contractor shall apply fertiliser over unweathered imported mulch or chipped site vegetation to neutralise soil nitrogen loss .
fertiliser num .
unless specified otherwise in the drawings mulch shall not be mixed in with the soil or buried in the soil during the spreading operations .
avoid mixing mulch num .
unless specified otherwise in the contract mulched areas shall be thoroughly watered to saturate the mulch .
watering shall include any rainfall .
watering in num .
the contractor shall avoid spreading mulch on plants structures roadways and paths road shoulders and grassed areas and leave the site in a neat clean condition .
mulch shall not be placed closer than nummm from the stem of any existing vegetation or new plantings .
existing vegetation or new plants accidentally covered by mulch shall be uncovered as soon as possible .
avoid over spreading mulch num hydromulching and hydroseeding num general num .
the contractor shall carry out hydromulching and hydro seeding operations where nominated in the drawings using revegetation industry best practice and equipment .
num .
hydromulching and hydroseeding mixes and rates shall be as specified in annexure numb .
num .
hydromulching and hydroseeding operations shall be carried out as soon as practical following preparation of finished soil surfaces at the optimal time for the region as nominated in annexure numb to match seasonal rainfall and as soon as the local weather conditions are optimal .
timing num .
prior to commencing any operations the contractor shall assess the risk of surface runoff flows causing damage to any areas to be treated and confirm there are no obstruction obstacle hazard or factor likely to cause delays or failures of the operations .
the contractor shall notify the superintendent of any necessary works required to minimise the risk of delays or failures of the operations .
obstruction num .
not less than num working days prior to commencing any hydromulching and hydroseeding operations on site the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that hold point a the nominated areas are correctly defined .
b no obstructions obstacles hazards or factors likely to cause delays or failures of the operations have been identified .
c the soil surfaces are ready for the hydromulching and hydroseeding operations .
d the soil moisture content is conducive to seed germination .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num e details of the procedures materials and equipment to be used are documented and have been submitted for approval .
f equipment has been calibrated to mix and discharge a homogeneous mixture at a continuous and uniform rate .
g a program for the hydromulching and hydro seeding operations is documented and submitted for approval .
the contractor shall confirm with the superintendent any changes to the operations that may be necessary following approval .
num hydromulch num .
unless specified otherwise in annexure numb the hydro mulch shall consist of water cellulose fibre mulch binder and dispersing agents .
num hydroseed num .
seed species grass native plants or other nominated plant species and fertiliser and other materials as specified shall be added to the hydromulch slurry at the rates nominated in annexure numb or in the drawings .
hydroseeding num .
seed shall be pretreated as nominated in annexure numb .
num hydromulch and hydroseed operations num .
the contractor shall delineate areas on site nominated for hydromulch and hydroseed by the use of stakes or site features or other means to suit the project site conditions and specified mix requirements so that the areas are clearly marked prior to the start of operations .
delineation of areas num .
the soil surface shall be prepared in response to the site soil conditions to provide a suitable soil surface environment for the hydro mulching and hydroseeding operations .
soil preparation num .
unless detailed otherwise in annexure numb all materials making up the hydromulch and hydroseed slurry shall be mixed on site .
the superintendent may request a review of all proposed ingredients and mixing prior to the start of operations .
mixing num .
the hydromulch and hydroseed slurry mix shall be kept continuously agitated so the ingredients are kept uniformly dispersed throughout the slurry prior to the application .
num .
the hydromulch and hydroseed slurry mix shall be uniformly applied to suit the size and location of the site area the slope and soil and local weather conditions .
application num .
the hydromulch and hydroseed slurry mix shall be applied in a uniform and continuous motion in overlapping passes to achieve an unbroken surface with no bare or incomplete areas and to prevent over saturation of the soil surface and minimise soil movement .
num .
the contractor shall ensure that all reasonable precautions are taken to avoid over spraying onto paths and sealed surfaces .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
unless otherwise detailed in the annexure numb the thickness of the hydromulch shall be a minimum of nummm and no more than nummm .
thickness num .
areas subject to concentrated surface runoff flows shall be treated with thicker applications of hydromulch or higher concentration of binder as specified .
num .
hydromulch shall not be applied in heavy rain or when the wind speed exceeds numkm per hour except by direct hand held hose application .
heavy rain or wind num .
seeded areas shall be not be disturbed by equipment and vehicles or by pedestrians and animal traffic during the seeding operations and during the establishment period .
disturbance of seeded areas num direct seeding num general num .
the contractor shall carry out direct seeding operations where nominated in the drawings using horticulturalrevegetation industry accepted practice and equipment to achieve the completion criteria as specified in annexure numc .
num .
seed mixes and rates to be used in the direct seeding operations shall be as specified in annexure numb .
num .
seeding shall be undertaken as soon as practical following construction activities at the optimal time for the region as nominated in annexure numb and to match seasonal rainfall .
timing num preparation of seed materials num .
seed shall be pretreated as specified in annexure numb .
seed pre treatment num .
seed in separate labelled containers for each species shall be delivered for batching into the nominated seed mixes as nominated in annexure numb .
unless specified otherwise the batching of seed shall occur offsite .
seed batching num .
the contractor shall notify the superintendent when and where offsite the batching of seed is to occur .
num .
the prepared seed mixes shall be delivered on site in containers labelled to identify seed mix and weight ready for use in the direct seeding operations .
num .
unless specified otherwise seed mixes shall be blended with a carrierbulking agent such as clean washed dry sand vermiculite attapulgite clay or similar in the proportions by volume of bulking agent to seed to suit the project requirements and allow for the even spreading of seed .
bulking of seed mixes num .
fertiliser as specified in annexure numb shall be mixed with the bulking agent or uniformly applied over the soil surface as a separate operation at the time of sowing .
fertiliser num .
unless specified otherwise only a granular low phosphorous slow release fertiliser suitable for native plants shall be used in the direct seeding operations .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num seeding operations num .
prior to commencing any operations the contractor shall assess the presence of weed species the soil moisture and the risk of surface runoff flows causing damage to any areas to be treated and confirm there are no obstruction obstacle hazard or factor likely to cause delays or failures of the operations .
the contractor shall notify the superintendent of any necessary works required to minimise the risk of delays or failures of the operations .
obstruction num .
not less than num working days prior to commencing any direct seeding operations on site the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that hold point a the nominated areas are correctly defined .
b no obstructions obstacles hazards or factors likely to cause delays or failures of the operations have been identified .
c the soil surfaces are ready for the seeding operations .
d details of the seed pretreatment and batching of the seed mixes are documented .
e certificates of seed purity and viability are provided for each batch if specified .
f details of the procedures materials and equipment to be used are documented .
g equipment has been calibrated to uniformly apply the nominated seed .
h a program for the direct seeding operations is documented and submitted for approval .
the contractor shall confirm with the superintendent any changes to the operations that may be necessary following approval .
num .
the contractor shall delineate areas on site nominated for direct seeding by the use of stakes or site features or other means to suit the project site conditions and specified mix requirements so that the areas are clearly marked prior to the start of operations .
delineation of areas to be seeded num .
the soil surface shall be prepared in response to the site soil conditions to provide a suitable soil surface environment for seed germination and unless specified otherwise the soil surface shall be lightly cultivated prior to seeding to form a loose and roughened surface .
soil preparation num .
seed shall be sown uniformly in overlapping passes to allow for complete seed coverage of the prepared surfaces within the marked areas .
seeding num .
unless detailed otherwise in the annexure numb farm machinery calibrated blower or spreader hand or mechanical or broadcast by hand may be used as necessary to suit the size and location of the area to be seeded the slope and soil and local weather conditions .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
seeding shall not occur in heavy rain or when the wind speed exceeds numkm per hour if a mechanical blower or spreader is used .
heavy rain or wind num .
unless otherwise detailed in the annexure numb seed shall be covered by light harrowing scarifying bagging dragging or raking of the seeded area as soon as practical and within the same day of seeding .
covering of seed num .
unless detailed otherwise in the drawings or in annexure numb mulch shall not be spread over any areas of direct seeding .
num .
all machinery shall be in good working order to uniformly apply seed and the calibration of the equipment shall be demonstrated to the superintendent upon request .
calibration num .
no disturbance of seeded areas by equipment and vehicles or by pedestrians and animal traffic shall occur during the operations and the establishment period .
disturbance of seeded areas num .
the contractor shall assess the need for any follow up watering of seeded surfaces and if necessary shall apply water to minimise drying out of the surface and loss of germinating seed .
follow up watering num planting num general num .
the contractor shall carry out the planting operations as specified using accepted industry practices and equipment to achieve the completion criteria as specified in annexure numc .
completion criteria num .
contractor shall ensure that all staff engaged in the planting operations are competent experienced and skilled as required and supervised during the works .
supervision of staff num .
the contractor shall undertake planting where nominated in the drawings using the species and numbers as nominated in annexure numb .
species and numbers num .
the contractor shall supply a list of proposed sources for all the specified plants within num days of the contract award for the superintendents approval .
ordering and purchase num .
the list of proposed sources shall include the name of supplier contact details nursery accreditation details and written warranty from the nursery list of plants to be supplied and date of supply .
num .
the purchase of plants shall not occur until the superintendent approves the list of plant supply .
hold point num .
the contractor shall reinstate at no cost to the principal any other site works disturbed or damaged during the planting works .
damage num .
unless specified otherwise in annexure numb planting operations shall be undertaken as soon as practical following construction activities at the optimum time to match seasonal rainfall in the region and the effectiveness of the weed control .
timing num .
the contractor shall obtain approval from the superintendent in writing prior to commencing any planting works outside this period .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
prior to commencing any operations the contractor shall assess the presence of weed species or feral animals the soil moisture and the risk of surface runoff flows causing damage to any areas to be planted and confirm there are no obstruction obstacle hazard or factor likely to cause delays or failures of the operations .
obstruction num .
the contractor shall notify the superintendent of any necessary works required to minimise the risk of delays or failures of the operations .
num .
not less than num working days prior to commencing any planting operations on site the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that hold point a the nominated areas for planting are correctly defined .
b no obstructions obstacles hazards or factors likely to cause delays or failures of the operations have been identified .
c the soil surfaces are ready for the planting operations .
d adequate soil moisture content is present for planting .
e all staff are competent experienced and skilled in planting operations .
f a program for the planting operations is documented and submitted for approval .
the contractor shall confirm with the superintendent any changes to the operations that may be necessary following approval .
num delivery on site num .
plants shall be delivered to the site and planted immediately after delivery or before the end of the same day unless agreed to in writing by the superintendent delivery num .
the superintendent shall be notified at least num hours before each scheduled delivery of plants to site in order to allow an inspection of the plant material .
num .
plants shall not be damaged or allowed to dry out during transport .
on arrival at the site plants shall be placed in a sheltered position and thoroughly watered from a suitable water supply and not allowed to dry out until required for planting .
transport num .
if an onsite storage area for plants is necessary the contractor shall provide details including location fencing and water of the proposed storage area in writing to the superintendent for approval .
onsite storage num .
any onsite nursery for holding plants prior to planting shall be a vermin proof compound of sufficient size with provision for watering of plants and adequately protected from sun wind storm theft and accidental damage by workers etc .
num .
the contractor shall maintain any plants in an onsite storage area in the hardened condition as supplied by the nursery .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
transplanted trees and other plant material to be replanted within the site shall receive root pruning and or preparation in accordance with accepted industry transplanting practice to ensure delivery on site in good condition and ready for placement .
transplanted stock num .
the superintendent reserves the right to inspect and reject any plants not meeting the requirements of this specification .
root bound containers and plants that do not retain the root mass shall be rejected by the superintendent .
rejected plants shall be replaced by approved stock at no additional cost to the principal .
rejecting plants num preparation of planting areas num .
the contractor shall ensure the accurate marking out of all planting modules grids and edges of planting beds prior to beginning any planting operations in accordance with the drawings .
marking out planting areas num .
the contractor shall confirm that adequate soil moisture is present at a depth of num numcm prior to starting any planting operations .
soil moisture num .
planting areas nominated in the drawings for cultivation shall be improved by the application of topsoil fertiliser soil additives andor soil conditioners to the soil surface as specified and thoroughly mixed by rotor tilling the soil to nummm minimum depth to achieve a loose and friable condition suitable for fine grading and planting .
cultivated planting areas num .
in confined spaces or close to irrigation fixtures the cultivation shall be by hand .
num .
weed control matting and or mulch as specified shall be applied over the cultivated surfaces .
num .
all cultivated planting areas shall be watered thoroughly to a depth of nummm num hours prior to planting .
num .
where only individual planting holes are nominated in the drawings no cultivation shall occur .
individual planting holes num .
only the individual planting hole shall be excavated and topsoil soil conditioner fertiliser and soil additives as specified shall be added with the backfill .
num .
where specified weed control mats and or mulch shall be installed around each plant .
num .
areas nominated for ripline planting shall be ripped to a minimum depth of nummm and mounds formed at the spacing and layout shown in the drawings .
areas for ripline planting num .
unless detailed otherwise in the drawings the planting mounds shall be a minimum nummm in height in wet areas and in dry areas nummm in height .
num setting out of planting num .
the contractor shall set out individual plants within a planting area in accordance with the spacings layout and setbacks shown in the drawings .
setting out planting num .
for plants which have been given location coordinates setting out shall be to a tolerance of or nummm .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
if not specified otherwise individual plants shall typically be setback in accordance with table num below .
planting setbacks table num typical planting setbacks features shrubs or ground covers trees dual use paths .
num metres num metres boundary fence .
num metres num metres painted edge line or kerb .
num metres num metres structures roadside furniture and light standards .
num metres num metres num .
if the placement of transplanted materials or advanced plants is not nominated in the drawings the contractor shall request the superintendent for direction on site prior to setting out and planting .
advanced plants num planting out num .
prior to any planting into weed control matting each individual planting hole shall be prepared by first slitting open and laying back the matting to allow for each planting hole to be excavated and prepared for planting .
planting in weed control matting num .
prior to any planting into mulch each individual planting hole shall be prepared by first moving clear the mulch to allow for each planting hole to be excavated and prepared for planting and space for the excavated soil .
topsoil shall be excavated and stored separately from any underlying material .
any substandard excavated material or excess soil shall be spread evenly around the planting hole or disposed of as specified .
planting in mulch num .
for each planting hole the topsoil shall be excavated and stored separately from any underlying material .
any substandard excavated material or excess soil shall be spread evenly around the planting hole or disposed of as specified .
planting hole num .
if not detailed in the drawings the planting hole shall be excavated vertically to accommodate the root ball of the plant such that the top of the plant root ball finishes below the existing ground surface and creates a watering saucer suitable for the size of the plant .
num .
if necessary the base of the hole shall be broken up to a minimum depth of nummm and the sides of the planting hole loosened .
num .
individual plants shall be removed from containers so as to minimise damage to leaves stem and root ball .
handling of plants num .
the root ball of plants shall not be left exposed or allowed to dry out and planted without delay .
num .
plants shall not be planted into standing water within a plant hole .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
individual plants shall be placed in the centre of the planting hole and set plumb .
the backfill shall be firmed progressively after placing to eliminate air pockets and minimize settlement .
num .
after firming and settlement the top of the root ball shall be covered with soil and sit below the finished lowest level of the surrounding watering saucer shaped during planting .
num the outside lip of the watering saucer shall be approximately three times the diameter of the plant container and capable of holding a sufficient volume of water necessary for any followup watering for the plant container size .
watering saucer num .
when planting on batter slopes a raised horizontal terrace shall be formed as a watering saucer down slope and equal to the diameter of the planting hole .
sloping ground num .
frayed or broken roots of bare rooted plants shall be cut cleanly before planting .
bare roots num .
fertiliser as specified shall be applied to each plant in accordance with good horticultural practice .
unless specified otherwise in annexure numb only a granular low phosphorous slow release fertiliser suitable for native plants shall be used for tube stock plantings .
fertiliser num .
mulch shall be respread so that the mulch tapers down to soil level nummm from the stem of the plant .
mulch num .
plant guards shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
guard stakes and ties num .
where specified individual plants shall be secured by plant ties to stakes .
num .
where specified individual weed control mats shall be placed around each planting hole in accordance with the manufacturers published instructions .
weed control mats num .
unless specified otherwise all plants shall be watered in immediately after planting sufficient to thoroughly saturate the soil to twice the area of the root ball .
watering in num .
the contractor shall protect all plantings from trespass and traffic until the plants are well established .
protective fencing shall be clearly visible to all traffic day and night and not constitute a safety hazard .
protection of plantings num transplanting into place num .
if not specified in the drawings the location of the planting hole for advanced plants shall be confirmed with the superintendent before the excavation .
planting hole num .
each planting hole shall be excavated to a depth and width sufficient to take the rootball plus nummm minimum clearance at the base and sides and to form a watering saucer suitable for the size of the plant .
num .
where specified root control barriers shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
control barriers num .
rock and other unsuitable materials shall be removed from the planting hole and not used as backfill .
backfill main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the planting hole shall be backfilled in nummm lifts with the specified soil mix fertiliser and any specified soil additives and consolidated progressively by saturating with potable water .
num .
if not specified otherwise a special blended soil mix shall be prepared for the plant that conforms to the requirements of as num for organic sandy loam soils .
num .
between backfill lifts the plant hole shall be flooded with sufficient potable water to consolidate the soil and eliminate air pockets .
the watering saucer shall be filled and the root ball thoroughly soaked immediately after planting .
watering num .
if not specified otherwise in the drawings stakes andor guys shall be installed such that the plant is held firmly with its trunk vertical .
cables in contact with the plant trunk shall be covered with rubber hose or similar to avoid damage to the plant tissue .
supporting cables and stakes num .
tree grates frames andor guards shall be installed as shown in the drawings .
grates shall be placed flush with the pavement and guards plumb .
tree grates and frames num planting boxes and containers num .
planter boxes shall be cleaned of any builder rubble cement and or other materials injurious to plant health .
the inside surfaces shall be sealed as specified and in accordance with the sealant manufacturers instructions .
planter boxes num .
if not specified a special blended soil mix shall be prepared for raised planting beds and planter boxes that conform to the requirements of as num for organic sandy loam soils .
the planter box shall be backfilled with the specified soil mix fertiliser and any specified soil additives and consolidated progressively by saturating with potable water .
the soil level shall be topped up to achieve the nominal finished surface level specified in the drawings .
num .
plants shall be placed and planted as specified in the drawings .
num grassing num general num .
grass shall be established by turfing or by establishment from rhizomes runners stolons or sprigs or by direct seeding or hydro seeding as specified using the species variety and quantity specified in annexure numb .
general num .
the contractor shall carry out all grassing operations using horticultural best practice and equipment to achieve the completion criteria nominated in annexure numc .
num .
not less than num working days prior to commencing any grassing operations on site the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that hold point a the nominated areas are correctly defined .
b no obstructions obstacles hazards or factors likely to cause delays or failures of the operations have been identified .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num c the soil surfaces are ready for the grassing operations .
d certificates are provided for each batch .
e details of the procedures materials and equipment to be used are documented .
f a program for the grassing operations is documented and submitted for approval .
the contractor shall confirm with the superintendent any changes to the operations that may be necessary following approval .
num .
grass turf and grass runners shall be kept moist at all times during transport and site storage and shall be laid within num hours of being cut .
delivery on site num .
grassing shall be undertaken as soon as practical following construction activities to match the seasonal rainfall unless nominated otherwise in annexure numb .
timing num .
grassing shall only proceed after the completion of all necessary preliminary works including weed control minor earthworks surface preparation topsoiling and soil improvements and the installation and commission of any specified irrigation systems .
num .
areas to be grassed shall be treated to remove all existing grass and weeds at least num weeks prior to the grassing .
soil preparation num .
nummm of clean topsoil soil additives andor conditioners shall be applied to the surface and thoroughly mixed by rotor tilling the soil to nummm minimum to achieve a loose and friable condition suitable for fine grading and rolling .
num .
the surface to be grassed shall be free from debris and have a grade to allow water to drain with no surface ponding .
surface grading num .
the finish shall be smooth and rolled to obtain an even well consolidated surface with no irregularities depressions hollows or abrupt changes in grades or levels .
num .
all grading shall be undertaken by hand or machine as appropriate however only by hand within nummm of sprinklers or other fixed irrigation fixtures .
num .
num hours before the grassing operation the area to be grassed shall be watered thoroughly to a depth of nummm .
watering num grassing by turf num .
the areas to be turfed shall be prepared and graded to a nominal finished soil level nummm below the adjacent levels .
soil preparation num .
before laying the turf the contractor shall spread fertiliser suitable for turf grass establishment over the surface and lightly rake the fertiliser into the surface while maintaining correct levels .
num .
immediately before laying turf the soil shall be watered to prevent drying out of grass roots .
num .
the turf runs shall be placed in straight line with each subsequent row parallel to and tightly butted against each staggering the lateral joints .
spreading and rolling main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
all joints shall be tightly butted and the turf sods shall not be stretched or overlapped .
num .
turf edges shall finish flush with adjoining surfaces .
num .
after placement the turf shall be diagonally rolled and thoroughly watered to a depth of nummm within two hours of planting .
num grassing by stolons num .
the soil surfaces to be grassed by the use of grass stolons shall be prepared and graded to provide a smooth firm surface true to grade and finished flush with adjoining surfaces .
soil preparation num .
before spreading the stolons the contractor shall spread fertiliser suitable for grass establishment over the surface and lightly rake the fertiliser into the surface while maintaining correct levels .
num .
grass shall be planted at the rate of num square metre of turf shredded and applied as stolons over a maximum area of num square metres of soil unless specified otherwise in the drawings or annexure numb .
grassing rate num .
the stolons shall be spread in two equal directions in transverse directions over the area to be grassed to form an interlocking mat with the spaces between the stolons not exceeding nummm in any direction .
spreading num .
the stolons shall then be rotary hoed into the soil to a depth of between nummm to nummm .
where necessary in confined spaces the stolons shall be spaded in by hand .
num .
after planting the area shall be lightly raked and rolled to produce an even level surface or plane free of wheel marks waves depressions or other irregularities .
rolling num .
all areas shall be thoroughly watered to a depth of nummm within two hours of planting .
watering num grassing by seed num .
grassing of areas from seed by hydroseeding or by dry seeding shall be as specified and using horticultural best practice .
seeding num care and establishment of grassing num .
the contractor shall protect all newly grassed areas from trespass and traffic until the grass is well established .
protective fencing shall be clearly visible to all traffic day and night and not constitute a safety hazard .
protection num .
all grass areas shall be given additional applications of fertiliser in accordance with good horticultural practice during establishment .
fertilising num .
grassed areas shall be watered on a regular basis as required to establish and maintain grass growth in a healthy condition .
watering num .
all grassed areas shall be mowed and edged as necessary to maintain a neat appearance in accordance with good horticultural practice during the vegetation establishment period .
grass shall be maintained within the nominal height range of nummm to nummm .
mowing main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
once established a top dressing of clean sand or topsoil as specified shall be applied to a depth of num mm to take up any slight irregularities in the surface .
top dressing num .
where grass fails to establish the affected areas shall be retreated in accordance with the relevant clauses .
num .
the contractor shall lift all failed turf and relay with new turf .
replacement num watering system num .
the contractor shall provide for a temporary water delivery system by sprinkler water truck with a spray boom or other method to distribute a uniform coverage of water to all areas of vegetation as required during the vegetation establishment period .
temporary water delivery system num .
the contractor shall supply details of the system and water source prior to use at practical completion .
details of water supply num .
the watering system shall be maintained in good working order to avoid leakage loss of water and soil erosion .
water trucks shall not be driven onto the landscaped areas .
num .
if not specified otherwise all areas of the works shall be watered at sufficient frequency and rate to establish and maintain all planting seeding and grassed areas and achieve the required standard specified for acceptance of the works .
the watering shall include any rainfall .
watering rates and frequency num .
watering of seeded and grassed areas shall be applied in a fine spray to minimize disturbance or displacement of materials .
the force of water volume and pressure shall not cause displacement of soil or mulch .
watering for landscaped areas shall not spray onto or flow across or pond on paved areas .
num revegetation signs num .
unless detailed otherwise in the drawings the contractor shall supply and install a main roads guide sign drawing no .
mrgm num roadside revegetation sign in the locations nominated in the drawings or annexure numb and in accordance with specification num signs .
roadside revegetation signs num num not used establishment period num completion of works num .
on completion of the works the contractor shall remove all rubbish and surplus materials accumulated during construction and the site shall be left in a neat and tidy condition .
tidying up main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
prior to the commencement of the establishment period the contractor shall ensure that completion of works a any areas of plantings or grassing by turf shall have been installed for a minimum of num days .
b any areas of grassing by stolons shall have been installed for a minimum of num days .
c as constructed drawings detailing all seeding planting and grassing works are signed by a suitably experienced and qualified person in environmental botanical horticultural andor related fields who is familiar with main roads requirements have been prepared and presented to the superintendent .
d the irrigation system has run on a predefined automatic program for at least num full days prior to completion of works .
e as constructed drawings num copies of the irrigation system signed by an engineer or suitably qualified person have been prepared and presented to the superintendent .
f a complete operating manual num copies and specifications for the irrigation system including a parts list of all operating components description and suppliers plus an electronic copy in ms word format or as advised by the superintendent have been presented to the superintendent .
g a complete construction and installation warranty against faulty materials and workmanship for a minimum of num months from the date of practical completion is presented to the superintendent .
h a vegetation establishment program for the works is documented and submitted to the superintendent for approval .
i a monitoring program for the works is documented and submitted to the superintendent for approval .
num .
the contractor shall give the superintendent at least num days notice that the works are ready to be inspected for completion .
notice for inspection num .
the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that all the revegetation and landscaping works have been completed in accordance with the requirements of the contract and seek approval to commence the establishment period .
hold point num vegetation establishment num .
the contractor shall establish and monitor the condition and development of the works during the establishment period as nominated in annexure numa .
establishment period num .
prior to commencing the establishment period the contractor shall provide to the superintendent a detailed program of all activities including timing to be undertaken by the contractor to establish the vegetation in accordance with this specification .
vegetation establishment program main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the vegetation establishment program shall include at least one weekly inspection of the works and the contractor shall notify the superintendent of any vandalism of the works any faults or defects to irrigation or any other damage within num day of detection .
num .
the contractor shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the irrigation system until the end of the establishment period for the works .
the contractor shall adjust the height of all sprinkler heads valve boxes and any other associated plant and equipment as directed by the superintendent during the irrigation warranty period .
num .
the designated activities to establish the works shall include but not be limited to designated establishment activities a progressive weed control .
b mowing of grassed areas .
c maintenance of irrigation systems .
d repair and replace any erosion rills in soil surfaces .
e repairs and replacement of damaged or failed areas of seeding or hydromulching or hydroseeding .
f replacement of plants that have failed .
g repairs and replacement of damaged or failed areas of grassing .
h watering of all seeding grassing and plantings as necessary .
i maintenance of tree stakes tree ties and grates .
num .
water shall be applied to all plants as often and in sufficient amount as conditions may require to keep the plants in a healthy and growing condition until the end of the vegetation establishment period .
num .
failed or damaged plants or plants that do not meet the acceptance criteria shall be removed and replaced during the establishment period to the original plant specifications .
the superintendent may determine this requires an extension of the vegetation establishment period at the contractors expense .
replacement num monitoring program num .
the contractor shall undertake monitoring and reporting on the condition and development of the works during the establishment period as nominated in annexure numa .
monitoring and reporting num .
prior to commencing the establishment period the contractor shall provide to the superintendent a detailed program of all the monitoring and reporting activities including timing to be undertaken by the contractor .
monitoring program num .
each monitoring report shall monitoring reports a outline the works undertaken during the reporting period .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num b compare development of revegetation and landscaping with the relevant outcomebased completion criteria annexure numc .
c identify any follow up remedial works to be undertaken .
d set out a program for the remedial works .
num .
two copies of each report shall be supplied to the superintendent within num days of the end of the reporting period .
num .
the final monitoring report at the end of the vegetation establishment period shall be included in the handover report submitted at final completion .
final monitoring report num num not used as built and handover requirements num handover requirements num .
the contractor shall be responsible for preparing reproducible as constructed drawings of the works in accordance with main roads design and drawing presentation standards .
as constructed drawings num .
as constructed drawings shall be completed detailing all seeding planting and grassing works signed by a suitably experienced and qualified person in environmental botanical horticultural and or related fields who is familiar with main roads requirements .
num .
as constructed drawings shall be completed detailing the irrigation system showing as constructed details specifications and site measured locations of all main components from a permanent fixed structure .
num .
the contractor shall provide training in the setup and operation function and programming procedures of the irrigation system to nominated representatives of the principal before the end of the establishment period .
training in the irrigation system num .
the handover report shall include handover report a the final monitoring report .
b record the location and details of any equipment such as irrigation installed as part of the landscaping and revegetation works .
c record any outstanding defects for correction and the proposed timing .
d detail the recommended ongoing maintenance activities for the contract area .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num final completion num .
the contractor shall give the superintendent at least num days notice that the works are ready to be inspected at the end of the establishment period .
num .
acceptance of the works by the superintendent at the end of the nominated vegetation establishment period shall be subject to final completion a satisfactory preparation and submission of monitoring reports .
b satisfactory preparation and submission of as constructed drawings c satisfactory completion of all additional maintenance and remedial works as directed by the superintendent .
d the landscaping and revegetation works meeting the completion criteria as detailed in annexure numc for final completion .
num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numa specific requirements complete the blank template schedules to match the specific requirements of the contract and delete this note numa.num .
list of contract drawings drawing number drawing name numa.num .
the establishment period shall be numa.num .
the defects liability period for the irrigation system shall be numa.num .
monitoring shall occur during the establishment period and after completion of the works at monitoring requirements numa.num .
the completion criteria for this project are nominated in annexure numc .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numb material requirements complete the blank template schedules to match the specific requirements of the contract and delete this note numb.num .
planting list plant species mix species size number by mix total bnum bnum bnum c cnum cnum tnum tnum sub totals totals numb.num .
seeding mixes species seed mix type pretreatment a anum anum d dnum s total quantity of seed grams numb.num .
seed provenance requirements species provenance requirements numb.num .
transplanting requirements main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num location storage notes numb.num .
grassing requirements type details grass turf grass stolons grass seed numb.num .
hydromulch and hydroseed mix ingredient material rate per ha cellulose fibre mulch tacifierbinder water fertiliser seed numb.num .
mulch requirements type location depth mm main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num numb.num .
surface preparation and soil improvements location details numb.num .
erosion control requirements location details numb.num .
timing of works item optimum time period notes seeding planting grassing transplanting hydromulching main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num numb.num .
weed control requirements the contractor shall identify all weed species within the contract area and prepare a weed control program .
weed species and locations include but are not limited to the listing below .
weed species timing of control control measures locations of designated weeds nominated for removal are summarised as coordinates weed species treatment details north east numb.num .
revegetation signs item number notes main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numc completion criteria complete the blank template schedules to match the specific requirements of the contract and delete this note numc.num .
advanced plantings criterion twelve weeks after completion after one autumn at final completion plants surviving plants meeting acceptance criteria weed free zone radius around base of each plant .
healthy foliage cover of weeds within each nominated planting zone .
numc.num .
plantings irrigated criterion twelve weeks after completion after one autumn at final completion plant surviving .
surviving plants meeting acceptance criteria weed free zone radius around base of each plant healthy foliage cover of weeds within each nominated planting zone .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num numc.num .
plantings not irrigated criterion twelve weeks after completion after one autumn at final completion plants surviving within each representative plot .
species richness of the species planted still present within each nominated planting zone .
nominated key species of the species planted still present within each nominated planting zone .
surviving plants meeting acceptance criteria weed free zone radius around base of each plant .
healthy foliage cover of weeds within each nominated planting zone .
foliage cover or demonstrated progress towards this level by monitoring reports two or more randomly selected representative plots m x m or equal area per nominated planting zone within the project area .
nominated planting zones are as shown in the drawings .
acceptance criteria for plants shall be a plants are well formed and exhibit signs of healthy growth b plants are free of disease symptoms eg yellowing wilting etc c plants are free from signs of insect pests numc.num .
irrigation acceptance criteria for irrigation shall be full compliance with the specifications for product and material and construction requirements .
numc.num .
hydromulching and hydroseeding acceptance criteria shall be full compliance with the specifications for product and material and construction requirements .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num numc.num .
erosion control criterion twelve weeks after practical completion after one autumn at final completion maximum number of active rills num mm in depth within each nominated zone .
acceptance criteria shall be full compliance with the specifications for product and material and construction requirements .
numc.num .
weed control criterion twelve weeks after practical completion after one autumn at final completion healthy foliage cover of nominated weeds within each representative plot .
compliance with acceptance criteria two or more randomly selected representative plots m x m or equal area per nominated zone within the project area .
nominated plantingseeding and grassing zones are as shown in the drawings .
acceptance criteria for weed control shall be a the approved weed control program is implemented as required .
b treated areas display signs of dying off within num days of application .
numc.num .
grassing irrigated criterion twelve weeks after practical completion after one autumn at final completion grass cover within each representative plot .
compliance with acceptance criteria main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num numc.num .
grassing not irrigated criterion twelve weeks after practical completion after one autumn at final completion grass cover within each representative plot .
compliance with acceptance criteria two or more randomly selected representative plots .. m x .. m or equal area per nominated zone within the project area .
nominated grassing zones are as shown in the drawings .
acceptance criteria for grass shall be a grass is well formed and exhibits signs of healthy growth b grass is free of disease symptoms e.g .
yellowing wilting etc .
c grass is free from signs of insect pests numc.num .
direct seeding of plants criterion twelve weeks after practical completion end of second spring at final completio n mean number of stems excluding weed species mnum within each representative plot .
number of species within each representative plot .
species richness of species sown within each nominated seeding zone .
presence of nominated key species in within each nominated seeding zone .
bare soil areas excluding weed species nummnum within each representative plot .
foliage cover or demonstrated progress towards this level by monitoring reports two or more randomly selected representative plots .. m x .. m or equal area per nominated seeding zone within the project area .
nominated seeding zone are as shown in the drawings .
acceptance criteria for individual seedlings from direct seeding shall be a plants are well formed and exhibits signs of healthy growth main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num b plants are free of disease symptoms e.g .
yellowing wilting etc .
c plants are free from signs of insect pests numc.num .
regeneration from bushland topsoil criterion twelve weeks after completion end of second spring at final completion mean number of stems excluding weed species mnum within each representative plot .
number of species within each representative plot .
species richness of species sown within each nominated seeding zone .
presence of nominated key species in within each nominated seeding zone .
bare soil areas excluding weed species nummnum within each representative plot .
foliage cover or demonstrated progress towards this level by monitoring reports two or more randomly selected representative plots .. m x .. m or equal area per nominated zone within the project area .
nominated zones are as shown in the drawings .
acceptance criteria for individual seedlings by regeneration from topsoil shall be a plants are well formed and exhibits signs of healthy growth b plants are free of disease symptoms e.g .
yellowing wilting etc .
c plants are free from signs of insect pests main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num guidance notes delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference all edits to downloaded tdp documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
deletions shall be struck through e.g .
example .
insertions shall be in italics e.g .
example .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted then the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
the custodian of this specification is the landscape architect .
num .
general contract specifications shall only be prepared by individuals with experience in road revegetation and landscaping and suitably qualified for this work and shall be based on an approved final design .
specifications shall not duplicate the design drawings and shall contain the specific requirements and contract arrangements for the works .
revegetation and landscaping works may be managed as a separable portion of a roadwork andor bridgework construction contract or as a standalone minor works contract .
num standard works contract where revegetationlandscaping works form part of a roadwork andor bridgework construction contract suitable specifications and drawings shall be prepared for incorporation into the main contract .
ensure the tender documentation includes any appropriate crossreferencing of specifications e.g .
clearing and earthworks requirements .
ensure that a vegetation establishment period is nominated in the special conditions of contract to supplement the defects liability period in the conditions of contract .
num standalone minor works contract for revegetationlandscaping where revegetationlandscaping occurs as a standalone minor works contract ensure that a vegetation establishment period is nominated in the special conditions of contract to replace the defects liability period in the conditions of contract or to supplement the defects liability period if the works include hard landscaping items or irrigation .
also remember to include the issue of a certificate of practical completion and the issue of a final certificate of completion refer to the main roads environmental guideline revegetation planning and techniques document no .
num for guidance on the planning and implementation of revegetation works .
for revegetation and landscaping works with an expected cost numm the project manager must forward the preliminary revegetation planning and design documentation to the manager environment branch for review .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num advice and support can be obtained from the manager environment branch .
num .
scope of works the revegetation of disturbed soil areas is carried out for environmental and visual amenity to meet the objectives and commitments defined in the environmental management plan for the project .
project requirements for revegetationlandscaping will vary significantly .
the works may include mass planting and seeding temporary hydromulching to protect an exposed batter surface irrigated planting and grassing or be limited to respreading topsoil and mulch .
constraints may apply on plant species selection seed collection and propagation .
soil testing may be necessary in some locations .
delete specification clauses not relevant to the project .
annexure num a this sets out the specific contract requirements for the works .
refer to section num of the specification guidance notes for examples of a completed annexure .
list of contract drawings the number and content of the drawings will vary according to the scale and complexity of the works e.g site vegetation clearing .
site topsoil management .
planting plan and or seeding plan .
special details or treatments e.g .
irrigation .
insert a listing of the final design drawings title and drawing reference number .
establishment period once the initial seeding and planting works have been completed the new vegetation must also be allowed to establish and grow .
the revegetation works may also only be partially successful in the first year .
it is essential to allow for a vegetation establishment period with adequate financial incentives to ensure that follow up works replacement or infill are identified and will occur in subsequent years .
a minimum vegetation establishment period of at least two summers num months following the completion of the works is recommended prior to a handover of the revegetation works for ongoing routine roadside maintenance activities .
contract arrangements must be defined as part of the project planning to cover the establishment of the new vegetation and any remedial works that may become necessary .
the contract may be limited to the initial construction works only or include the vegetation establishment period .
ensure that a vegetation establishment period is nominated in the special conditions of contract to replace or to supplement the defects liability period in the conditions of contract .
insert the nominated vegetation establishment period for the works main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num defects liability period the works may include built components with a defined defects liability period e.g .
irrigation system .
insert the nominated defects liability period .
monitoring monitoring reports provide important feedback on the effectiveness and success in achieving the contract completion criteria as listed in annexure numc .
the recommended sequence and timing for monitoring is listed in annexure numa .
the timing allows assessment and planning for infill and replacement planting in the following years .
a handover report at the completion of the works is essential to ensure a smooth transition into the roadside maintenance cycle .
it provides a concise record of the works and a sound basis for defining ongoing maintenance requirements and any followup works by the asset manager after handover .
insert the nominated timing for the monitoring reports .
insert the reference to annexure numc for completion criteria .
refer to section num of the specification guidance notes for an example of a completed annexure numc annexure num b use schedules to summarise the specific quantities and other contract requirements for the works based on the design drawings and specifications .
amend the template schedules to match the scope of the works .
in small projects the listing of plant and seed species are documented on the design drawings .
for complex and large projects separate schedules are prepared for the plant and seed mix supply and crossreferenced on the drawings .
insert the relevant schedules for the works .
annexure num c this sets out the completion criteria for the works .
complete the details for each of the completion criteria provided in the template tables to match the specific site and contract requirements .
the project manager must ensure that completion criteria are determined for the works in the project planning and design process .
the generic process for setting completion criteria is outlined in the main roads environmental guideline revegetation planning and techniques document no .
num .
completion criteria and the nominated requirements are customised to specific zones within the project area e.g .
batters drainage basins medians roadside verge or planting seeding or grassing areas and are based on the design drawings .
key steps are set the management objective by defined zones within the project area .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num set the target to be achieved for each zone based on the condition of existing vegetation adjacent to the site or project commitments .
nominate the completion criteria for each zone .
a zone is an area of varying size but with uniform characteristics .
in any given project zones can be separated by treatments received e.g .
planting seeding grassing soil types slope angle position in the landscape watershedding or wateraccumulating or a maximum size e.g .
up to num mnum .
the number of representative plots and the plot size i.e .
two representative plots numm x numm or equal area or of the zone area per nominated zone within the project area are defined during the design process and are based on the design drawings .
the layout of the representative plots must reflect the shape of the area and the type of vegetation .
plot and size should relate to the overall area ha of the project site e.g .
say num if sitenumha and num if numha .
the expected mean number of plant stems will vary by project area and according to seeding rate and the species used .
the sample figures provided in section num for annexure numc are nominal for urban or agricultural regions .
the figures nominated for a project must be estimated to match the plant and seed list and the density of vegetation cover that naturally occurs in the project area .
in arid areas where rainfall variability is high the spacing between individual plants will tend to be greater with more areas of bare soil than occurs in the agricultural regions with regular seasonal rainfall and low rainfall variability .
note that the requirement for the each zone varies for each stage during the vegetation establishment period .
amend the template tables provided to match the specific site and contract requirements .
insert the relevant completion criteria for the works .
num .
timing of works the timing of the works is fundamental to its effectiveness .
revegetationlandscaping should occur at the optimal time for the region when the soil moisture content is conducive to seed germination and establishment and as soon as practical after soil preparation .
generally this is limited to match the seasonal rains otherwise watering must be allowed for .
it is important that the superintendent ensure the soil moisture content is conducive to seed germination and establishment before allowing seeding operations to start .
timing of the work including the ordering and acquisition of materials is dependent on seasonal conditions and the progress of road construction works .
project timetables often mean that a delay occurs between the end of road works and the optimal time to start the revegetationlandscaping works .
where a delay is necessary the hold over period must be planned and budgeted for prior to finalising the contract .
tasks like weed control stabilisation of batters plant and seed supply may be necessary during the hold over period .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num the general sequence of works is weed control soil preparation plantingseedinggrassing and vegetation establishment prior to handover for ongoing maintenance .
advice and support can be obtained from the manager environment branch .
the optimal time for the works should be specified in the annexure numb .
num .
control and surveillance of the works the surveillance and control of the contract works is essential to achieve the design objectives and value for money .
the recommended schedule of hold points and identified records are provided below .
quality control of materials and checking at key points during the works is critical to ensuring that the basics are done right the first time to achieve the project objectives .
the recommended hold points are listed below .
the recommended hold points are listed below .
refer to the clause numbers and apply as required in the contract .
check that the clause numbers are still valid .
clause hold point num trenching for irrigation system num testing of irrigation system num commencement of hydromulching and hydroseeding num commencement of direct seeding num plant supply num commencement of planting num commencement of grassing num completion of works the recommended identified records are listed below .
refer to the clause numbers and apply as required in the contract checklists for surveillance of the works should be prepared to schedule and track the works on a regular basis .
check that the clause numbers are still valid .
clause identified record num soil conditioner certified test report num imported topsoil certified test report num imported mulch certified test report num seed collection licences num seed quality certificate num seed purity testing report num seed viability testing report num plant nursery supply warranty num grass turf stolons and seed supply warranty num contractors certification for irrigation system num contractors certification for hydromulching and hydroseeding num contractors certification for direct seeding num list of plant supply num contractors certification for planting num contractors certification for grassing main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num details of temporary watering system num irrigation system warranty and documentation num vegetation establishment program num monitoring reports num as constructed drawings num handover report num .
preparation of soil surfaces revegetation and landscaping may follow on from new road works or be undertaken within an established roadside or borrow pit .
the management of the existing site vegetation and topsoil and weed control activities during clearing and earthworks can facilitate or make revegetation more difficult .
where revegetation follows on from new road works it is critical to ensure that the specifications for clearing num and earthworks num are coordinated with and complement the revegetation and landscaping num specifications .
where revegetation occurs within an established roadside the soil preparation and weed control occurs in response to the site conditions and reflected in the design drawings and specifications .
num .
watering revegetation is like growing agricultural crops and subject to the local weather conditions .
wherever practical watering in the first growing season to complement the rainfall should be used to promote the establishment of vegetation .
the superintendent should confirm the water source quality potable if available and watering system proposed by the contractor .
there are four general types of irrigation for possible use in revegetation works .
sprinkler systems relatively costly need to be designed and good water supply .
drip or trickle system less cost temporary permanent above or below ground watering hose limited and not very efficient .
watering form a water truck limited access and use .
the selection of watering system is dependant on availability of suitable water and size of area to be treated .
if area is nummnum then a drip or sprinkler system may be more efficient .
regional advice should be sought on the most appropriate watering system for the project size and location .
num .
steep batter slopes project manager must ensure that the design of batters is suitable for the proposed revegetation measures .
key locations for attention are steep batter slopes where subsoil rock and groundwater may cause instability of topsoil and vegetation .
additional work in finishing of batters may be required to facilitate revegetationlandscaping works .
the risk of erosion is directly proportional to the length of time a disturbed soil area is exposed without vegetation cover or other surface protection .
consideration shall be given to the need for batter protection and weed control during any interim period until the main revegetation work can be undertaken .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num the installation of temporary and or permanent control measures e.g .
erosion control matting hydro mulching may be required to control site surface runoff or wind erosion and minimise disturbance to areas of revegetation .
steep and long slopes increase surface runoff and downslope transport of surface soil .
surface roughening and benching of bare soil by creating furrows across slopes terracing or by surface roughing tracking the soil surface reduces erosion potential by decreasing runoff velocities trapping sediment and increasing infiltration of water into the soil and will facilitate effective mulching seeding and planting .
on accessible slopes mulch shall be anchored or tracked with suitable equipment to anchor the mulch into the soil .
on slopes that are inaccessible a suitable binding agent shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers instructions to anchor the mulch .
if nominated for use as a binding agent bitumen emulsion shall be applied at a controlled rate nominal num to num litres per square metre of surface to match the soil moisture and site requirements .
if available brush rough cut site vegetation may be laid along the slope to provide a uniform cover thatch over the soil surface .
the brush shall be secured by mulch control netting wire strands running across the slope and secured to regular fixed stakes or equal method to prevent the brush from blowing away .
num .
planting and seeding it is important to allow leadtime for securing plants and any collection of seed or plant propagation .
at least one year is recommended before the required works are due to begin .
the propagation of plants and seed collection may be contracted out separately from the revegetation and landscaping works .
the pretreatment of seeds is necessary to improve germination and to assist to break dormancy .
the requirements for pretreatment should be nominated in annexure numb .
if not nominated the contractor shall be required to treat all species of seed with pre treatment as per best horticultural practices .
in addition to smoke water hard seeded species shall be treated by scarification or hot water treatment .
a seeding rate should be specified within the design documentation .
in the absence of this information a default value of num kgha can be used .
hydromulch unless specified otherwise in annexure numb the hydromulch shall consist of water cellulose fibre mulch tacifier e.g .
gluonnum applied at numltr to numltr ha polygonnum a powder applied at numkgha or equal and other materials paper mache or bulking agent as necessary to suit the size and location of the site area the slope and soil and local weather conditions .
unless specified otherwise in annexure numb the hydromulch shall be applied at a nominal rate of numlitresha .
rates can vary from up to num litresha in response to project site conditions .
soil conditions means that the application may involve several passes e.g .
on clay soils on sand batters .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num the critical measure is the depth applied .
the number of applications may vary due to the conditions .
num .
weed control include any weed control requirements as part of annexure numb .
the control or removal of unwanted vegetation weed species is critical to ensure that planting and seeding operations are effective .
while eradication of all weed species may not be possible the objective is to control and reduce weed populations and to prevent their spread within the road reserve .
to make best use of available resources a listing of the weed species that pose the greatest risk should be identified and the weed control initiatives to target these priority species .
a weed control program must be developed for the contract area and implemented by the contractor .
nominated weed species should not be limited to the species identified in the design process .
the recommended approach is to require the contractor to identify all weed species within the contract area and to prepare a weed control program and submit this to the superintendent for approval prior to undertaking any works .
num .
pesticides and herbicides the term pesticide as defined by the department of health doh includes herbicides fungicides and all other specific forms of pest control agents .
herbicides are used to control or remove the growth of unwanted vegetation .
also refer to the draft main roads environmental guideline on water protection .
approval to apply pesticides on road verges in proclaimed areas must be obtained from the doe .
in water catchment areas managed by the water corporation mixing or spraying of pesticide must not occur within numm of other water courses where water is flowing .
within numm of any visible natural or artificial pool or storage .
if rain is falling or is likely to occur within four hours following application .
when herbicides are to be used in water catchment areas the doe or water corporation should be advised at least num weeks before the spraying programme .
details supplied should include location type of herbicide rate of application and date when work is planned .
advice on appropriate herbicide use within the project area selective and or non selective residual timing etc .
should be sought from specialist in the area .
a weed control plan should be prepared for the project area .
residual herbicides are generally not recommended for use within the road reserve .
a sample general list of herbicides that may be nominated for a specific project is provided below a glyphosate biactive at manufacturers recommended rate non selective .
b lontrel for broadleaf weeds at manufacturers recommended rate .
c verdict or fusilade for narrow leaf grasses at manufacturers recommended rate .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
blend areas the zone between all proposed and existing landscaping treatments shall be blended both visually and functionally .
blended areas are undertaken to reinstate an existing landscaping damaged by the road works extend the existing landscaping treatment into an adjoining area altered by the road works modify an existing landscaping treatment to integrate with the proposed landscaping .
where blend areas overlap private property the nominal extent is num metres beyond the cadastral boundary or num metres beyond the limit of any road works which have extended into the property .
this work shall only proceed with the approval of the landowner .
this work shall be undertaken at the contract rates submitted by the contractor .
the scope may be hard to define .
a provisional sum should be allowed to cover any additional costs or extra treatments .
num .
contract specific requirements the project manager andor designer must nominate the specific contract requirements for the establishment period and defects liability period and monitoring .
recommendations only are noted below .
adjust the various annexures to match project requirements and add any contract specific clauses as required commencing with clause num .
the establishment period shall be num months .
the defects liability period for the irrigation system shall be .num months .
monitoring shall occur during the establishment period and after completion of works at num months end of first spring num months end of first autumn num months end of second spring num months end of second autumn num months end of third spring the completion criteria for this project are nominated in annexure numc completion criteria the project manager and or designer must nominate the specific contract requirements for the completion criteria .
recommendations are noted below assuming a standalone minor works contract for revegetation and landscaping .
most projects will only include some of the following .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num advanced plantings criterion twelve weeks after practical completion after one autumn at final completion plants surviving num num num plants meeting acceptance criteria num num num weed free zone radius around base of each plant .
num metre num metre num metre healthy foliage cover of weeds within each nominated planting zone .
num num num plantings irrigated criterion twelve weeks after practical completion after one autumn at final completion plant surviving .
num num num surviving plants meeting acceptance criteria num num num weed free zone radius around base of each plant num metre num metre nummetre healthy foliage cover of weeds within each nominated planting zone .
num num num plantings not irrigated criterion twelve weeks after practical completion after one autumn at final completion plants surviving within each representative plot .
num num num species richness of the species planted still present within each nominated planting zone .
num num num nominated key species of the species planted still present within each nominated planting zone .
num num num surviving plants meeting acceptance criteria num num num weed free zone radius around base of each plant .
num metre num metre num metre healthy foliage cover of weeds within each nominated planting zone .
num num num foliage cover or demonstrated progress towards this level by monitoring reports num two or more randomly selected representative plot numm x numm or equal area per nominated planting zone within the project area .
nominated planting zones are as shown in the drawings .
acceptance criteria for plants shall be .
plants are well formed and exhibit signs of healthy growth .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num plants are free of disease symptoms e.g .
yellowing wilting etc .
plants are free from signs of insect pests .
irrigation acceptance criteria for irrigation shall be full compliance with the specifications for product and material and construction requirements .
hydromulching and hydroseeding acceptance criteria shall be full compliance with the specifications for product and material and construction requirements .
erosion control criterion twelve weeks after practical completion after one autumn at final completion maximum number of active rills num mm in depth within each nominated zone .
num num num acceptance criteria shall be full compliance with the specifications for product and material and construction requirements .
weed control criterion twelve weeks after practical completion after one autumn at final completion healthy foliage cover of nominated weeds within each representative plot .
num num num compliance with acceptance criteria num num num two or more randomly selected representative plots numm x numm or equal area per nominated zone within the project area .
nominated plantingseeding and grassing zones are as shown in the drawings .
acceptance criteria for weed control shall be the approved weed control program is implemented as required .
treated areas display signs of dying off within num days of application .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num grassing irrigated criterion twelve weeks after practical completion after one autumn at final completion grass cover within each representative plot .
num num num compliance with acceptance criteria num num num grassing not irrigated criterion twelve weeks after practical completion after one autumn at final completion grass cover within each representative plot .
num num num compliance with acceptance criteria num num num two or more randomly selected representative plots numm x numm or equal area per nominated zone within the project area .
nominated grassing zones are as shown in the drawings .
acceptance criteria for grass shall be grass is well formed and exhibits signs of healthy growth .
grass is free of disease symptoms e.g .
yellowing wilting etc .
grass is free from signs of insect pests .
direct seeding criterion twelve weeks after practical completion end of second spring at final completio n mean number of stems excluding weed species mnum within each representative plot .
num num num number of species within each representative plot .
num num species richness of species sown within each nominated seeding zone .
num num presence of nominated key species in within each nominated seeding zone .
num num bare soil areas excluding weed species nummnum within each representative plot .
num num num foliage cover or demonstrated progress towards this level by monitoring reports num two or more randomly selected representative plots numm x numm or equal area per nominated seeding zone within the project area .
nominated seeding zone are as shown in the drawings .
acceptance criteria for individual seedlings from direct seeding shall be .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num plants are well formed and exhibit signs of healthy growth .
plants are free of disease symptoms e.g .
yellowing wilting etc .
plants are free from signs of insect pests .
regeneration from bushland topsoil criterion twelve weeks after practical completion end of second spring at final completio n mean number of stems excluding weed species mnum within each representative plot .
num num num number of species within each representative plot .
num num species richness of species sown within each nominated seeding zone .
num num presence of nominated key species in within each nominated seeding zone .
num num bare soil areas excluding weed species nummnum within each representative plot .
num num foliage cover or demonstrated progress towards this level by monitoring reports num two or more randomly selected representative plots numm x numm or equal area per nominated zone within the project area .
nominated zones are as shown in the drawings .
acceptance criteria for individual seedlings by regeneration from topsoil shall be .
plants are well formed and exhibit signs of healthy growth .
plants are free of disease symptoms e.g .
yellowing wilting etc .
plants are free from signs of insect pests .
num .
hard landscaping clause num suggested clauses for hard landscaping are given below .
insert relevant clauses and include a hold point where necessary .
add specification numbers and titles to the list of main roads specifications under references .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contract specific requirements to add or delete the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
some projects may include special items as per examples below .
the contractor shall undertake any necessary preparation or reinstatement works at the locations identified in the drawings to allow for the placement and or to accommodate public artwork items or similar elements .
some projects may include the retention of existing large trees in cut or fill .
advice on the appropriate treatment is necessary and requirements should be checked for accuracy with the landscape architect .
include a suitable payment items and note a hold point during earthworks .
garden edging may be extruded concrete kerbing insitu concrete kerbs formed and precast kerbs paving units timber plastic or as specified otherwise in the drawings .
colour durability strip footings expansion joints fixings and other details shall be as specified .
where appropriate transplanting of certain desirable vegetation e.g .
grass trees can be used to preserve a scarce or attractive native plant type local to the area .
lifting and temporary storage of the target species is carried out prior to the main clearing operations and transplanting to final location can be made part of specification num revegetation and landscaping .
requirements for other species would be similar but should be checked for accuracy with the landscape architect .
include suitable payment items and note the hold point for temporary storage .
num lifting storage of grass trees num .
existing grass trees within the road reserve that would be destroyed during clearing operations shall be retained where possible by lifting and temporarily storing before final transplanting into the landscaped areas .
num .
the contractor shall lift store and maintain a sufficient number of grass trees xanthorrhoea existing on site to provide the transplanting requirement before the commencement of any clearing operations .
num .
the contractor shall select the required number of grass trees plus an additional quantity to allow for replacements during the defects liability period .
the grass trees shall be selected on the basis of using the healthiest mature specimens that the contractor considers are most suitable for transplanting .
selection num .
a storage site or sites of sufficient size cleanliness and security shall be confirmed with the superintendent prior to the grass trees being removed .
storage main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the selected storage sites shall be suitably prepared to receive grass trees lifted from their original locations .
site preparation shall include removal of weeds and other undesirable material levelling as required and general preparation of ground ready to receive the grass trees .
num .
prior to lifting trim of all dead and mature foliage ensuring that the shoot and new leaves are retained undamaged .
num .
use suitable equipment to remove each plant with minimum disturbance to the aboveground growth and with sufficient undisturbed surrounding soil attached to the fibrous root system to ensure the plant will survive .
removal num .
replant immediately into a suitably sized prepared hole in the storage area .
settle the plant into the prepared hole so that it sits at the same level relative to the ground surface as it was originally .
backfill as necessary with clean natural soil in nummm lifts flooding with water between lifts to consolidate the soil around the rootball and to eliminate air pockets .
storage num .
form a watering saucer a minimum of nummm high around the trunk with a radius approximately nummm greater than the trunk radius .
thoroughly soak the root ball and surrounding soil and keep continuously moist until ready to transplant into final position .
under watering should not occur .
watering to the individual grass trees shall be maintained for two full summers seasons after transplanting .
watering num .
the individual grass trees shall be transplanted to their final locations in the works in accordance with the clause transplanting into place .
transplanting num .
the individual grass trees shall be shall be maintained for two full summer seasons after transplanting in accordance with good horticultural practices .
maintenance num .
evidence of foliage growth is required to demonstrate that successful transplanting has occurred after two full summer seasons .
performance criteria num plant and equipment num .
the contractor shall supply all plant labour and equipment etc .
required to achieve the works of this contract including safety equipment and signage .
num .
all plant and equipment shall be suitable for the requirements of this contract and shall be maintained in a safe and sound working condition at all times during the contract .
num .
the contractor shall remove from the work site any plant or equipment considered by the superintendent to be unsuitable for carrying out the work specified .
main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num hard landscaping num .
bollards to be used in the works shall be in accordance with specification num grab rails bollards .
bollards num .
unless detailed otherwise in the drawings rock pitching to be used in the works shall be in accordance with specification num rock protection .
rock pitching num .
unless detailed otherwise in the drawings segmental paving to be used in the works shall be in accordance with specification num segmental paving .
segmental paving num .
concrete surfacing to be used in the works shall be in accordance with specification num concrete general works .
concrete surfaces num .
unless detailed otherwise in the drawings materials to be used for screen walls in the works shall be in accordance with specification num noise walls .
screen walls main roads western australia specification num revegetation landscaping page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification amendment checklist specification name no num revision no ______title revegetation landscaping project manager name _____________signature ______________date________ checked by name _ _______________signature ______________date________ contract no ______contract description __________________________________ item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked change mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materialsproductsclauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from mcp .
num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection testing parameters included in spec num test methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date _______________ specification num surface drains and levees copyright main roads western australia specification num surface drains and levees num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num whole document complete revision of issue sre num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num surface drains and levees num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num concrete num num rock protection num num proprietary products num num num not used num construction num num general num num table drains including type e num num table drain blocks and drop structures num num offshoot drains type a num num side drains type b num num catch drains type g num num spoon drains num num culvert drains type f num num levees num num drainage basins num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num specification num surface drains and levees num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num surface drains and levees general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the construction of all types of surface drains levees and drainage basins .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia specifications and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num steel reinforcing materials main roads specifications specification num clearing specification num earthworks specification num culverts specification num rock protection specification num concretegeneral works num num not used products and materials num concrete num .
concrete shall be supplied and placed as specified in specification num concrete general works .
num .
reinforcing steel shall conform to the relevant requirements of as num steel reinforcing materials .
the cleaning binding fixing and tying of all reinforcement shall be completed as specified in specification num concrete general works .
steel fabric num rock protection num .
stone pitching and rock protection and any associated materials such as mortar shall be supplied and placed as specified in specification num rock protection .
specification num surface drains and levees num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num proprietary products num .
proprietary products shall only be used where specified on the drawings or where approved by the superintendent .
num .
if used proprietary products shall be used only in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
num num not used construction num general num .
the location of the various types of surface drains levees and drainage basins shall be as shown on the drawings .
locations num .
clearing shall conform to the requirements of specifications num clearing .
topsoil removal shall comply with topsoil removal clauses of specification num earthworks .
clearing num .
drains shall be excavated to provide an even grade with no obstructions or hollows which would impede the flow of water .
drain gradient num .
drains levees and drainage basins shall be constructed to conform to the crosssections and levels as shown in the drawings and shall be neatly finished to a standard obtainable with blade grader operations .
standard num .
batter slopes shall comply with the finishing of batters and ground surfaces clause of specification num earthworks .
batter slope num .
material excavated from drains and drainage basins which conforms to the requirements for embankment material as specified in specification num earthworks may be utilised to construct levees or as fill material more than nummm below the subgrade surface .
excavated material num table drains including type e num .
table drains shall be constructed during excavation works as detailed in specification num earthworks and to the profiles and levels as shown on the drawings .
shape num .
batter slopes at culvert and bridge sites shall be smoothly transitioned over a length of numm to match culvert wingwall or abutment wall slopes .
batter slopes num .
the invert of the table drain shall be within nummm vertically and num mm laterally of the position shown in the drawings .
tolerances num .
where indicated on the drawings shall be lined with rock protection as specified in specification num rock protection placed to the dimensions shape and extent as shown on the drawings rock protection num .
where specified on the drawings rock protection shall be mortared in place as specified in specification num rock protection .
mortar specification num surface drains and levees num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num table drain blocks and drop structures num num general num .
table drain blocks and drop structures shall conform to the location cross section and levels as shown in the drawings .
table drain blocks and drop structures shall be installed level and within nummm vertically and nummm laterally and longitudinally of the position shown on the drawings .
tolerances num .
where indicated on the drawings table drain blocks shall be lined with rock protection as specified in specification num rock protection placed to the dimensions shape and extent as shown on the drawings .
rock protection num .
where specified on the drawings rock protection shall be mortared in place as specified in specification num rock protection .
mortar num table drain blocks using natural materials num .
suitable material excavated from earthworks operations or drains or from borrow pits may be utilised to construct table drain blocks .
material source num .
compaction of table drain blocks shall be as specified for embankment construction in specification num earthworks .
compaction num table drain drop structures num .
table drain drop structures shall be constructed to the requirements of clause num .
concrete num offshoot drains type a num .
offshoot drains and diversion drains shall be constructed as shown on the drawings or as required to direct water away from table drains or other works .
num side drains type b num .
side drains shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of specification num earthworks and as shown on the drawings .
num catch drains type g num .
catch drains shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of specification num earthworks and as shown on the drawings .
num spoon drains num .
spoon drains shall be constructed as and where shown on the drawings .
locations num .
the base of the excavation for spoon drains shall first be shaped and compacted as specified for embankment foundation in specification num earthworks .
shaping compaction num .
spoon drains shall be rock protected as specified in specification num rock protection .
rock protection specification num surface drains and levees num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
rock protection work shall be mortared in place as specified in specification num rock protection .
mortar num culvert drains type f num .
culvert inlet and outlet drains shall be constructed as shown on the drawings and shall be neatly finished to a standard obtainable with blade grader operations .
num levees num .
levees shall be constructed as shown on the drawings construction num .
suitable material excavated from drains or material from borrow pits which conforms to the requirements for embankment material as specified in specification num earthworks may be utilised to construct levees .
material source num .
the parallel levees associated with side drains diversion drains catch drains and other levees shall be neatly trimmed to conform to the shape and levels shown on the drawings .
type a b g num .
all levees including parallel levees associated with diversion drains and side drains shall be constructed and tested as specified for embankment construction in specification num earthworks except that three tests per lot shall be carried out .
compaction num .
levees shall be installed within nummm vertically and nummm laterally and longitudinally of the position shown on the drawings .
tolerances num .
rock protection to levees shall be constructed as shown on the drawings in accordance with the requirements of specification num rock protection .
rock lining num drainage basins num .
retention basins compensating basins sumps and similar drainage features shall be excavated and formed to the dimensions slopes and levels shown on the drawings in accordance with specification num earthworks .
excavation num .
suitable material from excavations for drainage basins shall be incorporated into the works .
unsuitable material shall be disposed of to the contractors spoil sites .
suitability num .
associated culverts balance pipes and culvert headwalls and similar features shall be constructed in accordance with specification num culverts .
associated num .
levees associated with drainage basins shall be constructed in accordance with section num .
standard num num not used as built and handover requirements specification num surface drains and levees num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num surface drains and levees num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is senior road engineer rural .
num .
topsoil operations refer to clause num below num .
this specification has been developed on the basis of no respreading of topsoil in drains in order to discourage vegetation regrowth .
on some projects it may be desirable to respread topsoil and the author should include clause num if this activity is required .
num .
landscaping for drainage basins refer to clause num below num .
any specialised landscaping treatment required in association with the construction of drainage basins drainage sumps etc .
should be included with suitable references made to specification num revegation and landscaping .
num .
such work may include the placing of specialised materials such as silts and clays for the retention of water to promote vegetation and fauna species planting and other features .
reference should always be made to the environment branch for assistance in this area .
specification num surface drains and levees num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num topsoiling in drains num .
topsoil shall be spread in table drains to the extent shown in the drawings .
num .
topsoil spreading shall comprise the respreading of suitable topsoil stockpiled from topsoil removal operations or the spreading of imported topsoil or a combination from both sources as provided for in specification num earthworks .
source of topsoil num landscaping for drainage basins num .
drainage basins and similar drainage features shall be landscaped to the extent shown on the drawings .
num .
landscaping shall be in accordance with the requirements of specification num revegation and landscaping .
plus other text as required note add specification num revegation and landscaping to references at clause num .
specification num surface drains and levees num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title surface drains and levees revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num subsoil drains copyright main roads western australia specification num subsoil drains num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document num reformatted hold point added sco gsme num num use of powder coating instead of metallic paint recommended gsme num whole document complete review of specification gsme num num australian standards and publications amended num table num amended num not used as num geosynthetics gsme num table num notes num geotextile installation stresses num grade of subsoil drainage whole document complete review of specification .
clauses num num amended .
guidance notes added gsme num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num subsoil drains num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num geotextile num num filter aggregate num num drainage layer num num slotted pipe num num flushout points num num num not used num construction num num general num num trench excavation num num drain lining num num bedding num num installation of slotted pipe num num filter aggregate and backfill material num num filter aggregate and backfill material num num filter aggregate and backfill material num num not used num num marker posts num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num specification num subsoil drains num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num subsoil drains general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and installation of subsoil drainage .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below acts and regulations worksafe wa occupational safety and health regulations num australian standards as num pvcu pipes and fittings for stormwater and surface water applications as num part num perforated drainage pipe and associated fittings as num geosynthetics glossary of terms as num geotextiles identification marking and general data as num geotextiles methods of test general requirements sampling conditioning basic physical properties and statistical analysis as num geotextiles methods of test determination of burst strength california bearing ratio cbr plunger method as num geotextiles methods of test determination of puncture resistance drop cone method as num geotextiles methods of test determination of pore size distribution drysieving method as num geotextiles methods of test determination of permittivity permeability and flow rate as num geotextiles methods of test determination of durability resistance to degradation by light heat and moisture other standards and publications austroads guide to pavement technology part numg geotextiles and geogrids specification num subsoil drains num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name main roads test methods wa num particle size distribution sieving and decantation method wa num particle size distribution of aggregate main roads specifications specification num earthworks specification num concrete general works num num not used products and materials num geotextile num .
the geotextile lining shall be a nonwoven fabric consisting of long chain synthetic polymer fibres composed of at least num by mass of polyester or polyolefins polypropylene polyethylene bonded by needle punching heat or chemical bonding processes or combinations thereof .
bonded fibres must be capable of retaining their relative position in the geotextile .
the polymer fibres shall be rot proof chemically stable and have low water absorbency .
geotextile fibres num .
the geotextile shall have a high ultraviolet resistance such that when tested in accordance with as num shall have retained strength of at least num after num hours of test exposure .
the geotextile shall be free of any flaws or defects that may adversely affect the mechanical or physical properties of the fabric .
uv resistance num .
each roll of geotextile shall be provided with a suitable covering to protect the fabric against moisture and ultraviolet radiation and marked in conformance with as num .
supply num .
prior to installation the geotextile rolls shall be stored on site under a protective cover and supported off the ground .
the contractor shall take appropriate measures to protect the geotextile from damage .
this includes adhering to any other recommendations on method of storage set by the suppliermanufacturer .
storage num .
the geotextile shall comply with the mechanical and hydraulic requirements shown in tables num and num below .
properties table num mechanical properties property subsoil drains test method minimum geotextile strength rating g as defined in austroads part numg geotextiles and geogrids num asnum asnum specification num subsoil drains num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name notes i geotextile strength rating g l . hnum geotextile survivability refers to the ability of the geotextile to withstand the installation stresses during construction .
ii l in newtons is the characteristic value of burst strength cbr plunger method for the batch tested determined in accordance with as num as num. hnum in mm is the characteristic value of puncture resistance drop cone method for the batch tested determined in accordance with as num as num .
the characteristic values of l and hnum shall be calculated as the mean value less num standard deviation. . table num mechanical properties property subsoil drains test method maximum equivalent opening size eos m num asnum minimum qnum lms num asnum notes i maximum equivalent opening size eos and minimum qnum are mean values ii eos particle diameter for which num of particles would be retained iii qnum flow rate under nummm constant head determined using the perpendicular flow test num .
the contractor shall certify that the geotextile delivered to site meet the specification requirements .
sampling conditioning and statistical analysis of results for each batch of geotextile shall be carried out in accordance with as num .
sampling frequency shall be in accordance with appendix a of as num .
the conformance testing shall include determining the mean weight mass per unit area of the geotextile in accordance with as num .
sampling and testing num .
prior to the use of the geotextile for drainage lining the contractor shall submit to the superintendent product certificates of compliance from the supplier showing that the geotextile complies with all the requirements of this specification .
test results shall be reported on nata endorsed documents .
hold point num filter aggregate num .
filter aggregate for use in backfilling trenches shall consist of hard durable clean gravel or crushed rock and shall be free from organic material clay or other deleterious substances .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings the aggregate shall have the particle size distribution psd as shown in table num as determined by wa num aggregate specification num subsoil drains num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num crushed aggregate nominal num mm as sieve size mm passing by mass num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
prior to the use of the aggregate material for filter aggregate the contractor shall provide certification to the superintendent that the aggregate conforms to the specified requirements .
test results shall be reported on nata endorsed documents .
hold point num drainage layer num .
any required drainage layer over the aggregate backfill shall be a free draining cohesionless material free of clays organic matter and any other deleterious substances and shall conform with the requirements shown in table num as determined by wa num drainage layer table num drainage layer as sieve size mm passing by mass num num num num num num num num num num slotted pipe num .
drainage pipes and associated fittings and jointing procedures shall comply with the following requirements a as num perforated drainage pipe and associated fittings b as num pvc pipes pvc pipe specification num subsoil drains num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
unless otherwise noted on the drawings slotted pipe shall be nominal nummm outside diameter class num type num pvc pipe with num elbows as required .
num flushout points num .
the subsoil drain flushout point shall have a concrete cover of class nnum concrete fitted with a removable cap .
concrete shall be supplied in accordance with specification num concrete general works .
flushout points num num not used construction num general num .
subsoil drains shall be constructed to the locations crosssectional shapes and dimensions as shown on the drawings .
a typical cross section is shown at figure num to illustrate various components of the subsoil drain .
extent figure num typical cross section of subsoil drain num trench excavation num .
the trench for the installation of the subsoil drain shall be excavated to the width and depth shown on the drawings .
the excavation shall have vertical sides throughout where the excavation is up to numm deep .
the bottom of the trench shall be not more than nummm below the specified level of the invert of the pipe .
excess trench excavation shall be made good by filling back to grade and lightly compacting with material of permeability similar to that of the surrounding material .
numm deep num .
where the excavation is greater than numm deep the trench shall be excavated in accordance with the relevant requirements of occupational safety and health regulations num .
any loose or disturbed material shall be removed from the walls of the trench .
numm deep num .
unsuitable material from excavations shall be disposed of in accordance with specification num earthworks .
unsuitable material filter aggregate geotextile slotted pipe trench width trench height bedding backfill specification num subsoil drains num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
trench excavations in rock shall be carried out in accordance with specification num earthworks .
rock num .
trenches should be graded to have reasonably smooth side and bottom faces so that the geotextile lining will not bridge cavities or be damaged by protrudingsharp objects .
cavities should be filled with granular material before placement of geotextile .
the minimum grade of subsoil drainage must be num .
shape num .
prior to the placement of geotextile as detailed in clause num the contractor shall provide certification to the superintendent that the trench excavation conforms to the trench shape grade line filling and light compaction for over excavated section and removal of any protrudingsharp objects .
hold point num drain lining num .
the contractor shall take every reasonable care to ensure that the geotextile is not damaged during installation and backfilling operations .
care num .
geotextile shall be placed in the excavated trench to cover the bottom and sides of the trench with sufficient free fabric to wrap around the completed drain as shown on the drawings .
the geotextile should conform to the shape of the trench with minimal wrinkles folds or air voids between fabric and trench but not stretched on the soil .
placement num .
unless otherwise specified on the drawings the minimum overlap in longitudinal direction along the trench shall be nummm .
successive sheets of geotextile within the trench shall be overlapped with the upstream fabric overlying the downstream fabric .
overlap num .
damaged areas of geotextile may be repaired by overlaying the damaged section with a patch .
the patch shall extend a minimum of num m beyond the area of damage .
repair num. with drainage backfill layer shall not exceed num days .
where possible and practical geotextiles shall be placed just ahead of associated advancing construction work and covered by relevant construction materials or suitable protective sheeting within num hours of being placed .
exposure num .
any fabric allowed to remain exposed to sunlight for a period greater than num days shall be removed and replaced at no cost to the principal .
prolonged exposure num bedding num .
filter aggregate bedding in accordance with clause num shall be placed on the geotextile to the depth indicated on the drawings and tamped level .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings the depth of the bedding shall be nummm .
num installation of slotted pipe num .
slotted pipe shall be installed as shown on the drawings and shall be placed centrally within the trench on the crushed aggregate bedding .
placement specification num subsoil drains num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
any required joints in slotted pipe shall be made in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
joints num .
flushout points shall be constructed at the locations shown on the drawings complete with concrete covers as described in clause num .
flushout points num filter aggregate and backfill material num .
filter aggregate shall be placed over the slotted pipe to the depth shown on the drawings and tamped to a level profile .
to avoid postconstruction settlement the filter aggregate material shall be compacted to its full depth to achieve effective mechanical interlock between particles .
the geotextile shall be wrapped over the top of the aggregate layer with sufficient overlap lesser of trench width or nummm .
aggregate backfill num .
where shown on the drawings any required drainage backfill layer shall be placed on top of the geotextile wrapped aggregate and shall be filled to the subgrade surface .
this layer shall be compacted as for embankment construction in accordance with specification num earthworks .
backfill num .
prior to backfilling the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that compliance has been achieved with all specified requirements .
hold point num filter aggregate and backfill material num .
after completion of backfilling subsoils drains shall be flushed in the presence of the superintendent with sufficient clean water until only clean water discharges at the outlet .
num filter aggregate and backfill material num .
where a subsoil drain is provided for the drainage of the pavement layer outlets are to be provided as shown on the drawings .
subsoil drains shall discharge into gully pits and other stormwater drainage structures or outlets approved by the superintendent .
num not used num marker posts num .
the contractor shall supply and erect marker posts at all drain inlets and outlets .
they shall be galvanised steel box sections be capped and have the following dimensions nummm in width nummm in depth and nummm in height .
they shall be driven into the ground leaving nummm above the ground level .
the top nummm of the posts shall be painted with white powder coating on all faces .
the powder coated width facing the road shall be marked s s drain .
the letters shall be in black paint and of the following dimensions height nummm and width nummm .
num num not used specification num subsoil drains num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is geomechanical and structural materials engineer .
num .
clause num and num the project manager shall ensure that any concrete covers clause num and inspection structures clause num are fully detailed on the drawings .
specification num subsoil drains num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num subsoil drains num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title subsoil drains revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num culverts copyright main roads western australia specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num annexure numa numb table numanum numbnum and reference to asnzs num amended sre num num missing horizontal vertical tolerances introduced sre num clause num discontinuation of the use of polypropylene pipes sre num whole document reference to as num amended sre num references changed ws spnum to atic spnum throughout document sre num references added asnzs num and ws spnum sre num num type gp cement numb.num numc.num major amendments for compliance for cement used and registration requirements numb.num reference to ws spnum annexure numd added concrete request for registration form whole document major amendments relate to approach for small box culverts installed in aggressive ground environment .
new plastic culverts added .
multiple minor amendments made throughout document sre num numc.num numc.num change minimum clear cover description .
cmpm num specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num products and materials num num reinforced concrete pipes num num corrugated metal pipes num num reinforced concrete boxes num num reinforcement and insitu concrete num num cement stabilised backfill num num select bedding material num num joint sealant num num num not used num installation num num general num num trench excavation num num blasting num num protection of foundation surfaces num num bedding num num damage num num backfill and compaction num num pavement reinstatement num num traffic num num culverts num num existing culverts num num damage to existing structures num num pegging of culverts num num trench excavation for culverts num num end treatments num num formwork num num outlet drains num num rock protection num num drainage structures num num stormwater drains num num num not used num specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name asbuilt and handover requirements num num asbuilt information num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num construction requirements num annexure numb num precast reinforced concrete pipes num general num numb.num scope num numb.num terminology and standards num products and materials num numb.num precast units num numb.num reinforcement and concrete num numb.num joint materials num manufacture handling and storage num numb.num cover to reinforcement num inspection and testing num numb.num routine testing num numb.num defects num numb.num nonconformance num annexure numc num precast reinforced concrete box culverts num general num numc.num scope num numc.num terminology and standards num products and materials num numc.num precast units num numc.num formwork num numc.num reinforcement and concrete num manufacture handling and storage num numc.num concrete num numc.num reinforcement and cover num numc.num casting methods num specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name numc.num handling of precast units num numc.num delivery and storage num inspection and testing num numc.num minimum testing frequency num numc.num defects num annexure numd num cementitious materials for concrete num request for registration by manufacturer num specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num culverts general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and installation of reinforced concrete pipes rcps and reinforced concrete boxes rcbs culverts corrugated steel pipe csp and corrugated aluminium pipes cap culverts reinforced concrete end treatments for culverts and the supply and installation of rcp stormwater drains .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num methods of testing concrete as num methods of testing concrete part num methods for the determination of properties related to the consistency of concrete as num methods of testing soils for engineering purposes soil strength and consolidation tests determination of the penetration resistance of a soil perth sand penetrometer test as num specification and supply of concrete as num steel sheet and strip hot dipped zinc coated or aluminiumzinc coated as num chemical admixtures for concrete mortar and grout as num pre cast reinforced concrete box culverts as num elastomeric seals for waterworks purposes as num helical lockseam corrugated steel pipes as num helical lockseam corrugated steel pipes design and installation as num aggregates and rock for engineering purposes part num concrete aggregates as num supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement fly ash as num concrete structures as num formwork for concrete as num portland and blended cements specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name as num bridge design concrete australiannew zealand standards asnzs num buried corrugated metal structures asnzs num methods of testing portland and blended cements asnzs num buried flexible pipelines structural design asnzs num buried flexible pipelines installation asnzs num supplementary cementitious material for use with portland and blended cement amorphous silica asnzs num design for installation of buried concrete pipes asnzs num paints for steel structures organic zincrich primer asnzs num precast concrete pipes pressure and non pressure asnzs num polyethylene pe pipes for pressure applications asnzs num steel reinforcing materials asnzs num polyethylene and polypropylene pipes and fittings for drainage and sewerage applications other standards aashto mnum astm bnum corrugated aluminium pipe for sewers and drains aashto mnum astm bnum aluminium alloy sheet for corrugated aluminium pipe aashto mnum astm anum steel sheet metalliccoated and polymer precoated for corrugated steel pipe astm cnum standard test methods for chemical analysis of hydraulic cement report trnum cement and concrete association of new zealand appendix c atic spnum cementitious materials for concrete main roads test methods wa num particle size distribution abbreviated method for coarse soils wa num dry densitymoisture content relationship modified compaction fine and medium grained soils wa num dry densitymoisture content relationship modified compaction course grained soils wa num chlorides and total soluble salts in soil and water main roads specifications specification num quality systems specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num environment specification num earthworks specification num surface drains and levees specification num drainage structures specification num rock protection specification num low strength infill specification num pavements specification num bituminous surfacing specification num asphalt surfacing specification num falsework specification num concrete for structures specification num formwork specification num steel reinforcement specification num concrete general works num definitions num .
where this specification refers to reinforced concrete box culverts they also include reinforced concrete link slabs .
link slabs num .
culvert end treatments shall include endwalls or headwalls wingwalls cut off walls and aprons .
end treatments num .
stormwater drains consist of reinforced concrete pipes connecting drainage structures such as inlets manholes and catchpits as shown on the drawings .
stormwater drains num .
unless otherwise stated clauses within this specification that reference rcp culverts are also applicable to rcps installed to carry stormwater from drainage structures .
rcp stormwater drains num .
where this specification refers to aggressive ground conditions as defined in annexure numa it includes environmental conditions where additional protective measures to culverts are required in accordance with table numanum .
aggressive ground conditions num .
culway installations refer to culverts associated with traffic monitoring equipment .
culway num num not used products and materials num reinforced concrete pipes num .
concrete pipes for culverts shall be precast reinforced concrete pipes rcps to the classes shown on the drawings .
rcps specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
concrete pipes shall be manufactured tested and inspected in accordance with the requirements of annexure numb .
manufacture num .
concrete pipe shall be manufactured to suit the insitu ground conditions as specified in annexure numa table numanum in accordance with the requirements of table numanum .
num .
joint types shall be as specified in annexure numa .
joint types num .
rubber ring joints shall be provided for all spigot and socket pipes unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
rubber ring joints num .
rubber ring gaskets required for jointing spigot and socket concrete pipes shall conform to the requirements of as num .
rubber ring gaskets num corrugated metal pipes num general num .
corrugated metal pipes with diameter greater than nummm or individual units that are to be joined to form a single barrel shall be supplied with a unique identifying number for post installation shape measurement and reassembly purposes where applicable .
num .
corrugated metal pipes with diameter greater than nummm shall be supplied with indelible markings defining the internal diameter vertically through the obvert and invert and horizontally at intervals as specified in specification num quality systems .
the manufacturer shall provide internal measurements taken at each set of indelible markings to an accuracy of nummm cross referenced to the unique identifying number detailed in this clause .
num .
corrugated metal pipe shall be manufactured to suit the insitu ground conditions as specified in annexure numa table numanum in accordance with the requirements of table numanum num corrugated steel pipes num .
corrugated steel pipe culverts shall be supplied to the corrugation size and steel thickness in accordance with this clause .
csps num .
the corrugated steel pipes shall be a spirally wound type .
spirally wound corrugated steel pipes shall conform to as num .
num .
num .
the steel thickness shall be nummm for nummm diameter nummm for nummm to nummm diameter and nummm for nummm to nummm diameter .
steel thickness num .
the corrugations shall be nummm x nummm for up to and including nummm diameter and nummm x nummm for nummm to nummm diameter .
corrugation num .
all pipes shall be manufactured from grade num steel plate to as num .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
all corrugated steel pipes cut during the manufacturing process for bevel or skew installations shall have their cut surfaces treated in accordance with clause num damage .
cut surfaces num corrugated aluminium pipes num .
corrugated aluminium pipe shall be fabricated from alclad numhnum in accordance with aashto mnum .
raw material coil width shall be nummm or greater to maximise lock seam spacing .
cap base material num .
manufacture shall be in accordance with aashto mnum to the tolerances shown in as num and shall incorporate a staked double offset lockseam joint .
manufacture num .
the structural design procedure shall be in accordance with as num modified to suit the aluminium section properties of alclad numhnum with regard to metal strengths and flexibility which are as follows design a. modulus of elasticity e num num mpa b .
yield stress num mpa c. flexibility factor num mmn num .
the aluminium thickness shall be nummm for up to and including nummm diameter nummm for nummm to nummm diameter and nummm for nummm to nummm diameter .
aluminium thickness num .
the corrugations shall be nummm x nummm for up to and including nummm diameter and nummm x nummm for nummm to nummm diameter .
corrugation num .
dissimilar metals shall not be permitted to be in direct contact with aluminium pipe .
dissimilar metals num reinforced concrete boxes num .
reinforced concrete box culvert units with spans up to and equal to num mm shall be manufactured tested and inspected in accordance with annexure numc and as num .
rcbs spans nummm num .
reinforced concrete box culvert units with spans of num mm and greater shall be manufactured tested and inspected in accordance with annexure numc and as num .
rcbs spans nummm num .
reinforced concrete box culvert units shall be manufactured to suit the in situ conditions as specified in annexure numa table numanum in accordance with the requirements of table numanum .
num .
joint sealant for masking external joints shall be a nummm wide joint sealant complying with this specification .
joint sealant specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num reinforcement insitu concrete num reinforcement num .
reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of specification num steel reinforcement .
num insitu concrete num .
the supply of insitu concrete for base slabs and end treatments shall conform to requirements of annexure numa table numanum .
num .
the supply and placement of all n class concrete shall be in accordance with specification num concrete general works .
n class concrete num .
the supply and placement of all s class concrete shall be in accordance with specification num concrete for structures .
s class concrete num cement stabilised backfill num .
cement stabilised backfill material shall consist of basecourse material or other suitable material approved by the superintendent stabilised in the proportion of numkg of type gp cement to one cubic metre of uncompacted backfill material .
mix proportions num .
water for cement stabilisation shall be clean and potable .
water num select bedding material num .
select bedding material shall be basecourse material or other suitable material approved by the superintendent containing less than num by mass of material retained on the nummm sieve as determined by mrwa test method wa num .
num joint sealant num .
acceptable joint sealant for masking external joints are flash tac scotch wrap no.num and rock wrap num or a suitable equivalent approved by the superintendent .
num num not used installation num general num .
the installation of pipes and box culverts shall include all trench excavations construction and backfill to the details shown on the drawings and as described in this specification .
num trench excavation num .
trenches shall be excavated to the width shown in the drawings with vertical sides throughout where the excavation is up to numm deep .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
where the excavation is greater than numm deep the trench shall be excavated in accordance with the requirements of the drawings .
any loose or disturbed material shall be removed from the walls of the trench .
trench numm deep num .
all spoil material from excavations including excavations for end treatments and rock protection shall be disposed of as specified in specification num earthworks .
spoil material num .
excavations shall be kept free from water until work below ground level is sufficiently set or protected .
dewatering operations shall be undertaken in accordance with specification num environment and water discharged from trenches shall in no circumstances be disposed of to sanitary sewers .
dewatering num .
trench excavations in rock including excavation for end treatments shall be carried out in accordance with specification num earthworks .
rock num blasting num .
any requirement for blasting shall be carried out in accordance with specification num earthworks .
blasting num protection of foundation surfaces num .
the exposed surface at the bottom of the excavation shall be adequately protected from disturbance by the contractors operations or by the action of storm water or ground water .
where required dewatering shall be undertaken in accordance with the requirements of specification num environment .
any disturbance shall be reinstated to the requirements of clause num bedding by the contractor at no cost to the principal .
exposed surface num bedding culverts shall be bedded as detailed on the drawings .
num .
num .
excavation for culverts bedding and end treatments shall be undertaken to the extent shown on the drawings .
extent of excavation num .
unless shown otherwise on the drawings the culverts and end treatments shall be bedded on the insitu foundation material that has been compacted to the requirements specified for embankment foundation in specification num earthworks with a frequency of testing in accordance with specification num quality systems .
num .
select bedding material shall be constructed to the dimensions shown in the drawings .
select bedding material shall be compacted to the characteristic dry density ratio specified for embankment construction in specification num earthworks with a frequency of testing in accordance with specification num quality systems .
select bedding material num .
provisions shall be made to accommodate pipe socketconnections to ensure pipes are fully supported along the barrels .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num damage num .
precast concrete pipes and box culvert units shall be handled and installed in such a manner that no nonconforming cracking or other nonconforming defect occurs that is outside acceptable limits given in annexure numb and numc as applicable .
damaged pipe and box culverts shall be assessed and repaired or replaced in accordance with annexure numb or numc as applicable at no cost to the principal .
damaged concrete units num .
corrugated steel pipe culvert units shall be handled and installed in such a manner as to prevent damage to the zinc coating .
areas on culvert units where zinc coating has been damaged shall be cleaned of rust and painted with two coats of zincrich organic priming paint complying with asnzs num .
where other coatings such as polymer precoats are used then damage to those coats shall be repaired in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
such surface repairs shall be undertaken at no cost to the principal .
where damage occurs other than to the surface coating then the damaged units shall be replaced at no cost to the principal .
damaged csps num .
corrugated aluminium pipe culvert units shall be handled and installed with care to prevent damage to the pipe wall and seamed joints .
damaged pipe units shall be replaced at no cost to the principal .
damaged aluminium pipes num backfill and compaction num general num .
prior to backfilling the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that compliance has been achieved with all specified requirements .
hold point num .
the backfill requirements for all culverts shall be as detailed in the drawings .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings backfill material other than cement stabilised backfill shall be embankment material placed and compacted to the requirements specified for embankment construction in specification num earthworks with a frequency of testing in accordance with specification num quality systems .
backfill levels on each side of any conduit shall not differ by more than nummm .
the contractor shall ensure that the backfill placement does not damage the end treatments .
backfill num .
the dimensional requirements relating to backfill shall be as shown on the drawings .
extent num .
all sheeting struts braces and similar temporary supports shall be entirely removed from the trench prior to backfilling .
removal shall be effected in such a way so as not to disturb or displace the culvert .
removal of bracing num .
appropriate precautions such as the use of holdingdown straps shall be taken to ensure that corrugated metal pipe culvert barrels do not float during the backfilling process particularly during vibration of the backfill .
metal culvert float precautions specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall ensure that the equipment used during compaction of backfill does not damage the culvert .
limitations on the type of compaction equipment and cover to be provided to the top of the culvert shall be determined in accordance with asnzs num for reinforced concrete pipes as num for reinforced box culverts or as num for corrugated steel pipes .
compaction equipment num .
no backfill shall be placed behind insitu wingwalls or headwalls within seven days of concrete being placed in the wingwalls or headwalls .
concrete strength num cement stabilised backfill num .
cement stabilised backfill material to culverts shall be as specified in clause num cement stabilised backfill and shall be placed to the limits and dimensions as shown on the drawings .
material num .
only sufficient water shall be mixed with the stabilised material to facilitate compaction .
water num .
cement stabilised backfill material shall be placed within num minutes of mixing the cement with water .
the stabilised backfill shall be compacted during placement using pneumatic or mechanical rotary type immersion vibrators .
the cement stabilised material shall be vibrated until all excess water and air are expelled .
placing num .
during placing of cement stabilised backfill the backfill levels on each side of any conduit shall not differ by more than nummm .
backfill placement shall not damage the culverts or end treatments .
placement num .
immersion vibrators shall be of the rotary out of balance type with a frequency of not less than num num cycles per minute .
before the commencement of each backfill sufficient vibrators and spares shall be available and tested .
the number of vibrators required for a given rate of placing cement stabilised material shall be as specified in table num and shall be continuously used during the process .
vibrators table num number of vibrators rate of placing cement stabilised material mnum per hour working vibrators required standby vibrators required up to num num num num to num num num num pavement reinstatement num .
where a culvert is constructed under an existing road pavement the pavement on the existing road shall be reinstated by the construction of the appropriate pavement layers with thicknesses as shown on the drawings .
reinstatement specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the edges of the excavation shall be saw cut straight and parallel to the line of the culvert or stormwater drain and the excavation backfilled to the requirements of clauses num general and num backfill and compaction respectively .
the pavement layers shall be constructed to the relevant requirements of specification num pavements .
edges pavement num .
bituminous surfacing and asphalt shall be applied in accordance with the requirements of specification num bituminous surfacing and specification num asphalt surfacing respectively with the top surface finished level with the surrounding existing sealed surface .
surfacing num .
a waterproof seal shall be provided between the new and the old surfaces .
waterproof seal num traffic num .
the contractor shall repair or replace any culvert damaged by construction backfill or public traffic in accordance with the requirements of clause num damage at no cost to the principal .
damage num .
construction traffic with greater than legal wheel or axle loading as defined by the road traffic vehicle standards regulations num shall not be permitted to travel over culverts .
num culverts num general num .
batter slopes at culverts shall be evenly transitioned over a length of numm from the edge of the wingwall to match culvert wingwall slopes .
num .
all culverts shall be constructed to the correct alignment and cross sectional shape and shall conform to dimensions levels and other details specified or shown in the drawings .
alignment num .
inlet and outlet invert levels shall be as shown in the drawings plus or minus nummm .
inverts shall be smooth and of uniform gradient throughout each culvert length .
invert levels tolerance num .
any culvert which is not true to line level or grade or shows settlement after laying or which is damaged during backfilling compaction or subsequent operations shall be removed by the contractor and replaced at no cost to the principal .
misalignment or damage num .
on completion of installation no diameter measured across the indelible markings on metal culverts shall differ from the supplied preinstalled dimension by more than num percent .
testing frequency shall be in accordance with specification num quality systems .
metal culvert diameter tolerances num .
where shown on the drawings metal culverts shall be anchored to an in situ concrete collar .
metal culverts anchorage num .
all culverts shall be flushed clean from end to end on completion of the installation and maintained in proper working order for the duration of the contract .
flushing specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
culverts shall be laid with the connections kept clean and shall be laid with the inverts true to the lines and levels shown on the drawings and to the following tolerances a. horizontal alignment nummm nummm b. vertical level nummm nummm num .
the contractor shall seal the ends of the culverts with a temporary plug to exclude water sand or other deleterious materials caused from work under the contract unless otherwise approved by the superintendent .
num concrete pipe culverts num .
pipe laying shall proceed upgrade with the pipe sockets at the higher end of the pipes .
num .
rubber ring joints shall be lubricated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
pipe handling shall be carefully controlled to avoid disturbing the rubber ring and to ensure that it is free from dirt and other foreign materials .
any rubber ring so disturbed shall be removed cleaned and relubricated before refitting .
rubber rings num .
care shall be taken to properly align the pipe before the joint is forced home .
during the jointing operation the pipe shall be partially supported in a suitable manner to minimise unequal lateral pressure on the rubber ring and to maintain concentricity until the rubber ring is properly seated .
jointing num .
flush jointed concrete pipes shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations with the rubber jointing bands and pipe joints being kept free from dirt and foreign materials .
flush joints num .
the installation and jointing recommendations provided by the pipe manufacturer shall be followed at all times .
sufficient pressure shall be applied in making the joint to ensure proper seating and sufficient restraint shall be applied to ensure that the line does not creep until backfill material can be placed and thoroughly compacted around the pipe .
at the end of the work day the last pipe shall be blocked in an effective manner to prevent creep .
manufacturers recommendations num concrete box culverts num .
unless otherwise detailed in the specification or drawings installation of all precast reinforced concrete boxes shall comply with the requirements of as num section num installation .
concrete boxes num .
all box culverts shall be installed on a cast insitu concrete base slab .
pre cast concrete bases shall not be used .
insitu base slabs num .
reinforced concrete box culvert units including link slab units shall be placed in position on a mortar bed in accordance with the drawings .
unless specified otherwise on the drawings cement mortar is to be num num water cement ratio by mass and num num sand cement ratio by mass .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
cement stabilised backfill shall not be placed until the cement mortar used to seal culvert crown units and link slabs has cured for num hours .
hold point num .
the base slab construction for box culverts shall comply with the following requirements base slab a. dimensions shall be within nummm of those shown on the drawings .
surface irregularities shall be less than nummm abrupt and nummm over a num metre straight edge .
tolerances b .
no construction equipment or public traffic is permitted to travel or work on or over the concrete base slab within seven days of the placement of concrete in the base slabs .
traffic use c. the contractor shall not operate any plant directly on the concrete base slabs without prior approval from the superintendent .
plant use d. reinforced concrete box culvert units shall not be placed on concrete base slabs within num hours of completing the concrete base slabs .
num .
box culverts with a span of nummm or greater shall have shear keys as shown on the drawings and constructed in accordance with this specification .
shear keys num .
where link slabs are installed they shall be seated on continuous cement mortar pads as shown on the drawings .
all surplus mortar shall be removed from the installation before the mortar hardens .
the space between link slabs shall be backfilled in accordance with the drawings .
link slabs num corrugated steel pipe culverts num .
installation of helical lockseam corrugated steel pipes shall comply with the requirements of this specification the drawings and as num .
helical lockseam corrugated steel pipes num .
where corrugated steel pipes are to be cut insitu to suit end treatments the cut surfaces shall be treated in accordance with clause num damage for damaged corrugated steel pipe .
num corrugated aluminium pipe culverts num .
installation of corrugated aluminium pipes shall comply with the requirements of this specification the drawings and as num .
aluminium pipes num existing culverts num removal backfill num .
where detailed on the drawings existing culverts shall be removed and if deemed suitable for reuse by the superintendent can be used for sidetracks .
when the sidetrack is no longer in use or if there is no sidetrack removed culverts shall be stored or disposed of by the contractor to the contractors disposal site or an authorised waste disposal site or a site approved by the local government authority .
redundant culverts specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
where damage to the concrete that exposes the reinforcement or any cracking which exceeds nummm wide occurs then those damaged culvert units shall be disposed of by the contractor to the contractors disposal site or an authorised waste disposal site or a site approved by the local government authority .
minor chipping of the concrete may be repaired by the contractor using an approved epoxy mortar and the culverts will be considered to be undamaged .
damaged fittings num .
if the removed culvert is not being replaced the void remaining shall be filled and compacted with embankment material .
backfilling num .
the embankment material shall be placed and compacted to the requirements for embankment construction in specification num earthworks with a frequency of testing in accordance with specification num quality systems .
num low strength infill num .
where indicated on the drawings redundant existing culverts and associated drainage structures located under roadways which are to be retained in their existing location shall be entirely filled insitu in accordance with specification num low strength infill .
the open ends of any remaining pipe runs and apertures left in remaining drainage structures shall be permanently sealed off to exclude water sand or other material .
low strength infill num culvert extensions num .
construction of culvert extensions to existing culverts shall be in accordance with the relevant construction requirements for new culverts except that extension of a culvert shall normally be completed before associated earthworks at the same location .
culvert extensions num .
trench excavation for the culvert extension shall be carried out as required .
where the invert level of the culvert extension is lower than the existing ground level the insitu material shall be excavated to the width shown on the drawings for new culverts .
num .
existing culvert endwalls shall be broken out as required and the old endwall material removed to spoil areas .
care shall be taken not to damage retained culvert conduit .
num .
unless shown otherwise on the drawings the existing culvert barrel shall be excavated back to a minimum of nummm from the end of the culvert .
prior to backfilling the joint between the existing and the new conduit shall be masked with a suitable joint sealant in accordance with clause num joint sealant .
num .
the gradient of the culvert extension shall match the gradient of the retained portion of the existing culvert or where required the extension shall be laid to a specified invert level .
culvert extensions shall be thoroughly jointed with the existing culvert so as to provide a continuous structure with no internal projections to impede the flow of water .
num .
end treatments to extensions shall be constructed as for new culverts .
end treatments specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num damage to existing structures num .
any damage to any culvert end treatment or any other structure during the contract shall be repaired by the contractor at no cost to the principal .
damage num pegging of culverts num .
prior to any clearing at culvert locations the contractor shall peg the centreline of the culvert at the inlet and outlet inverts and peg the extent of the clearing required for associated works for the superintendents verification and adjustment as required .
hold point num trench excavation for culverts num .
except for culvert extensions no culvert shall be laid until the embankment at the point of laying has been brought to a level nummm above all points along the top of the culvert or to the subgrade level whichever is the lesser and compacted .
where pipes with spigot and socket joints are used then measurement shall be taken from the top of collar .
embankment height num end treatments num insitu construction num .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings all culvert end treatments shall be constructed of cast insitu concrete or where applicable of mortared rock pitching in accordance with the drawings .
construction num .
the dimensions of the end treatments shall be within nummm of those shown on the drawings when measured in accordance with as num .
tolerances num .
surface irregularities of the concrete end walls wing walls cut off walls and aprons shall be less than nummm abrupt and nummm over a num metre straight edge .
surface irregularities num .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings concrete shall be in accordance with annexure numa table numanum and shall conform to the requirements of clause num reinforcement and insitu concrete .
concrete num .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings mortar for mortared rock pitching shall comprise a num to num mix of builders sand and ordinary portland cement with all sand being from the same source .
mortar num precast concrete end treatments num .
the use of commercially available precast end treatments shall not be permitted .
precast end treatments num formwork num .
all formwork used to form and support the concrete shall conform to the requirements of specification num formwork .
associated requirements for falsework shall conform to the requirements of specification num falsework .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the tolerances of formwork for concrete construction of all end treatments shall be as follows tolerances a .
variation in crosssectional dimensions nummm b .
variation in overall dimensions nummm c. variation in surface level nummm num outlet drains num .
construction of culvert inlet and outlet drains shall be in accordance with the drawings and specification num surface drains and levees .
num rock protection where shown on the drawings culverts shall have rock protection .
num .
num .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings dimensions and class of rock for rock protection shall be as specified in the culvert schedule and shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of specification num rock protection .
rock class num drainage structures num .
supply and installation of drainage structures such as inlets manholes and catchpits shall be in accordance with the drawings and specification num drainage structures .
num stormwater drains num .
on completion of the entire system all pipes shall be flushed clean from end to end and left in proper working order .
flushing num num not used asbuilt and handover requirements num asbuilt information asbuilt drawings shall include the following information for culverts num. a .
material type .
b .
length .
c. culvert skew angle .
d. inlet and outlet invert levels .
e. nominal diameter for pipes or span and height for rcbs .
f. number of barrels .
in the case of box culverts in addition to number of barrels number of link slabs shall also be noted where applicable .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa construction requirements numanum .
ground conditions clause num num .
num insitu ground conditions with respect to the manufacture and installation of culverts shall be classed in accordance with table numanum culvert type and material ground condition reinforced concrete pipe aggressive reinforced concrete box aggressive corrugated steel pipe aggressive corrugated aluminium pipe nonaggressive table numanum insitu ground conditions delete the culvert types and conditions which are not applicable .
refer also to guidance note num and delete this note num .
num requirements for culvert units installed in ground conditions identified as aggressive refer to table numanum shall be in accordance with table numanum culvert type and material requirements reinforced concrete pipe all sizes minimum cover to reinforcement shall be in accordance with asnzs num for marine conditions reinforced concrete box span up to nummm refer to guidance note num for interim treatment options available to project managers .
insert the required treatment here and delete this note reinforced concrete box span nummm refer to guidance note num for interim treatment options available to project managers .
insert the required treatment here and delete this note corrugated steel pipe all sizes refer to guidance note num for treatment options available to project managers .
insert the required treatment here and delete this note table numanum requirements for culvert units installed in aggressive ground conditions this table can be used for multiple types of culverts .
delete the culvert type which is not applicable and delete this note specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name numanum .
concrete pipe joints clause num num the type of culvert joints to be supplied for precast reinforced concrete pipes shall be flush joints spigot and socket joint delete the joint type which is not applicable and delete this note numanum .
insitu concrete strength clause num culvert type culvert span diameter concrete class reinforced concrete box rcb nummm nnum reinforced concrete box rcb nummm snum reinforced concrete pipe rcp nummm nnum reinforced concrete pipe rcp nummm snum corrugated steel pipe csp nummm nnum corrugated steel pipe csp nummm snum table numanum insitu concrete strength for base slabs and end treatments delete the types and classes which isare not applicable .
refer also to guidance note num and delete this note specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numb precast reinforced concrete pipes general numb.num scope num .
this annexure is for the supply and delivery of precast reinforced concrete pipes .
the contractor must nominate the nominal effective length of the units with the tender .
numb.num terminology and standards num .
unless otherwise specified material and manufactured articles and workmanship shall conform to the relevant australian standards .
where conflict occurs between this annexure and the relevant australian standard this annexure shall take precedence .
products and materials numb.num precast units num .
the pipes shall be manufactured tested and accepted in accordance with the requirements of asnzs num except where otherwise varied by this annexure .
num .
the pipes shall be manufactured to suit the insitu ground conditions as specified in annexure numa table numanum in accordance with the requirements of table numanum ground conditions num .
the nominal internal pipe diameters to be supplied shall include those diameters between nummm and nummm given in the culvert schedule andor the schedule of rates .
pipe diameter num .
this annexure applies to the following load classes as described in asnzs num load classes a .
standard pipe classes num num and num are available as stock items .
b .
extra strength pipe classes num num num and num are also available from pipe manufacturers as required .
the class of pipe shall be as shown on the drawings .
num .
num .
the type of joints to be supplied shall be as specified in clause numanum joint types num .
information to be supplied by the purchaser and the supplier shall be in accordance with asnzs num .
purchasing specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name numb.num reinforcement and concrete numb.num concrete general num .
concrete shall be cast and cured to produce a sound dense and durable concrete .
num .
concrete shall have a surface finish equivalent to a steel trowel finish for internal surfaces .
external surfaces shall have as a minimum a class num finish in accordance with as num .
the internal and external surfaces of pipes shall not be coated unless otherwise specified .
surface finish num .
concrete shall be produced in accordance with the requirements of this specification .
numb.num cement num .
cement shall comply with the requirements of as num and australian technical infrastructure committee atic spnum .
all sampling and testing of cement shall be in accordance with asnzs num .
the cement shall be dry to flow freely during application .
the cementitious material registration scheme cmrs shall be used to confirm that the cement complies with atic spnum .
the standard application form for cmrs registration is given in annexure num d. the contractor shall provide manufacturers test certificates showing certification num .
prior to the manufacturing of culverts the contractor shall confirm that the cement complies with atic spnum and shall provide the cmrs registration number for the cement to the superintendent for approval of the cement .
num .
cement shall contain less than num per cent total alkali expressed as sodium oxide equivalent .
the method of testing to determine this figure shall be in accordance with astm cnum .
num .
the contractor shall use cement in approximately the chronological order in which it is delivered from the manufacturer .
the contractor shall demonstrate that transportation units and storage bins used for bulk cement have been constructed so that there is no dead storage .
if dead storage exists the bins shall be emptied completely at least once every three months .
cement delivered in bags shall be stored in weatherproof structures having floors raised above the ground .
cement that is more than three months old shall not be used .
num .
numb.num secondary cementitious additives num .
the following secondary cementitious additives shall be acceptable silica fume and fly ash a. silica fume up to num cement replacement .
silica fume shall be in accordance with asnzs num and atic spnum .
b .
fly ash up to num cement replacement .
fly ash shall be in accordance with as num and atic spnum .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall ensure adequate dispersion of the additives throughout the mix .
numb.num aggregate num .
fine aggregates for concrete shall be natural sand and shall comply with the requirements of as num .
the maximum amount of water absorption for fine aggregates shall not exceed num per cent .
fine aggregates num .
coarse aggregates for concrete shall conform to the requirements of the as num .
the maximum water absorption of coarse aggregates shall not exceed num per cent .
the durability of coarse aggregates shall be assessed according to test methods detailed in clauses num and num of as num .
the acceptance criteria for these tests shall be that for concrete with an exposure classification of severe .
coarse aggregates num .
aggregates proposed for use in the works shall comply with the requirements of clause num in as num .
numb.num admixtures num .
the use of admixtures in the concrete for the purpose of maintaining workability will be permitted .
if the contractor proposes to use any admixtures in the concrete then he shall submit details of these with the tender .
num .
any admixture to be used by the contractor shall comply with the requirements of as num .
numb.num alkali content of concrete and soluble salts num .
the total mass of reactive alkali in the concrete including any admixtures shall not exceed numkgm .
the method of determining the alkali content shall be in accordance with appendix c of report no trnum by the cement concrete association of new zealand .
alkali content num .
sulphate and chloride ion contents shall be determined by testing of hardened concrete in accordance with as num method num .
a representative sample of at least num grams of crushed and ground concrete shall be used with the titrating solution being num to num n. the volhard method calibrated using a concrete with known chloride content shall be used for the test .
num .
the sulphate content of concrete as placed expressed as the percentage by mass of acidsoluble sonum to cement shall not be greater than num .
sulphate content num .
the mass of acidsoluble chloride ion per unit volume of concrete as placed shall not exceed num kgmnum chloride content numb.num reinforcement num .
reinforcing steel shall conform with the requirements of specification num steel reinforcement .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name numb.num joint materials num .
where rubber joint rings are to be supplied by the contractor they shall comply with as num .
rubber joint rings manufacture handling and storage numb.num cover to reinforcement num .
unless otherwise stated in annexure numa table numanum the minimum concrete cover to reinforcement shall be in accordance with asnzs num for normal environment num .
nibs shall be supplied to all reinforcement spacers that intrude into the specified cover .
where pipes are spun or roller compacted then nibs shall be mild steel .
where pipes are wet cast then nibs shall be stainless steel .
nibs inspection and testing numb.num routine testing num .
the following specified tests are required in addition to those specified in asnzs num table num a. ultimate load b. water absorption c. cover d. dimensional accuracy e. joint assembly test where appropriate num .
testing procedures and minimum testing frequencies shall be in accordance with table numbnum .
tests shall be carried out in accordance with asnzs num .
num .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table numbnum minimum testing frequency process quality verification requirement minimum testing frequency fine aggregate as per as num water absorption num monthly clay and fine silt settlement method num monthly organic impurities other than sugar num monthly particles size distribution monthly coarse aggregate as per as num water absorption num monthly particle size distribution weekly water mrwa test method wa num monthly precast reinforced concrete drainage pipes load testing as per asnzs num and clause numb.num of the specification in accordance with asnzsnum appendix a section anum and anum cover to reinforcement as per asnzs num and clause numb.num of the specification in accordance with asnzs num appendix a section anum inspection for defects as per asnzs num and clause numb.num of the specification visual inspection all units absorption testing as per asnzs num and clause numb.num of the specification in accordance with asnzs num appendix a section anum dimensional accuracy as per asnzs num in accordance with asnzs num appendix a section anum joint assembly test as per asnzs num in accordance with asnzs num appendix a section anum specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name numb.num defects num .
unless otherwise specified within this clause pipe defect types identified in asnzs num clause num workmanship and finish shall not be acceptable .
selected extracts from asnzs num table num are shown in the tables below .
num .
where specified below as acceptable finishing and repairs to defects shall be in accordance with asnzs num clause num .
numb.num pipe wall num .
the following pipe wall defects as defined in asnzs num clause num shall be deemed acceptable subject to the acceptability of defects shown below defect acceptability type num acceptable after repair type num acceptable after repair type num acceptable after repair type num acceptable after repair numb.num joint surface num .
the following joint surface defects as defined in asnzs num clause num shall be deemed acceptable subject to the acceptability of defects shown below defect acceptability type num acceptable after repair type num acceptable after repair numb.num nonconformance num .
pipes shall be deemed nonconforming when they fail to satisfy all the manufacturing and testing requirements of asnzs num and this specification with modifications as specified in this annexure .
non conforming units shall be rejected and replaced at no cost to the principal .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numc precast reinforced concrete box culverts general numc.num scope num .
this annexure is for the supply and delivery of precast reinforced concrete box culvert sections including link slabs .
nominal spans and heights of the precast units shall be as shown on the drawings .
the units shall be supplied in lengths of numm or numm .
the contractor must nominate the length of the units with the tender .
numc.num terminology and standards num .
the term precast units where used in this annexure shall include the pre cast reinforced concrete crown sections and link slabs .
num .
unless otherwise specified material and manufactured articles and workmanship shall conform to the relevant australian standards .
where conflict occurs between this annexure and the relevant australian standards this annexure shall take precedence .
products and materials numc.num precast units for culvert units up to nummm span the following shall apply num. a. precast units shall be manufactured tested and inspected in accordance with the requirements of as num except where otherwise varied by this specification .
b. the recommended nominal internal dimensions for the num x num culvert units are nummm width andnummm depth in accordance with as num figure num .
the effective waterways area shall not be less than num mnum .
c. the height of fill including pavement between the trafficable surface of the road and the top of the culvert unit or top of the link slab shall not be less than nummm and not greater than nummm .
num .
for culvert units of nummm span or larger with fill heights of up to num metres the following shall apply a. precast units have been designed by main roads western australia and the minimum design requirements are detailed on drawing number num .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name b. manufactured in accordance with as num .
num .
all precast concrete box units shall be manufactured to suit the insitu ground conditions as specified in annexure numa table numanum in accordance with the requirements of table numanum .
num .
the type of units required for the contract are as listed in the culvert schedule or the schedule of ratesbill of quantities .
num .
tenderers shall submit with their tenders full details of proposed concrete dimensions and reinforcement to meet the minimum design requirements as detailed on drawing number num for spans nummm and greater .
num .
information to be supplied by the purchaser and the supplier shall be in accordance with as num .
numc.num formwork num .
all formed concrete surfaces to the precast units shall have a smooth dense and dust free concrete finish .
num .
form joint marks shall be unobtrusive and concrete surfaces shall be free from blowholes deeper than nummm .
the allowable extent of blowholes per unit area shall be as for class num formwork in as num .
maximum allowable surface irregularities shall be nil abrupt or nummm over the width of the surface .
num .
form lubricants used shall be of the nonstaining type and shall have no detrimental effects on the concrete .
num .
the unformed surface of the precast units shall be wood floated to produce a uniform surface without surface pitting or cavities .
maximum allowable surface irregularities shall be nil abrupt or nummm over the width of the surface .
num .
for culvert units of nummm span and larger the design of all formwork shall be in accordance with specification num formwork .
numc.num reinforcement and concrete numc.num concrete general num .
concrete shall consist of a mixture of cement and water and coarse aggregate and fine aggregate .
in its finished state concrete shall be sound and dense and durable and free from honeycombing and shall have the strength and other properties specified .
num .
precast reinforced concrete box culvert units shall be sampled and tested for water absorption in accordance with appendix f of asnzs num .
the calculated water absorption of each unit shall not exceed num percent .
num .
all concrete shall be produced in accordance with the requirements of this specification .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name numc.num cement num .
all cement shall comply with the requirements of as num and atic spnum .
all sampling and testing of cement shall be in accordance with as num .
the cement shall be dry to flow freely during application .
the cementitious material registration scheme cmrs shall be used to confirm that the cement complies to atic spnum .
the standard application form for cmrs registration is given in annexure num d. certification num .
prior to the manufacturing of a culvert the contractor shall confirm that the cement complies with atic spnum and shall provide the cmrs registration number for the cement to the superintendent for approval of the cement .
hold point num .
cement shall contain less than num total alkali expressed as sodium oxide equivalent .
the method of testing to determine this figure shall be in accordance with astm cnum .
alkali content num .
the contractor shall use cement in approximately the chronological order in which it is delivered from the manufacturer .
transportation units and storage bins for bulk cement shall be weather proof and shall be constructed so that there is no dead storage .
the contractor shall demonstrate that the storage bins for bulk cement do not have any dead storage .
if dead storage exists the bins shall be emptied completely at least once every three months .
cement delivered in bags shall be stored in weatherproof structures having floors raised above the ground .
cement that is more than three months old shall not be used .
num .
numc.num secondary cementitious additives the following secondary cementitious additives shall be acceptable num. a. silica fume up to num cement replacement .
silica fume shall be in accordance with as num and atic spnum .
b .
fly ash up to num cement replacement .
fly ash shall be in accordance with as num and atic spnum .
num .
cast insitu structures including base slabs and end treatments constructed in seawater or saline groundwater environments shall use concrete containing num fly ash and at least num silica fume .
num .
the contractor shall ensure adequate dispersion of the additives throughout the mix .
numc.num aggregate num .
fine aggregates for concrete shall be natural sand and shall comply with the requirements of as num .
the maximum amount of water absorption for fine aggregates shall not exceed num .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
coarse aggregates for concrete shall be crushed or screened river gravel or crushed igneous rock conforming to the requirements of as num .
the maximum water absorption for coarse aggregates shall not exceed num .
the durability of coarse aggregates shall be assessed according clauses num and num of as num .
the acceptance criteria for these tests shall be that for concrete with an exposure classification of c. num .
the contractor shall produce evidence to show that the aggregates proposed for use in the works comply with the requirements of clause num alkali reactive materials of as num .
numc.num admixtures num .
the use of admixtures in the concrete for the purpose of maintaining workability will be permitted .
the use of admixtures for the purpose of reducing cement will not be permitted .
if the contractor proposes to use any admixtures in the concrete then details of these shall be submitted with the tender .
num .
any admixture to be used by the contractor shall comply with the requirements of as num .
num .
where specified in annexure numa table numanum the contractor shall use culvert units containing an approved admixture in accordance with the following requirements a. concrete shall contain a timeproven effective hydrophobic pore blocking ingredient hpi system used strictly in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and providing a hydrophobic cement matrix throughout as well as dispersed polymer particles suitable for use as a pore blocking agent .
num .
the following hydrophobic poreblocking ingredient system products are acceptable for use on mrwa projects approved hpis i. everdure caltite cementaid ii .
admix cnum xypex numc.num alkali content of concrete and soluble salts num .
the total mass of reactive alkali in the concrete including any admixtures shall not exceed numkgm .
the method of determining the alkali content shall be in accordance with appendix c of report no trnum by the cement concrete association of new zealand .
num .
sulphate and chloride ion contents shall be determined by testing of hardened concrete in accordance with as num method num .
the volhard method calibrated using a concrete with known chloride content shall be used for the test .
num .
the sulphate content of concrete as placed expressed as the percentage by mass of acidsoluble sonumto cement shall not be greater than num .
num .
the mass of acidsoluble chloride ion per unit volume of concrete as placed shall not exceed num kgmnum .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name numc.num reinforcement num .
reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of specification num steel reinforcement .
manufacture handling and storage numc.num concrete numc.num mix design all concrete for the works shall be in accordance with table numcnum .
num .
table numcnum concrete properties concrete class snum minimum compressive strength fc at num days on a standard cylinder nummpa target strength for mix design nummpa maximum aggregate size nummm maximum watercement ratio num minimum cement content numkgmnum maximum cement content numkgmnum for the purpose of this annexure the following definition will apply num .
watercement ratio is the ratio by mass of the total water content of the mix available for hydration to the total cement in the mix .
num .
the contractor shall design a mix which complies with all requirements of this annexure .
concrete mix design shall aim to produce a workable mix having a minimum watercement ratio and a maximum aggregatecement ratio consistent with proper transport and placement and compaction of the concrete without segregation and so as to produce a dense and durable concrete .
num .
in addition the ratio by mass of the fine aggregate to the combined aggregate of the mix shall be the minimum to produce a workable concrete .
the contractor shall make every effort to minimise the ratio of fine aggregate to combined aggregate when developing the trial mix .
the combined grading shall be within the limits given in figure numcnum to this annexure for culvert units with spans up to nummm and figure numcnum for culvert units of nummm spans or greater with up to num metres of fill after making allowance for the permissible tolerances on individual aggregate grading given in clause numc.num .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name numc.num trial mixes num .
if a contractor has not previously supplied box culverts to main roads western australia or has changed the concrete mix design of any culverts the contractor shall submit details of the concrete mix design and shall at the contractors own expense prepare a trial mix for the required class of concrete using the plant to be used for concrete in the works .
num .
where an admixture is proposed to be used in the concrete two trial mixes shall be prepared .
the first trial mix shall be prepared without the admixture and from this mix the need for an admixture established .
the second trial mix shall be prepared with the proposed admixture .
num .
the contractor shall measure the slump of the trial mix in accordance with as num slump test .
num .
once the superintendent has approved a mix design for the concrete the slump measured for the trial mix shall be deemed to be the slump for the concrete and all concrete shall have the same slump within a tolerance as detailed in as num .
any concrete having a slump outside this tolerance shall be rejected .
num .
the maximum slump of a concrete mix with admixture shall in no case be greater than nummm .
num .
compressive test specimens shall be moulded by the contractor from the trial mix and tested in accordance with clause numc.num of this specification to determine the num day compressive strength of the concrete .
num .
the number of compressive test specimens to be moulded from each trial mix shall be nine .
tests shall be carried out on the trial mix to determine that the requirements of this specification are met .
in addition the average strength of all compressive strength specimens made from a trial mix shall be not less than the target strength and num of all test results shall have compressive strengths within nummpa of the mean .
num .
the contractor shall not vary the properties of the materials used or vary their relative proportion from those of the approved trial mix .
if the mix design or source of aggregates changes during the course of the contract then further trial mixes shall be carried out in accordance with this clause .
numc.num workability num .
concrete shall have a degree of workability such that satisfactory placement and compaction of the concrete is achieved consistent with the properties permitted by clause numc.num of this annexure .
num .
the workability of all concrete shall be checked by use of a slump cone in accordance with as num slump test .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name numc.num testing num .
for the purpose of this annexure the strength of concrete shall be defined as the average num day crushing strength of a minimum of two standard nummm diameter by nummm long cylinders taken from the same lot and made and cured and tested in accordance with as num .
num .
testing of concrete specimens for the determination of num day compressive strength shall be carried out by the contractor in accordance with as num .
concrete test specimens for determining the demoulding strength shall be cured on site under the same curing conditions as the precast units .
num .
all testing shall be carried out by the contractor based on the requirements given in this specification and in accordance with as num .
num .
testing equipment shall be calibrated by a company endorsed by the national association of testing authorities nata as identified in the quality plan submitted at the time of tender and approved by the superintendent .
num .
sampling procedures shall conform to as num and from each sample of concrete taken for the purpose of checking the num day compressive strength not less than num test specimens shall be cast and not less than num specimens shall be cast to indicate the attainment of the specified demoulding strength of the precast units .
concrete shall be sampled each time a casting takes place .
minimum frequency of sampling shall be once per days production .
num .
the steel moulds for making concrete compression test specimens shall be nummm diameter by nummm long cylinder moulds complying with the requirements for moulds in as num .
num .
the tenderer shall include in his rates for the cost of supplying the steel moulds and undertaking the conformance testing required by this specification during the period of the contract .
num .
moulding and curing of test specimens shall be carried out by the contractor in accordance with as num and this clause .
the contractor shall make all due allowances in his unit rates for costs incurred in cleaning moulds and moulding test specimens and stripping moulds and site curing test specimens .
numc.num concreting plant num .
the batching plant shall be capable of producing the quantities of concrete at the rates necessary for the efficient and proper placement of concrete in the works .
numc.num batching and mixing num .
the contractor shall provide equipment and shall maintain and operate the equipment as required to accurately determine and control the amount of each separate ingredient entering the concrete to the accuracy specified in as num with the following modifications specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name for batch sizes less than nummnum the following permissible tolerances on batch ingredients shall apply batch ingredient percentage tolerance by weight cement num aggregate num added water num chemical admixtures num num .
the contractor shall adjust the quantity of water to be added to the mix to allow for moisture in the aggregates .
the amounts of cement and sand and each size of aggregate entering each batch of concrete shall be determined by weighing .
the amount of water shall be determined by either weighing or by volumetric measurement .
num .
all equipment shall be verified in accordance with the contractors quality management system .
the contractor shall have a quality management system in place that meets the requirements of specification num quality systems .
mixing of concrete shall comply with the requirements of as num .
num .
num .
excessive overmixing shall not be permitted and any concrete which has been retained in the mixer so long as to require additional water to permit satisfactory placing shall be rejected .
num .
concrete shall be transported in a manner preventing adulteration or segregation or loss of ingredients .
num .
all concrete in a batch shall be placed in its final position and compacted within num minutes of adding water to the mix .
numc.num placing num .
concrete shall be deposited in such a manner as to avoid segregation of the concrete and displacement of the reinforcement or other embedded items or formwork .
it shall be spread in horizontal layers .
at the time of pouring there shall be no residue of water in the moulds .
num .
the concrete shall be fully compacted throughout the full extent of each layer and shall be thoroughly worked against the formwork and around any reinforcement and other embedded items .
successive layers of the same lift shall be thoroughly worked together .
the compaction of concrete shall be carried out as follows num. a .
for culvert units of nummm span or smaller by using external vibrators clamped to the outside of the mould or the mould clamped to an external vibrator to achieve the desired level of compaction specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name b .
for culvert units of nummm span or larger by using appropriate methods of external vibration to achieve the desired level of compaction .
num .
powerdriven immersion vibrators shall be used only as backup units when external vibrators fail .
when immersion vibrators are used they shall be of the rotary outofbalance type with a frequency of not less than num num cycles per minute .
num .
overvibration shall be avoided .
immersion vibrators shall be withdrawn slowly to avoid the formation of voids .
care shall be taken to ensure that no reinforcement or embedded items are displaced by vibration .
numc.num curing and protection num .
the following general requirements for the curing and protection of concrete shall be met a. freshly placed concrete shall be protected from the sun and wind and rain and prevented from drying out .
b. curing shall commence immediately after the concrete has achieved its final set .
c. the minimum curing period for concrete shall be seven days immediately after removal from the casting mould refer to clause d below for the exception d. the minimum curing period for concrete incorporating granulated blast furnace slag silica fume or fly ash shall be num days .
all concrete surfaces shall be cured by one of the following methods num. a. moist and membrane curing i. surfaces of the units commencing immediately after the concrete has achieved final set but in no case later than two hours after placing .
ii .
concrete shall be cured by either moist or membrane curing to all the curing shall be continuous for not less than seven days immediately after removal from the casting mould .
moist curing concrete shall be kept continuously moist and the concrete maintained at a temperature above num degrees centigrade .
moist curing using water sprinklers which may damage adjacent pre cast units will not be acceptable .
moist curing membrane curing curing compounds shall be applied to all surfaces of the precast units to manufacturers specifications .
the concrete shall be maintained at a temperature above num degrees centigrade .
membrane curing b .
accelerated curing i .
accelerated curing shall be carried out by low pressure steam curing in accordance with as num appendix c. any other form of accelerated curing will not be permitted .
in addition the precast units shall be cured for a further continuous period of not less than five days immediately after removal from the casting mould .
accelerated curing specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name ii .
all procedures for the curing of concrete shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent prior to commencement of the works .
c. formwork curing by maintaining the formwork in position for the required curing period .
the concrete shall be maintained at a temperature above num degrees centigrade .
formwork curing numc.num concrete in hot weather num .
placement of concrete will be permitted when the ambient shade temperature does not exceed numc and is falling or when it is less than numc and rising provided that the placement can be completed before the ambient temperature exceeds numc .
at no stage during placement shall the concrete mix temperature exceed numc .
num .
to keep the maximum temperature of the concrete below numc it may be necessary to shield the aggregate stockpiles .
it may also be necessary to chill the mixing water andor schedule concrete placement at night .
num .
in hot dry weather andor when the ambient temperature is greater than numc suitable means shall be provided to avoid premature stiffening of concrete placed in contact with hot dry surfaces .
when necessary the surfaces including reinforcement and formwork against which concrete is to be placed shall be shielded from the direct rays of the sun and shall be sprayed with water to prevent excessive absorption by the surfaces of water from the fresh concrete .
numc.num strength requirements num .
concrete shall be deemed to conform to the compressive strength requirements of this annexure when the average strength of all specimens representing a batch is above the minimum strength and no individual specimen has strength less than num of the minimum strength .
numc.num reinforcement and cover num .
reinforcement for the precast units shall be fabricated and fixed in accordance with the requirements of this clause section num of as num and table num.cnum of this annexure .
where there is any conflict the requirements of this clause shall apply .
num .
reinforcement in the areas of the haunches shall be well anchored to resist stresses which occur during manufacture handling transporting and installation of the precast units .
num .
the minimum clear cover to the reinforcement for culvert units nummm span and larger with up to numm of fill shall be as specified on drawing number num .
num .
the minimum clear cover to the reinforcement for culvert units nummm span and smaller with up to num metres of fill shall be in accordance to asnum specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
reinforcement shall be hard drawn steel wire or grade numn hot rolled deformed steel bars conforming to asnzs num .
the minimum amount of main reinforcement shall be not less than num of the crosssectional area of the walls or deck .
num .
where spacers or bar chairs are used to support reinforcement they shall be made of either plastic concrete or stainless steel .
no mild steel spacers shall be used .
num .
for culvert units of nummm span and larger with fill depths up to num metres the following additional requirements shall apply a .
the contractor shall detail the reinforcement to satisfy the requirements of this annexure and drawing number num. b .
the contractor will be required to provide reinforcement to each face of the precast section .
the minimum quantity of main reinforcement required at each face is given on the drawings .
the spacing between main reinforcing bars shall not exceed nummm .
c. transverse distribution reinforcement is required to each face and shall not be less than num per cent of the main reinforcement taken over the same length .
the spacing of the distribution reinforcement shall not exceed nummm and the diameter of the bars shall not be smaller than nummm .
d. reinforcement in the top of the link slabs in both directions shall in no case be less than that specified for transverse distribution reinforcement in the bottom of the unit and shall in addition be adequate to resist stresses which occur during manufacture and handling and transporting .
e. spot welding of the reinforcement for the sole purpose of cage fabrication will be allowed .
the electrodes must be of the low hydrogen type .
f. where spacers or bar chairs are used to support reinforcement they shall not be placed in zones of high stress in the corners and mid span regions .
num .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num.cnum hook and cog allowances for bent bars and fitments bar diameter db mm num num num num num num num num num length allowance mm assumed pin diameter num db num num num num num num num num num numc.num casting methods num .
the methods of manufacture shall be so designed to ensure that tolerances comply with as num .
the units shall be free from honeycombing and cracks and spalling .
the ends of the units shall be free from any grout loss .
num .
moulds shall be designed to permit stripping without causing damage to the precast units .
num .
precast units shall not be removed from the casting mould until the concrete has attained compressive strength of not less than num mpa .
num .
each precast unit shall be suitably marked with a number and a date of casting and size dimensions .
the concrete test specimens shall be marked with the date sampled and the batch they represent .
numc.num handling of precast units numc.num lifting system num .
the lifting system for the precast units shall be of the swiftlift type as marketed by alan h reid pty ltd or ramset pin head anchors or similar approved .
num .
the number and size and location of the anchors to be cast into each pre cast unit shall be as specified by the manufacturer of the lifting system .
num .
the supplier shall provide a set of lifting slings with each truck load of units despatched from his works for unloading the units at the specified delivery site .
the lifting slings will remain the property of the supplier and return with the delivery truck .
cranage for lifting the units at the site will be provided by the supplier .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name numc.num handling and loading num .
the precast units shall be handled and loaded in such a manner so as not to cause damage to the units .
numc.num delivery and storage num .
completed precast units shall not be transferred from the place of manufacture until a .
for culvert units up to nummm span a minimum concrete strength of num mpa has been achieved .
b .
for culvert units nummm span or larger the num day minimum compressive strength of concrete has been achieved in accordance with clause numc.num mix design .
if an additional storage period has been specified then the units shall be stored at the manufacturers works for the nominated period and then delivered to site .
num .
the contractor shall be responsible for the supply and delivery of units to site and the condition of the precast units following delivery shall be in accordance with the requirements of this annexure .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name inspection and testing numc.num minimum testing frequency num .
testing procedures and minimum testing frequencies shall be in accordance with table numcnum .
table numcnum minimum testing frequency process quality verification requirement minimum testing frequency structural concrete consistency slump test as num num per nummnum or part thereof num test if less than nummnum where concrete batch plant facilities are used outside the metropolitan area a slump tests shall be carried out on each truck delivering concrete to site .
strength num per nummnum or part thereof num test if less than nummnum fine aggregate as per as num water absorption num monthly clay and fine silt settlement method num monthly organic impurities other than sugar num monthly particles size distribution monthly coarse aggregate as per as num water absorption num monthly particle size distribution weekly reactive alkali part num of report no .
trnum by the cement concrete association of new zealand num per source material per contract water mrwa test method wa num monthly precast reinforced concrete boxes cover to reinforcement as per as num and clause numc.num in accordance with as num inspection for defects as per as num and clause numc num visual inspection all units absorption testing methodology as per asnzs num applied to rcbs in accordance with asnzs num appendix a paragraph anum dimensional accuracy as per as num in accordance with as num specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name numc.num defects num .
defects in culvert units links and base slabs shall be classified by type as identified in as num .
num .
the following defects shall be deemed acceptable subject to the acceptability of defects shown below defect acceptability type num acceptable type num acceptable after repair for culvert spans nummm and greater the acceptable crack width shall be no greater than nummm num .
no other defect types will be accepted .
num .
chipped sections shall be repaired to the equivalent of the original condition using an epoxy mortar approved by the superintendent .
num .
surface cracks shall be measured using a feeler gauge .
numc.num nonconformance num .
culverts and link slabs shall be deemed nonconforming if they do not meet the requirements of this annexure and shall be rejected and replaced at no cost to the principal .
numc.num load testing for culvert units of nummm span and smaller num .
all culvert units and link slabs of span nummm or smaller supplied under this contract shall be subject to proofload testing in accordance with as num except for the following a. the proof load for nummm span culverts or link slabs shall be numkn b. the proof load for culverts or link slabs having span less than nummm shall be numkn c. the size of the cracks shall be measured with an optical device or a feeler gauge .
num .
all culverts and link slabs that fail the proof load test shall be deemed non conforming .
if a further culvert or link slab from a batch also fails the proof load test then all precast units from that batch shall be deemed to be non conforming .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name combined aggregate grading envelope for culvert units up to nummm span with up to numm fill num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num sieve size mm percentage passing annexure numc figure numcnum for culvert units up to nummm or larger span with up to numm fill num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num sieve size mm percentage passing annexure numc figure numcnum specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numd atic cementitious materials for concrete request for registration by manufacturer cement or blend details product name type proportions manufacturer place of manufacture source of constituent materials cement clinker fly ash slag limestone gypsum grinding aids supply details dispatching supplier contact name contact phone no .
contact address suppliers abn send this form with the sample to specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name rta chemical and materials laboratory att laboratory officer unit h num st. hilliers rd auburn nsw num for rta laboratory use only date of registration registration no specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
the custodian of this specification is senior road engineer .
num .
num .
nonhelical corrugated steel pipe clause num num clause num shall be included under contract specific requirements where nonhelical corrugated steel pipe is to be used on a project .
num .
precast concrete end treatments clause num num clause num shall be included under contract specific requirements where precast concrete end treatments are to be permitted on a project .
the project manager should be aware that precast concrete end treatments generally do not meet the geometric requirements shown on the drawings .
advice should be sought from mrwas structures engineering branch where apron lengths headwall heights or wall thicknesses fall outside the dimensions shown on the drawings .
num .
culways clause num num clause num shall be included under contract specific requirements where culways are to be installed .
num .
stock and fauna underpasses clause num num clause num shall be included under contract specific requirements where stock or fauna underpasses are to be installed .
num .
ground conditions annexure numa num the ground conditions shall be classified as aggressive or nonaggressive to allow the correct culvert units to be supplied .
item num of clause numanum should be completed accordingly note that with the exception of corrugated aluminium pipes the default ground condition is set as aggressive .
aggressive ground conditions include environments where specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name a. for reinforced concrete pipes the interior surface of the pipeline is subject to tidal flow openly exposed to direct wave action or wind driven saltspray or where the concentration limits applicable to some environmental constituents detailed in asnzs num appendix e have been exceeded or b. for reinforced concrete boxes the exposure classification is defined as bnum c or u in accordance with as num table num or c. for corrugated steel pipe as detailed in asnzs num appendix c. where the chemical composition of the soil is unknown then guidance should be sought from mrwas structures engineering branch .
where any doubt exists the default condition shall be set as aggressive .
num on larger projects where it may be uneconomical to classify soil conditions along the entire length as aggressive then clause numanum item num should be amended as per the following example a .
the insitu ground conditions with respect to the manufacture and installation of culverts shall be taken as nonaggressive except for the following locations which shall be taken as aggressive .
chainage culvert type and material ground conditions num rcp aggressive num csp nonaggressive table numanum locations of aggressive ground conditions additionally the above table information should be provided on the culvert schedule under the column titled ground conditions .
this will assist in the management of the assets in the future .
note it is intended to only include this information in one location and that should be in the culvert schedule .
the existing annexure item num would therefore become b .
for details on ground conditions refer to culvert schedule .
num where culverts are to be used in aggressive ground conditions then direction on additional requirements should be inserted into annexure numa table numanum under requirements column as follows a. for reinforced concrete pipes default requirements has been inserted and is applicable only where the environment can be defined as marine in accordance with asnzs num .
where the pipeline is openly exposed to wind driven saltspray or direct wave action or where the environmental constituent limits as defined in asnzs num appendix e have been exceeded then direction on minimum cover should be sought from the concrete pipe association of australia and inserted into annexure numa table numanum as applicable .
b. for reinforced concrete boxes the project manager has two options i .
where the preferred method of protection is by concrete admixtures add the following item to the table specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name culvert units shall contain an approved hydrophobic poreblocking ingredient hpi system in accordance with clause numc.num .
alternative products to those listed in clause numc.num shall not be used .
manufacturers of alternative products shall make a submission to mrwas structures engineering branch for acceptance and inclusion within the clause .
ii .
the project manager may choose to substitute reinforced concrete pipes or large span rcb units in place of small span rcb units .
where substituting with pipes the project manager should seek confirmation from the designer that the pipes have as a minimum the same hydraulic capacity as the box units they are replacing .
where any substitution is proposed there are no additional special requirements for annexure numa table numanum .
c. for corrugated steel pipes the project manager has two options i .
where the preferred method of protection is by means of a surface protection details of the particular protection i.e .
brand name should be added .
surface protection treatments shall be approved by mrwas structures engineering branch prior to its use .
ii .
where the preferred method of protection is by increasing the base metal thickness then add the following clause all corrugated steel pipes shall have the base metal thickness increased to .
mm .
insert base metal thickness here num .
joint type for rcps annexure numa item num num select the required joint type for rcps .
num .
annexure numc num .
box culverts for stormwater drains clause num num clause num shall be included under contract specific requirements where reinforced concrete boxes rcbs are intended to be used for connecting stormwater drainage pits .
num .
reinforcement details for box culverts num where box culverts are to be used then the following relevant drawings must be included within the contract documents a .
where large culverts span nummm are used include drawing no .
num .
num .
insitu concrete class for end treatments annexure numa and clause num num where the contract does not include any bridgeworks or there are not high numbers of culverts nummm or greater then the requirement to use concrete class snum to specification num concrete for structures for base slabs and end treatments of large pipes and box culverts may be relaxed .
in this case table numanum of annexure numa should be amended as follows culvert type culvert span diameter concrete class specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table numanum insitu concrete strength for base slabs and end treatments num additionally clause num should be added to contract specific requirements which has the added benefit that the bulk of culvert contract documents may be reduced by not having to unnecessarily include specifications num and num .
num .
plastic flexible culverts clause num num flexible pipes may be considered in remote locations where the cost of transport becomes prohibitive due to their light weight or where conditions are aggressive due to their inert nature to most naturally occurring chemicals .
num clause num should be added under contract specific requirements where the use of plastic flexible culverts are permitted on a project .
num note that section num minimum testing frequency within specification num quality systems will need to have the productprocess corrugated metal pipe under sub section num drainage amended to read plastic flexible pipe .
num unless otherwise recommended by the manufacturer where plastic flexible culverts are to be used in ground conditions that would ordinarily be classified as aggressive for concrete culverts clause numanum annexure a should be amended to not used .
this is because the materials used in plastic flexible culverts are typically inert in such conditions .
num where insitu concrete is proposed a. nnum insitu concrete used for pipe diameter with nummm .
b. nnum insitu concrete used for pipe diameter with nummm num alternative products to those listed in clause num shall not be used .
manufacturers of alternative products shall make a submission to mrwas structures engineering branch for acceptance and inclusion within the clause .
num .
supply delivery of rcps annexure numb and clauses num and num num supply where the contract is for supply delivery of reinforced concrete pipes clause num should be added and clause numb.num should be added to the end of annexure numb .
num quality system requirements where supply contracts for rcps incorporate quality system requirements clause num should also be added and clause numb.num should be added to the end of annexure numb .
num .
supply delivery of rcbs annexure numc and clauses num and num num supply where the contract is for supply delivery of reinforced concrete boxes clause num should be added and clause numc.num should be added to the end of annexure numc .
num quality system requirements rcbs and rcps all sizes nnum specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name where the supply contracts for rcbs incorporate quality system requirements clause num should also be added and clause numc.num should be added to the end of annexure numc .
num .
dewatering clause num num where the requirement for dewatering exists then clause num in specification num environment specification num guidance notes shall be added to the contract specific requirements of that document .
num .
low strength infill clause num and clause num num in certain situations such as road widening redundant existing drainage located under the verge may ultimately become located under the roadway .
if this occurs then clause num shall be added to the contract specific requirements of that document .
num .
construction traffic over culverts clause num num the superintendent may chose to allow construction traffic with greater than the legal wheel or axle loading to pass over culverts .
prior to approval the contractor should provide suitable evidence stating that damage to the culvert units shall not occur either in the form of a. the culvert manufacturers approval or b. the outputs from the concrete pipe association of australias pipe class software specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num nonhelical corrugated steel pipe num .
nonhelical corrugated steel barrels shall either be a nestable or multiplate bolted type .
nonhelical galvanised steel barrels shall conform to asnzs num .
num .
num .
corrugation size for nonhelical corrugated steel pipe shall be in accordance with table num of asnzs num .
corrugations num .
the contractor shall ensure that the equipment used during compaction of backfill does not damage the culvert .
limitations on the type of compaction equipment and cover to be provided to the top of the culvert shall be determined in accordance with asnzs num for nonhelical corrugated steel pipes .
compaction equipment num .
installation of nonhelical corrugated steel pipes shall comply with the requirements of this specification the drawings and asnzs num .
num precast concrete end treatments num .
where specified in the culvert schedule the contractor shall use precast concrete end treatments .
the precast concrete end treatments shall comply with the following minimum requirements a .
the end treatments shall be placed on a concrete bed consisting of class nnum concrete not less than nummm thick and be restrained against movement including overturning .
b .
where not incorporated into the precast unit the concrete bed shall be constructed with a nummm wide by nummm deep cut off wall unless otherwise specified in the culvert schedule .
num culways num .
backfill requirements for culways shall consist of cement stabilised backfill as specified in clause num cement stabilised backfill to the level of the top of box culvert .
where the cover to subgrade surface is less than nummm then the backfill material over the culverts shall be basecourse quality .
where the cover to the subgrade surface is greater than nummm then the upper nummm layer of backfill material shall be basecourse quality and the remaining lower layer shall be sub base quality material to the required thickness .
basecourse and sub base quality material shall be in accordance with specification num pavements .
backfill over culways shall be compacted in accordance with this specification .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num stock and fauna underpasses num .
where reinforced concrete box culverts are to be used as underpasses for stock or native fauna then the approaches to both ends of the culvert shall consist of a nummm thick layer of embankment quality material to the dimensions and grades as shown on the drawings .
num box culverts for stormwater drains num .
the requirements of this specification applicable to reinforced concrete boxes rcbs used as culverts also apply to rcbs installed to carry stormwater from drainage pits .
num .
stormwater drains consist of reinforced concrete pipes or reinforced concrete boxes connecting drainage structures such as inlets manholes and catchpits as shown on the drawings .
num insitu concrete class for end treatments num .
all formwork used to form and support the concrete shall conform to the requirements of as num .
num plastic flexible culverts num general num .
the work to be executed under this specification consists of the supply and installation of plastic flexible pipes for use on main roads projects culverts only in accordance with asnzs num .
scope num definitions culverts shall also include fittings as recommended by the manufacturer .
num .
num plastic flexible pipes and fittings num .
plastic flexible pipes and fittings for use on main roads projects culverts are limited to polyethylene pe only .
num .
polyethylene pe plastic flexible pipes and fittings shall be manufactured tested and inspected in accordance with asnzs num and asnzs num .
num .
the structural design procedure shall be in accordance with asnzs num .
num joint sealants and joint types num .
joint sealants used for coupling of pipe segments shall be in accordance with asnzs num appendix f methods of jointing .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num trench excavation num .
except for culvert extensions no culvert shall be laid until the embankment at the point of laying has been brought to a level num mm above all points along the top of the culvert conduit or to the subgrade level whichever is the lesser and compacted .
measurement shall be taken from the top of collar or in the case of flexible pipes with ribs from the top of the rib .
embankment height num damage num .
plastic reinforced pipes shall be handled and installed in such a manner so as to prevent damage to the pipes .
damage shall be assessed in accordance with the acceptance criteria detailed in as num .
where approved by the superintendent damaged units shall be repaired in accordance with manufacturers requirements .
where damaged units are unable to be repaired then they shall be replaced at no cost to the principal .
damaged plastic units num .
where approved by the superintendent minor damage to culverts may be repaired in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
minor repair num compaction num .
the contractor shall ensure that the equipment used during the compaction of backfill does not damage the culvert .
limitations on the type of compaction equipment and cover to be provided to the top of the culvert shall be determined in accordance with clause num protection of pipeline asnzs num and satisfy the manufacturers published requirements .
num .
appropriate precautions such as the use of holding down straps shall be taken to ensure that plastic pipe culverts barrels do not float during the backfilling process particularly during vibration of the backfill plastic culvert float precautions num pipe shape post installation num .
variations allowed in the internal diameter of installed culverts shall be in accordance with asnzs num .
testing frequency shall be in accordance with specification num quality systems .
num handling num .
plastic flexible pipes shall be loaded carted unloaded and stored in accordance with asnzs num section num transportation handling and storage .
damaged pipes shall be assessed and repaired or replaced in accordance with asnzs num section num pipeline components acceptance criteria and the manufacturers requirements at no cost to the principal .
num supply and delivery of rcps delivery insert the following clauses at the end of annexure numb and delete num. highlighted text specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name numb.num delivery num .
batches of pipes for delivery which comply with asnzs num manufacturing and testing requirements and the technical specification shall be acceptable for delivery .
numb.num supply only contracts num .
the principal will give the contractor two weeks notice of when pipes for nonaggressive environments will be required for delivery .
the principal will give the contractor six weeks notice of when pipes for aggressive environments or for extra strength load classes i.e .
load class num and higher will be required for delivery .
completion of any order will depend on the size of pipe and the number required and shall be agreed with the principal when the order is placed .
num .
the principal will be responsible for delivering the pipes to site .
the contractor shall be responsible for loading the precast pipes onto the truck supplied by the principal .
numb.num supply and delivery contracts num .
the contractor shall supply and deliver to site and offload the pipes at the site when delivery is included in the price schedule .
num .
the principal will provide the contractor with a minimum of two weeks notice prior to the required delivery date .
num supply and delivery of rcps quality insert the following clauses at the end of annexure numb and delete num. highlighted text numb.num quality system requirements numb.num quality system requirements for critical subcontracts num .
the subcontracts listed below shall require the subcontractor to have a certified quality system in accordance with specification num quality systems .
a .
cement b .
aggregate c. reinforcement d. rcp rubber joint rings numb.num traceability traceability shall apply to the following processes num. a .
concrete the trace shall start at the batching plant at the start of manufacture .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name b. precast concrete drainage pipes batches shall have a unique identification .
numb.num process control and special processes num .
a copy of the following process descriptions or procedures shall be submitted to the superintendent at least one week prior to commencing each work process .
a. reinforcement measures that ensure strict adherence to the requirements for cover to reinforcement in accordance with clause num of the specification for the supply of rcps annexure numb .
b .
concrete manufacture manufacturing procedures that ensure the production of a uniform quality concrete with minimum variation in workability and strength .
testing of the moisture content of the aggregate as dictated by weather and variations in the material supplied will be necessary to achieve this .
c. concrete transport placing and curing procedures for handling placing and compaction of concrete that ensure the production of a sound and durable product .
num supply and delivery of rcb delivery insert the following clauses at the end of annexure numc and delete num. highlighted text numc.num delivery num .
batches of rcbs for delivery which comply with as num manufacturing and testing requirements and the specification shall be acceptable for delivery .
numc.num supply only contracts num .
the principal will give the contractor two weeks notice of when rcbs will be required for delivery .
completion of any order will depend on the size of rcb and the number required and shall be agreed with the principal when the order is placed .
num .
the principal will be responsible for delivering the rcbs to site .
the contractor shall be responsible for loading the precast rcbs onto the truck supplied by the principal .
numc.num supply and delivery contracts num .
the contractor shall supply and deliver to site and offload the rcbs at the site when delivery is included in the price schedule .
num .
the principal will provide the contractor with a minimum of two weeks notice prior to the required delivery date .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num supply and delivery of rcb quality insert the following clauses at the end of annexure numc and delete num. highlighted text numc.num quality system requirements numc.num quality system requirements for critical subcontracts num .
the subcontracts listed below shall require the subcontractor to have a certified quality system in accordance with specification num quality systems .
a .
cement b .
aggregate c. reinforcement numc.num traceability traceability shall apply to the following processes num. a .
concrete the trace shall start at the batching plant at the start of manufacture .
b. precast concrete box culverts batches shall have a unique identification .
numc.num process control and special processes num .
a copy of the following process descriptions or procedures shall be submitted to the superintendent at least one week prior to commencing each work process .
a. reinforcement measures that ensure strict adherence to the requirements for cover to reinforcement in accordance with clause numc.num of the specification for the supply of rcbs annexure numc .
b .
concrete manufacture manufacturing procedures that ensure the production of a uniform quality concrete with minimum variation in workability and strength .
testing of the moisture content of the aggregate as dictated by weather and variations in the material supplied will be necessary to achieve this .
c. concrete transport placing and curing procedures for handling placing and compaction of concrete that ensure the production of a sound and durable product .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num redundant culverts num .
where indicated on the drawings any redundant culvert and associated drainage structure which are to be retained in its existing location shall be entirely filled in insitu in accordance with specification num low strength infill .
the open ends of any remaining pipe runs and apertures left in drainage structures shall be permanently sealed off to exclude water sand or other material .
specification num culverts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title culverts revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num drainage structures copyright main roads western australia specification num drainage structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num guidance notes amended note incorrectly shown as clause sre num whole document updated amended referenced documents .
amended compressive strength for bricks and amended wall thickness requirements .
revised clauses for consistency with specification num .
sre num whole document complete revision of issue no num to new format mcp num specification num drainage structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num concrete num num reinforcement num num manholes gullies and catchpits num num select bedding material num num num not used num installation num num general num num excavations num num blasting num num protection of foundation surfaces num num bedding num num handling of precast units num num backfill and compaction num num pavement reinstatement num num drainage structures num num step irons num num removal of existing drainage structures num num damage to existing structures num num adjustments of existing gully grates and manhole covers num num breaking into an existing structure num num new structure with existing pipes num num cleaning num num stormwater drains num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num specification num drainage structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa num existing drainage structures num specification num drainage structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num drainage structures general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and installation of minor road drainage structures including gullies manholes and catchpits .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australiannew zealand standards asnzs num structural steel welding as num structural steel asnzs num precast concrete pipes pressure non pressure asnzs num masonry units segmental pavers and flags methods of test num determining compressive strength of masonry units asnzs num masonry units segmental pavers and flags methods of test num determining resistance to salt attack as num steel reinforcing materials asnzs num hotdipped galvanised zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles main roads specifications specification num quality systems specification num occupational safety health specification num environment specification num earthworks specification num culverts specification num low strength infill specification num pavements specification num concrete general works specification num drainage structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used products and materials num concrete num .
all insitu concrete shall be supplied in accordance with specification num concrete general works unless otherwise detailed .
supply num reinforcement num .
reinforcing steel shall conform to the relevant requirements of asnzs num for both plain steel reinforcing bars and hard drawn steel wire reinforcing fabric .
steelwork num .
the cleaning binding fixing and tying of all reinforcement shall be completed as specified in specification num concrete general works .
fixing num manholes gullies and catchpits num manhole gully and catchpit covers and frames num .
manhole gully and catchpit covers and frames shall be manufactured from precast concrete and mild steel plates to the shapes and sizes shown in the drawings .
covers frames num .
mild steel plates and sections shall be of grade num steel in accordance with asnzs num .
steel grade num .
all welds shall be num mm continuous fillet welds in accordance with asnzs num unless otherwise detailed on the drawings .
welds num .
all mild steel components shall be hot dipped galvanised after fabrication in accordance with asnzs num .
galvanising num .
manhole gully and catchpit covers should be flush with the frame with a maximum allowable vertical tolerance of nummm .
tolerances num .
manhole gully and catchpit covers shall fit tightly within their frames with the total gap between the cover and their frame in any direction not be greater than nummm num miscellaneous steel details num .
miscellaneous steel details such as gully hoods shall be manufactured from mild steel conforming to asnzs num and where required hot dipped galvanised conforming to the requirements of asnzs num except that the zinc coating shall weigh not less than num grams per square metre of actual surface area .
steel specification num drainage structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num bricks num .
all bricks shall be nummm x nummm x nummm nominal size sound hard well burnt and true to shape and dimensions .
all bricks shall be solid brick having durability classification exposure in accordance with asnzs num and have minimum characteristic unconfined compressive strength of nummpa in accordance with asnzs num .
size strength num precast concrete liners num .
precast liner segments shall be manufactured as concrete pipes to asnzs num .
num .
reinforcement shall be the same as that for the equivalent class num rcp but shall be circular .
reinforcement num .
precast concrete liner wall thickness shall as a minimum permit concrete cover to reinforcement to be in accordance with specification num culverts for reinforced concrete pipes rcps .
wall thickness num .
load testing will not be required .
load testing num select bedding material num .
select bedding material shall be basecourse material or other suitable material approved by the superintendent containing less than num by mass material retained on the nummm sieve as determined by mrwa test method wa num num num not used installation num general num .
the installation of drainage structures shall include all excavations construction and backfill to the details shown on the drawings and as described in this specification .
num excavations num .
the hole for the installation of the drainage structure shall be excavated to the extent permitting installation in accordance with the drawings with vertical sides throughout where the excavation is up to num metres deep .
numm depth num .
where the excavation is greater than num metres deep the hole shall be excavated in accordance with the drawings for pipes having trench excavation greater than num metres deep .
any loose or disturbed material shall be removed from the walls of the excavation .
numm depth num .
all spoil material from excavations shall be disposed of in accordance with specification num earthworks .
unsuitable material specification num drainage structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
excavations shall be kept free from water until work below ground level is sufficiently set or protected .
dewatering operations shall be undertaken in accordance with specification num environment and water discharged from trenches shall in no circumstances be disposed of to sanitary sewers .
dewatering num .
excavation in rock shall be carried out in accordance with specification num earthworks .
num blasting num .
any requirement for blasting shall be carried out in accordance with specification num earthworks .
blasting num protection of foundation surfaces num .
the exposed surface at the bottom of each excavation shall be adequately protected from any disturbance by the contractors operations or any action from storm water and ground water .
where required dewatering shall be undertaken in accordance with the requirements of specification num environment .
any disturbance shall be reinstated to the requirements of clause num bedding by the contractor at no cost to the principal .
exposed surface num bedding num .
unless shown otherwise on the drawings drainage structures shall be bedded on the insitu foundation material which has been compacted to the requirements specified for embankment foundation in specification num earthworks with a testing frequency in accordance with specification num quality systems .
insitu bedding num .
insitu bedding material deemed unsuitable by the superintendent shall be removed to the depth as directed and replaced with a suitable bedding material prior to the laying of the base slab .
unsuitable material num .
the bedding material shall be compacted to the characteristics dry density ratio as specified for embankment construction in specification num earthworks with a testing frequency in accordance with specification num quality systems .
select bedding material num handling of precast units num .
precast units shall be handled and installed in such a manner that no non conforming cracking or any other nonconforming defect occurs outside the acceptable limits given in specification num culverts annexure numb .
damaged pipe and box culverts shall be repaired or replaced in accordance with annexure numb at no cost to the principal .
damaged concrete units num backfill and compaction num .
prior to backfilling the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that compliance has been achieved with all specified requirements .
holdpoint specification num drainage structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings backfill material up to subgrade level shall be embankment material placed and compacted to the requirements as specified for embankment construction in specification num earthworks with a testing frequency in accordance with specification num quality systems .
below subgrade num .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings backfill material above subgrade level shall be pavement material placed and compacted in accordance with specification num pavements with a testing frequency in accordance with specification num quality systems .
above subgrade num .
backfilling and compaction of stormwater drains shall be carried out in accordance with specification num culverts .
all conduits connecting to the drainage structure that are damaged by the backfilling and compaction processes used by the contractor shall be repaired or replaced at no cost to the principal .
damage num pavement reinstatement num .
where a structure is constructed within an existing road pavement the pavement on the existing road shall be reinstated by the construction of the appropriate pavement layers with thicknesses as shown in the drawings .
reinstatement num .
the edges of the excavation shall be saw cut straight and the excavation backfilled to the requirements of clauses num general and num backfill and compaction respectively .
the pavement layers shall be constructed to the relevant requirements of specification num pavements .
edges pavement num .
bituminous surfacing and asphalt shall be applied in accordance with requirements of specification num bituminous surfacing and specification num asphalt surfacing respectively with the top surface finished level with the surrounding existing sealed surface .
surfacing num .
a waterproof seal shall be placed between the new and the old surfaces .
waterproof seal num drainage structures num general num .
drainage structures shall be installed as the works proceed and shall be effectively sealed at joints and connection point against the ingress of water and other kinds of materials .
num .
drainage structures shall be constructed for details and location as specified in the drawings to a horizontal tolerance of nummm .
the bases shall be placed on firm uniformly compacted and finished bedding as specified in clause num bedding .
tolerances num .
inlet and outlet invert levels shall be as shown in the drawings nummm .
level tolerances num .
the finished level of manholes gullies and catchpits should be flush with the finished level of surrounding area .
the maximum allowable vertical tolerance is nummm finished surface tolerance specification num drainage structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the finished level of manholes gullies and catchpits should be flush with the finished level of surrounding area .
the maximum allowable vertical tolerance is nummm replacement num insitu concrete drainage structures num .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings all insitu concrete shall be class nnum supplied and placed in accordance with specification num concrete general works and to the details shown on the drawings .
concrete num .
the base concrete slab shall be laid first .
pipes entering the structure shall be trimmed to length if necessary supported on the slab and secured at their correct location and level and the walls built up around them .
num .
all inlet and outlet pipes shall be solidly grouted in place to affect a watertight closure using a cement mortar of one num part portland cement and three num parts sand .
grouting num .
special care shall be taken to bring the top of the walls to a good finish so that the cover slabs may be accurately seated with a minimum thickness of mortar bed .
finish num .
all holes shall be completely filled with cement mortar consisting of one num part portland cement and three num parts sand and all joints neatly pointed inside and outside .
holes num .
on completion of the walls to the required height the reinforced cover slab may be placed in position .
the opening in the cover slab shall be closed with a suitable temporary cover before backfilling is completed .
cover slab num .
all sheeting braces and similar temporary supports shall be entirely removed from the excavation prior to backfilling .
removal shall be effected in such a way so as not to disturb or displace the drainage structure .
temporary support num .
no backfill shall be placed behind insitu drainage structures within seven days of concrete being placed .
concrete strength num brick construction num .
unless otherwise detailed on the drawings the provisions relating to insitu concrete drainage structures shall apply to drainage structures of brick construction where such method is a specified alternative .
num .
bricks shall be well wetted before use and every course shall be set in a full bed of cement mortar with all joints solidly filled .
walls shall be properly bonded fair faced and flush pointed internally .
pointing num .
no bats or broken bricks will be allowed except where necessary for closers .
mortar joints shall not be thicker than nummm but some variation is permissible where brickwork is used to adjust the height and slope of catchpit and gully frames .
mortar thickness specification num drainage structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num precast concrete liners num .
unless otherwise detailed on the drawings the provisions relating to insitu concrete drainage structures shall apply to those of precast concrete liner construction wherever relevant .
num .
holes of sufficient size to accommodate entry and exit pipes shall be cut or punched out in accordance with the manufactures published requirements without cracking the liner or causing unnecessary damage .
the hole to accommodate the pipe shall be no greater than the pipe diameter plus nummm .
cement mortar or an approved epoxy mortar shall be used in sealing around holes formed in structures to accommodate entry and exit conduits .
liner holes num step irons num .
where the depth of manholes and gullies are greater than one metre step irons shall be provided at nummm intervals in height unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
num removal of existing drainage structures num .
where detailed on the drawings redundant drainage structures located under roadways shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor to the contractors disposal site or an authorised waste disposal site or a site approved by the relevant local government authority .
removal num .
voids left from the removal of a drainage structure not intended to be replaced shall be backfilled and compacted with embankment quality material in accordance with specification num earthworks or pavement material in accordance with specification num pavements as required by this specification .
voids num damage to existing structures num .
if during construction of the works the contractor causes damage to any drainage structure that is not to be removed or disturbed the contractor shall repair the damage or replace the damaged structure to the requirements of this specification at no extra cost to the principal .
num adjustments of existing gully grates and manhole covers num .
where existing gully grates and manholes need to have the levels adjusted to suit the works level adjustments up to a maximum of nummm are acceptable by using an approved mortar .
num precast liners num .
for adjustments greater than nummm either spacer rings cutting of the existing liner or cutting of additional nominal length liners shall be used .
all cutting of either the existing liner or the spacer rings shall be undertaken such that the cuts are square to the length .
num .
the reinforcement exposed at the ends of the cut liners shall be treated with an approved epoxy mortar .
specification num drainage structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num brick structures num .
for level adjustments from nummm to nummm nummm high bricks shall be used .
num .
for level adjustments greater than nummm additional nummm high bricks shall be added to the structure up to a maximum of six courses .
alternatively a conversion slab and precast spacer rings andor liners can be used to adjust the levels .
num concrete cast insitu structures num .
for level adjustments from nummm to nummm nummm high bricks shall be used .
num .
for level adjustments greater than nummm additional nummm high bricks shall be added to the structure up to a maximum of six courses .
alternatively a conversion slab and precast spacer rings andor liners can be used to adjust the levels .
num breaking into an existing structure num .
where shown on the drawings existing drainage structures shall be broken into and new pipes installed .
when breaking into the structure holes of sufficient size to accommodate the new pipes shall be cut or punched out without causing any unnecessary damage to the structure .
the hole to accommodate the pipe shall be no greater than the pipe diameter plus nummm .
cement mortar or an approved epoxy mortar shall be used in sealing holes around the new pipe to affect a watertight closure .
num .
any damage to the structure during the installation of new pipes shall be repaired by the contractor at no cost to the principal .
num new structure with existing pipes num .
drainage structures shall be constructed on existing drainage lines where shown on the drawings .
when breaking into existing drainage lines cutting of the existing pipes shall be made square to the pipe .
num .
the reinforcement exposed at the ends of the cut pipes shall be treated with an approved epoxy mortar .
num cleaning num .
prior to the superintendents inspection and commissioning all drainage structures shall be completely cleaned of any material left over as a result of the construction process upon completion of the works .
hold point num stormwater drains num .
supply and installation of connecting stormwater drains shall be in accordance with the drawings and specification num culverts specification num drainage structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num drainage structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is road design engineer urban .
num .
wall thickness clause num num .
where specification num culverts annexure numa specifies that the insitu ground conditions for reinforced concrete pipe are aggressive the minimum concrete cover to steel reinforcement shall be nummm in accordance asnzs num .
as such nummm diameter liners should not be used in aggressive environment as the typical wall thickness does not allow nummm cover to be achieved .
in such circumstances nummm diameter liners should be specified instead .
num .
precast concrete liners clause num num .
there is a practical limit as to the number and size of holes which can be safely punched into the walls of the liner to accommodate entry and exit drainage conduits without compromising wall strength .
where the manufacturers published requirements differ to those shown on the drawings then the contractor shall use the more stringent requirements .
num .
dewatering clause num num .
where the requirement for dewatering exists then clause num in specification num environment specification num guidance notes shall be added to the contract specific requirements of that document .
specification num drainage structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num .
reuseable redundant drainage structures the following clause concerns the removal and storage of reusable redundant drainage structures .
if required clause num should be added and annexure numa as shown below also needs to be inserted on a separate page following clause num and completed num reusable redundant structures num .
where redundant drainage structures are located under roadways such structures shall be removed by the contractor and if deemed suitable for reuse by the superintendent shall be delivered to the storage area nominated in annexure numa .
num .
damaged or unusable drainage structures shall be disposed of by the contractor to the contractors disposal site approved by the superintendent .
damaged num .
low strength infill for redundant structures the practice of infilling redundant drainage structures with low strength infill should be discouraged as the locations of redundant structures are rarely monitored and subsequent service checks are not likely to show their location resulting in unnecessary delays if exposed in future works .
should their removal not be possible then clause num below should be added num low strength infill num .
where detailed on the drawings redundant drainage structures shall be filled with low strength concrete infill in accordance with specification num low strength infill .
specification num drainage structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa existing drainage structures num .
storage of removed structures num removed and reusable drainage structures shall be transported and neatly stacked at the following location specification num drainage structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title drainage structures revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date main roads western australia specification num rock protection page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num rock protection copyright main roads western australia main roads western australia specification num rock protection page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num rock protection revision register date clause number description of revision authorised by num table num added half tonne aswe num whole document reformatting sco num table num renaming of rock class swe num table num column num removed minimum from the title .
swe num whole document complete revision of issue no num to new format mcp main roads western australia specification num rock protection page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num source rock num num rock fill for gabions and mattresses num num rock supply by principal num num geotextile lining num num gabions num num mattresses num num selvedges num num lacingtying and connecting wire num num num not used num construction num num geotextile lining num num rock protection num num rock pitching num num installation of gabions and mattresses num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num supply of rock by principal num main roads western australia specification num rock protection page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num rock protection general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and construction of all types of rock protection linings and rock pitching .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num methods for sampling and testing aggregates method num wetdry strength variation as num geotechnical site investigations as num aggregates and rock for engineering purposes part num aggregates for gabions baskets and wire mattresses as num geotextiles glossary of terms as num geotextiles identification marking and general data as num geotextiles method of tests other standards publications austroads waterway design a guide to the hydraulic design of bridges culverts and floodways .
publication no .
apnum austroads guide to geotextiles .
publication no .
apnum main roads specifications specification num earthworks num num not used main roads western australia specification num rock protection page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num products and materials num source rock num .
source rock for rock protection and rock pitching shall consist of clean sound durable hard rock .
rock used shall be fresh to slightly weathered and of very high to extremely high strength as defined in as num .
rock that is laminated fractured porous or otherwise physically weak is unacceptable .
flat slablike rock pieces with the breadth or thickness less than one third its length should be avoided due to poor interlocking and easy dislodgement by flow where not grouted .
properties num .
limestone calcarenite used for rock pitching shall be moderately strong to strong with reference to the clark and walker classification system for cementation and strength .
unconfined compressive strength ucs shall not be less than num mpa and calcium carbonate content caconum shall not be less than num in accordance with test method wa num .
rock pitching num .
rock for use in bridgeworks shall be to the details shown on the bridgeworks drawings .
for roadworks and drainage works rock shall conform to the details given in table num .
rock type and size num .
prior to delivery to site the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the rock conforms to the specified requirements for its intended use .
test results shall be reported on nata endorsed documents .
hold point main roads western australia specification num rock protection page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num table num rock protection and rock pitching general requirements rock class rock size m approximate rock mass kg percentage of rock larger than rock size in the second column typical use examples only facing type b num num num num num num num num num culvert outlets light num num num num num num num num num floodway batters quarter tonne num num num num num num num num num floodway batters half tonne num num num num num num num num num floodway batters one tonne num num num num num num num num num floodway batters two tonne num num num num num num num num num floodway batters num rock pitching num x num x num num landscaped slopes typically limestone num rock pitching num x num x num num landscaped slopes typically limestone assuming a specific gravity of num and spherical shape for facing light quarter tonne half tonne one tonne and two tonne .
num rock fill for gabions and mattresses num .
rock fill for gabions and mattresses shall be produced or derived from dense hard durable and clean rock in accordance with as num .
it shall be resistant to weathering actions of air and water and shall be free from cracks and other structural defects .
rock type main roads western australia specification num rock protection page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
rock used for rock fill shall be fresh to slightly weathered and of very high to extremely high strength as defined in as num .
the rock fill shall be clean angular and durable and of uniform quality free from dust clay dirt and other deleterious material and free from an excess of flat or laminate pieces .
for gabions the minimum rock size shall be nummm and the maximum rock size shall be nummm .
for mattresses the minimum rock size shall be nummm and the maximum rock size shall be twothirds the thickness of the mattress or nummm whichever is the lesser .
the rock supplied shall have a range of sizes and a degree of angularity to ensure mechanical interlocking between rocks .
properties num .
when determined in accordance with as num the aggregate wet strength shall not be less than numkn and the wetdry strength variation shall not exceed num .
the rock may be crushed so as to produce the aggregate suitable to test by as num .
num .
prior to delivery to site the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the rock fill conforms to the specified requirements for its intended use .
test results shall be reported on nata endorsed documents .
hold point num rock supply by principal num .
where some or all the rock protection requirements are supplied by the principal details are provided at annexure numa .
the contractor shall supply any additional rock that is required for the works .
annexure numa num geotextile lining num .
the geotextile for rock protection shall be a nonwoven fabric consisting of long chain synthetic polymer fibres composed of at least num by mass of polyester or polyolefins polypropylene polyethylene bonded by needle punching heat or chemical bonding processes or combinations thereof .
bonded fibres must be capable of retaining their relative position in the geotextile .
the polymer fibres shall be rot proof chemically stable and have low water absorbency .
the geotextile shall have a high ultraviolet resistance such that when tested in accordance with as num shall have retained strength of at least num after num hours of test exposure .
the geotextile shall be free of any flaws or defects that may adversely affect the mechanical or physical properties of the fabric .
geotextile num .
each roll of geotextile shall be provided with a suitable covering to protect the fabric against moisture and ultraviolet radiation and marked in conformance with as num .
supply num .
prior to installation the geotextile rolls shall be stored on site under a protective cover and supported off the ground .
the contractor shall take appropriate measures to protect the geotextile from damage .
this includes adhering to any other recommendations on method of storage set by the suppliermanufacturer .
storage main roads western australia specification num rock protection page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
prior to the use of geotextile the contractor shall submit to the superintendent product certificates of compliance from the supplier showing that the geotextile complies with all the requirements of this specification for intended use .
test results shall be reported on nata endorsed documents .
hold point num .
the contractor shall also certify that the geotextile delivered to site meets the specification requirements .
sampling conditioning and statistical analysis of results for each batch of geotextile shall be carried out in accordance with asnum .
sampling frequency shall be in accordance with appendix a of as num .
the conformance testing shall include determining the mean weight mass per unit area of the geotextile in accordance with as num .
sampling and testing num geotextile for rock protection num .
the equivalent opening size eos of the geotextile shall be less than num m mean value determined in accordance with as num .
the geotextile strength rating g shall be greater than num as defined in austroads guide to geotextiles where g l . hnum .
l in newtons is the characteristic value of burst strength cbr plunger method for the batch tested determined in accordance with as num and as num. hnum in mm is the characteristic puncture resistance drop cone method value for the batch tested determined in accordance with as num and as num .
the characteristic values of l and hnum shall be calculated as the mean value less num standard deviation .
if appropriate the minimum g rating may be reduced to num where the nominal maximum particle size of the rock is no greater than num mm .
eos and g rating num num geotextiles for gabions and mattresses num .
all gabions and mattresses shall be laid on geotextile filter lining as per the drawings .
num .
the equivalent opening size eos of the geotextile shall be less than num m mean value determined in accordance with as num .
the geotextile strength rating g shall be greater than num as defined in austroads guide to geotextiles where g l . hnum .
l in newtons is the characteristic value of burst strength cbr plunger method for the batch tested determined in accordance with as num and as num. hnum in mm is the characteristic puncture resistance drop cone method value for the batch tested determined in accordance with as num and as num .
the characteristic values of l and hnum shall be calculated as the mean value less num standard deviation .
eos and g rating num gabions num .
details of gabions shall be as shown on the drawings .
main roads western australia specification num rock protection page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the gabions supplied by the contractor shall be flexible woven galvanised pvc coated steel wire mesh boxes to the overall dimensions as specified on the drawings .
alternative equivalent or improved methods of corrosion protection such as zincaluminium alloy and polyethylene coatings are acceptable .
corrosion protection num .
gabions shall have a hexagonal mesh with nominal size of nummm x num mm .
the minimum steel core wire diameter for the mesh shall be num mm .
mesh size and wire diameter num .
each gabion shall be divided by diaphragms into cells whose length shall not be greater than the width of the gabion plus num millimetres .
cells num .
prior to use the contractor shall submit to the superintendent product certificates of compliance from the supplier showing that the gabions selvedges and lacing wire comply with all the requirements of this specification for its intended use .
hold point num mattresses num .
details of rock mattresses shall be as shown on the drawings .
num .
the mattresses supplied by the contractor shall be flexible woven galvanised pvc coated steel wire mesh boxes to the overall dimensions as specified on the drawings .
alternative equivalent or improved methods of corrosion protection such as zincaluminium alloy and polyethylene coatings are acceptable .
corrosion protection num .
mattresses shall have a hexagonal mesh with nominal size of nummm x nummm .
the minimum steel core wire diameter for the mesh shall be nummm for mattresses with less than nummm depth and nummm for num to nummm depth .
mesh size and wire diameter num .
each mattress shall be divided by diaphragms into cells across the width of the unit and at not more than numm centres or as shown on the drawings .
cells num .
prior to use the contractor shall submit to the superintendent product certificates of compliance from the supplier showing that the mattresses selvedges and lacing wire comply with all the requirements of this specification for its intended use .
hold point num selvedges num .
all edges of the gabions mattresses diaphragms and end panels shall be selvedged with a continuous wire thicker than the corresponding wire of the gabion mattress or diaphragm to give the mesh rigidity when subjected to tension .
edge selvedge main roads western australia specification num rock protection page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the selvedging must be such that the mesh will not unravel .
in addition the strength of the connection between the galvanised selvedge wire and the mesh shall be equal to or greater than the breaking strength of the mesh .
properties num .
the minimum steel core wire diameter shall be nummm for gabions nummm for mattresses less than nummm depth and nummm for mattresses between num to nummm depth .
wire diameter num lacingtying and connecting wire num .
lacingtying and connecting wire must be supplied with the gabions and mattresses to perform all the wiring operations required for the construction of the gabions or mattresses on site .
lacing num .
the minimum steel core wire diameter for lacingtying and connecting either gabions or mattresses shall be nummm .
wire diameter num .
where the selvedge has to be fastened to the cut ends of the mesh its diameter shall be nummm and it shall be attached by binding the cut ends of the mesh about it so that a force of not less than num numn applied in the same plane as the mesh at a point on the selvedge of a mesh sample of length num nummm is required to separate it from the mesh .
fastening num num not used construction num geotextile lining num .
the correct geotextile filter lining shall be supplied to suit unconfined rock protection or for use with gabions and mattresses .
lining types num .
the period between initial laying out and complete cover of the geotextile with rock embankment protection gabions or mattresses shall not exceed num days .
where possible and practical geotextile shall be placed just ahead of associated advancing construction work and covered by relevant construction materials or suitable protective sheeting within num hours of being placed .
exposure num .
any geotextile allowed to remain exposed to sunlight for a period greater than num days shall be removed and replaced at no cost to the principal .
prolonged exposure num .
the geotextile shall be laid in full roll widths as supplied with the length of the fabric laid in the direction of stream flow .
adjacent strips shall be overlapped a minimum of nummm .
laying and overlap main roads western australia specification num rock protection page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the contractor shall take every reasonable care to ensure that the geotextile is not damaged during installation and cover placement operations .
the laid geotextile shall be subjected only to pedestrian traffic .
care num .
any geotextile torn shall be replaced or patched by the laying over of an additional piece of geotextile extending a minimum of numm from the extremities of the tear .
the fabric shall be held down by rocks or other suitable means to prevent movements before placement of the rock embankment protection gabions or mattresses .
repair num rock protection num .
rock protection shall be supplied to the specified classes of rock and shall comprise hard clean rock spalls or cobbles obtained from the excavation of a uniform type and colour and grading as specified in clause num placed to the dimensions shape and extent shown on the drawings .
class of rock num .
excavation for any required trenching for the placement of rock protection shall be constructed to the line level and dimensions shown on the drawings .
surplus oversize and unsuitable material from excavations shall be disposed of in accordance with specification num earthworks .
excavation num .
the rock spalls shall be firmly placed into position to the required lines and levels with a minimum of voids and shaped to suit the drain grades or batter slopes to the following tolerances and compacted with at least num passes of a crawler tractor of mass not less than num tonnes placement a batter slopes shall be smoothly shaped to a uniform plane tolerances b the dimensions of the rock layer shall not be less than that shown in the drawings .
local surface irregularities of the finished surface shall not vary from the prevailing batter slope by more than nummm or nummm measured at right angles to the slope except for culvert outlet protection which shall not vary by more than nummm or nummm c on floodways no rock shall project above the shoulder and pavement level .
num .
rock protection shall present a generally uniform finish with flat surfaces of larger individual spalls facing uppermost comprising the finished surface and thoroughly keyed to the adjoining rocks .
finish num .
care shall be taken during placement to prevent sand filling voids between the rocks .
voids main roads western australia specification num rock protection page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
where grouted rock protection is specified individual rock spalls shall be placed on a mortar bed and voids between spalls filled with mortar as detailed in the drawings .
the size of the voids shall not exceed nummm in any direction .
mortar num .
mortar for grouting shall comprise a num mix of builders sand and ordinary portland cement with all sand being from the same source .
mortar mix num rock pitching num sample panels num .
prior to the commencement of rock pitching the contractor shall prepare a sample panel of each type of rock pitching required in the works each at least numm high x numm long for the superintendents approval .
hold point num .
the samples shall display rock colour texture grain surface treatment rock size and jointing detail .
the sample shall remain until the completion of stonework in the works .
display num .
the standard of construction approved for the samples shall be maintained throughout the works .
standard num construction num .
the finished rockwork on sloping rock pitching shall present a uniform surface matching adjacent slopes .
the finished surface shall be thoroughly cleaned of all excess mortar and other debris .
sloping rockwork num .
transitions from pitched batter slopes to pitched level surface shall be in the form of a smooth vertical curve to both top and toe conforming to the dimensions and form as indicated on the drawings .
slope transition num .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings the rocks shall be set level and flush for a lateral distance of numm when located adjacent to other paving materials such as kerbs paths and manholes .
paving transition num .
rocks at the top and toe of batter slopes shall be securely underpinned with mortar to prevent any vertical movement .
no mortar shall be visible after adjacent finished levels have been restored .
voids shall be filled with mortar from the bottom to within nummm of the exposed face of the rock .
mortar work num .
mortar shall comprise a num mix of builders sand and ordinary portland cement with all sand being from the same source .
where limestone is used for rock pitching mortar shall comprise a num mix of builders sand builders lime and ordinary portland cement with all sand being from the same source .
mortar mix main roads western australia specification num rock protection page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num installation of gabions and mattresses num .
the assembly and erection of the gabions and mattresses shall conform to the following and the manufacturers recommendations .
prior to assembly the wire mesh of the gabion or mattress shall be opened out flat on the ground and stretched as much as possible to remove all kinks and bends and checked to make sure that all creases are in the correct positions for forming the box .
assembly num .
the gabion or mattress shall be assembled individually by lifting the side and end panels into vertical position to form a rectangular box ensuring that the tops of all four sides are level .
panels num .
the four corners of the gabion or mattress box shall be wired together with lengths of lacing wire supplied .
starting at the top the end of the wire shall be secured by twisting it around the selvedges and through each mesh in turn using alternate single and double loops .
the wire at the bottom shall be secured with the lacing wire turned to the inside of the box on completion .
the diaphragm panels shall also be secured in a similar fashion .
lacing num .
the assembled empty gabion or mattress boxes shall be positioned in the structure .
the end or side from which work is expected to proceed shall be secured either to completed work or by stakes driven into the ground at the corners .
these stakes must be secure and reach at least to the top of the gabion or mattress .
staking num .
for gabions the opposite end or side of the box shall be stretched using crowbars or a small winch and secured top and bottom by stakes placed at the corners fixed at the bottom and tied back at the top .
lacing to adjacent boxes and filling shall be carried out whilst gabion boxes are under tension .
gabion stretching num .
for mattresses movement of the rockfill inside the cells either due to gravity or flowing current should be kept to a minimum .
mattresses on slopes shall be placed such that the long dimension lies up and down the slope i.e .
internal diaphragms at right angles to the direction of the slope .
in watercourses the long dimension of the mattress should be aligned with the direction of flow i.e .
internal diaphragms at right angles to the direction of flow .
the boxes shall be wired together along all adjoining edges and at diaphragm points .
mattress alignment num .
the gabion boxes shall be filled one third full and horizontal interval bracing inserted approximately numm apart to prevent excessive bulging and distortion of the completed structure .
this procedure shall be repeated when the box is two thirds full .
for both gabions and mattresses final filling shall be to a level num to nummm above their tops to allow for subsequent settlement .
filling main roads western australia specification num rock protection page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
closing and lacing down of lids for both gabions and mattresses shall proceed as soon as practicable after filling operations .
the lids shall be stretched tight over the filling with suitably design closing tools and laced securely through each mesh along all edges ends and diaphragms .
the ends of all lacing wires shall be turned into the box on completion of all lacing operations .
final lacing num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used main roads western australia specification num rock protection page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numa supply of rock by principal num .
rock spall details num rock spalls supplied by the principal are to the following details location of stockpiledumpsite type eg granite class eg facing quantity m cost m main roads western australia specification num rock protection page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num guidance notes delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference all edits to downloaded tdp documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
deletions shall be struck through e.g .
example .
insertions shall be in italics e.g .
example .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted then the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
the custodian of this specification is the senior waterways engineer .
num .
annexure numa supply of rock by principal num insert details into table where some or all the rock requirement is being supplied by the principal .
num if not applicable delete table and insert not applicable for this contract .
main roads western australia specification num rock protection page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specificationamendmentchecklist specification name no num revision no _____ title rock protection project manager name _______________signature __________date________ checked by name _______________signature _______________date________ contract no ______contract description___________________________________ item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked change mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materialsproductsclauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from mcp .
num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection testing parameters included in spec num test methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date ______________ main roads western australia specification num rock protection page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num kerbing copyright main roads western australia specification num kerbing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num guidance notes change of specification custodian rdsm num whole document complete revision of issue no num to new format mcp num specification num kerbing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num products and materials num num concrete num num joint fillers and sealants num num curing compounds num num kerb backfill num num num not used num construction num num general num num setting out num num surface preparation num num extruded kerbs num num kerb openings num num curing num num joints num num tolerances num num special features num num backfilling num num medians and traffic islands num num kerb repairs num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num specification num kerbing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num kerbing general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply of materials and construction of all types of extruded concrete kerbs and all associated works all as shown on the drawings .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num concrete kerbs channels gutters manually or machine placed main roads test methods wa num moisture content convection oven method wa num moisture content microwave oven method wa num dry density ratio main roads specifications specification num earthworks specification num rock protection specification num segmental paving specification num concrete general works main roads standard drawings num kerb types num kerb treatments num definitions num .
filler elastic tight fitting nonrotting nonabsorbent material used to provide firm backing against which the sealant can be tooled off .
filler shall also prevent the sealant from adhering to the bottom of the joint and cause the sealant to fail during the expansion of joints .
specification num kerbing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
sealants material used to seal expansion joints to prevent penetration of destructive materials .
num num not used products and materials num concrete num .
concrete shall be class nnum supplied in accordance with the requirements of specification num concrete general works and shall have a maximum aggregate size of between nummm and nummm and a slump not exceeding nummm .
class num .
unless otherwise stated herein all concrete materials used in the construction of kerbs shall be as described in specification num concrete general works .
num joint fillers and sealants num .
joint fillers shall comprise either a closed cell polyethylene rod of num mm diameter or a strip of poly urethane foam nummm wide .
filler num .
joint sealing compound for surface sealing shall be a grey butyl mastic sealant .
sealer num curing compounds num .
concrete curing compounds shall be based on an aliphatic alcohol for application in spray form .
num kerb backfill num .
kerb backfill material shall consist of an embankment quality material in accordance with specification num earthworks .
num num not used construction num general num .
kerbs on straight alignments exceeding numm and on curves of radii exceeding numm shall be placed by an extrusion machine .
machine placed num .
where the kerb is on a straight line of numm or less or on a radius of numm or less or where the lack of clearance prevents the kerb being placed by an extrusion machine the section of kerb may be hand placed .
hand placed kerb shall be rodded and shaped to give a finished kerb meeting the requirements of this specification .
hand placement num .
the shape and dimensions of the kerb shall be in accordance with the drawings .
shape dimensions specification num kerbing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num setting out num .
setting out of the kerb shape profile and alignment shall be carried out on the rear of the kerb .
spikes and nails shall not be driven into the pavement surface .
num surface preparation num .
the surface to receive kerbing shall normally be a bituminous aggregate seal .
receiving surface num .
the contractor shall clean the area between the receiving surface and the new kerb of all loose sand stones dust and other foreign matter and shall wet the surface with water immediately prior to placement of the new kerbing .
cleaning num extruded kerbs num .
extruded kerbs shall be laid by a suitable extrusion machine .
no dowels are required .
machine laid num .
extruded kerbs shall be dense with regular sides edges and chamfers finished to a fine surface free from blow holes and dragging and shall be impervious .
finishing with grout will not be permitted .
finish num .
the constituents of the concrete mix shall be as described in specification num concrete general works .
the mix for extruded kerbs shall be designed by the contractor who shall prepare place and compact trial mixes using the same extrusion machine as will be used in the works .
concrete mix num kerb openings num .
kerb openings shall be located and installed in accordance with the drawings .
openings num .
any associated rock protection shall be in accordance with specification num rock protection .
rock protection num curing num .
all exposed faces of the completed kerb shall be kept permanently wet for the curing period of a minimum num hours after placing .
concrete maybe cured by spraying with approved curing compounds .
concrete protection num .
any water applied shall not cause erosion of the concrete surface .
num .
the concrete shall be protected within num minutes after completion of casting the kerb .
num .
the kerb shall be protected from rain for at least twenty four num hours following placement .
rain num .
the kerb shall be protected from traffic for a period of twelve num hours following placement .
traffic specification num kerbing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num joints num .
immediately after placing the kerbing contraction joints shall be formed by grooving the exposed faces of the kerbs .
contraction joints shall be formed at spacings not exceeding numm .
contraction num .
not less than num hours nor more than num hours after placing of concrete expansion joints shall be constructed at the mid point between contraction joints by sawing a num mm wide gap through the full cross section of the kerb .
kerb cutting shall be carried out with water to minimise dust in the sawing process .
expansion joints num .
an approved joint filler shall then be forced into the sawn joint such that a num mm deep space remains to the concrete surface .
this space shall be completely filled with an approved joint sealant such as sikaflex construction polyurethane joint sealant or equivalent approved by the superintendent and used as per manufacturers instructions .
fillers sealants num tolerances num .
all kerbing shall be placed within nummm of its true plan position on the ground and the rate of deviation from its true line shall not exceed num in num .
the road face and the back face of the finished kerbing shall be parallel .
tolerances num .
the profile of finished kerbing shall not be less than that shown in the drawings .
kerb depth num .
the top surface shall be parallel to the ruling grade of the pavement and shall be free from depressions exceeding nummm when measured from a numm long straight edge .
top surface num special features num .
special features such as pram ramps transitions and end treatments shall be formed into the kerbing as required according to the details shown on the drawings .
num backfilling num .
where required the area behind kerbs shall be backfilled with suitable select fill quality material or as directed by the superintendent and compacted in accordance with the specification num earthworks .
the surface shall be constructed to the finished lines and levels shown in the drawings .
material num .
any kerb sections dislodged during backfilling or otherwise misaligned shall be removed and relaid at no cost to the principal .
care shall be taken in backfilling to ensure that no damage defacement or staining is caused to the kerbs and that the compaction requirements of the specification are achieved .
damage num medians and traffic islands num .
merging noses approach noses ramps traffic island infill slabs and other areas of medians and traffic islands as shown in the drawings shall be constructed of insitu concrete .
insitu specification num kerbing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the thickness of concrete shall exceed nummm except where otherwise detailed in the drawings .
the level of concrete infill shall be within nummm and nummm of the surrounding surface level .
thickness num .
select fill material shall be placed following the installation and setting of associated kerbing prior to placing of concrete slab except where otherwise detailed in the drawings in accordance with specification num earthworks .
the backfill material shall be supplied placed levelled and compacted by the contractor .
backfill num .
the finished surface of the concrete shall true and even without projections or irregularities and shall have a deep brush textured finish .
finish num .
an expansion joint nummm wide shall be constructed between the extruded kerbing and the concrete infill .
approved joint filler shall be forced into the joint such that a nummm deep groove remains .
this groove shall be filled after cleaning with an approved joint sealant .
expansion num .
immediately after placing concrete tooled contraction joints shall be formed at numm maximum intervals .
joint edges shall be neatly pointed .
contraction num .
grabrail and bollard sleeves where required shall be cast into ramps or concrete infill in accordance with the drawings .
sleeves num .
paving unit infill to such areas shall be constructed in accordance with specification num segmental paving .
paving units num kerb repairs num .
broken or damaged kerbing shall be removed and disposed of to the contractors spoil site at no cost to the principal .
damaged kerbing num .
the exposed concrete repair surface shall be roughened to remove all laitance and expose the aggregate to provide a thorough bond with concrete cast subsequently .
the roughened surface shall be cleaned with water to remove loose chips and foreign material .
repair num .
immediately before fresh concrete is cast against the existing surface the existing surface shall be thoroughly wetted .
wetting num .
class nnum concrete or rapid setting concrete products of like strength shall be placed and compacted in accordance with specification num concrete general work .
placement num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num kerbing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is senior road engineer .
num .
temporary kerbing clause num if temporary kerbing is required particularly if to be left in place after the completion of the works pending a later addition to or finalisation of the road design clause num see over could be added to the section contract specific requirements .
specification num kerbing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num temporary kerbing num .
temporary kerbing shall be installed where shown on the drawings in accordance with the requirements for permanent kerbing .
temporary kerbing shall be laid on a bond breaker membrane between the kerbing and the surface to prevent adhesion to the surface and to assist future removal .
num .
when the concrete has set a suitable fill material shall be placed between the permanent kerbing and the temporary kerbing and left flush with the top of the kerbing .
specification num kerbing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title kerbing revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date main roads western australia specification num revetment mattress page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num revetment mattress copyright main roads western australia main roads western australia specification num revetment mattress page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num revetment mattress revision register date clause number description of revision authorised by num apr num whole document document reviewed by custodian and no change required swe num aug num whole document complete revision of issue no num to new format mcp main roads western australia specification num revetment mattress page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num products and materials num num uniform cross section fabric num num fabric specifications num num num not used num installation num num fabric and grout num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num main roads western australia specification num revetment mattress page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num revetment mattress general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of supplying all materials equipment and labour required for installing revetment mattresses .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below american standard test methods astmdnum test method for air permeability of textile fabrics astmdnum standard guide for evaluating non woven fabrics astmdnum test methods for water permeability of geo textiles by permittivity astmdnum standard test method for index puncture resistance of geotextiles geomembranes and related products .
astmdnum standard test method for breaking strength and elongation of textile fabrics grab test num definitions num .
a revetment mattress is a doublesided mattress that shall be positioned over the surface and then injected with a sand cement grout .
the finished product shall follow the contours over which it is laid and shall be neat in appearance .
the resultant product will be a stable mat of suitable weight and configuration .
num num not used main roads western australia specification num revetment mattress page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num products and materials num uniform cross section fabric num .
uniform cross section fabric shall consist of double layer fabric joined together by restraining ties of uniform strength .
hydrostatic uplift where required shall be provided by inserting plastic weephole assemblies through the mat at specified centres .
the minimum thickness of the pumped mat shall be nummm .
num fabric specifications warp weft num dtx high tensity heavily u.v .
stabilised continuous filament polyester .
astm dnum endspick num per cm fabric weight num numgm num grab tensile strength warp above num n per nummm per fabric layer weft above num n per nummm per fabric layer grab elongation at break warp num weft num tear strength warp above num n per fabric layer weft above num n per fabric layer astm dnum porosity num num cub cm min sq cm astm dnum burst strength above num n astm dnum puncture strength above num n per single layer of fabric astm dnum water flow rate num num cub cm min sq cm astm dnum num num not used installation num fabric and grout num .
individual mill width panels shall be cut to suitable length and the two layers of fabric separately joined edge to create a continuous concrete mattress .
the fabric shall be positioned in its desired location with allowance made for the fabrics contraction .
fabric main roads western australia specification num revetment mattress page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
grout shall consist of a mixture of portland cement fine aggregate and water so proportioned and mixed as to provide a readily pumpable slurry .
a cut shall be made in the top layer of the mattress in which an injection hose shall be inserted through which the grout is pumped .
the cured grout shall exhibit a compressive strength of at least nummpa after num days .
grout num .
the mattress shall be tied down into an anchor trench on all perimeters as shown .
this trench is then earth backfilled or concrete backfilled to prevent any washouts behind the mat as detailed on the drawings .
num .
the finished product shall be fully inflated free of wrinkles or flat spots and shall leave no gaps around any permanent structures that are to be protected .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used main roads western australia specification num revetment mattress page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num guidance notes delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference all edits to downloaded tdp documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
deletions shall be struck through e.g .
example .
insertions shall be in italics e.g .
example .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted then the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
the custodian of this specification is the senior waterways engineer .
num .
application num revetment mattresses have a limited use in scour prevention works associated with major waterways structures .
they can not be used as a replacement for heavy duty antiscour applications where severe hydraulic forces are involved .
num reference to the senior waterways engineer must be made when this product is being considered for waterways applications .
main roads western australia specification num revetment mattress page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contract specific requirements to add or delete the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
none at this time .
main roads western australia specification num revetment mattress page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification amendment checklist specification name no num revision no _________title revetment mattress project manager name ______________signature _______________date______ checked by name _______________signature _______________date_____ contract no ___________contract description_____________________________ item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked change mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materialsproductsclauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from mcp .
num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection testing parameters included in spec num test methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date _______________ specification num low strength infill copyright main roads western australia specification num low strength infill num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document complete review of specification gsme num whole document complete review of specification gsme num whole document complete review of specification gsme num whole document complete revision of issue no num to new format mcp num specification num low strength infill num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num cement fine aggregates and admixture num num not used num products and materials num num properties num num num not used num testing num num compressive strength num num settlement num num flow consistency num num num not used num construction num num placement num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num specification num low strength infill num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num low strength infill general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the mix design production delivery and placing of low strength infill lsi for the backfilling of redundant or abandoned pipes culverts and other buried structures .
num references australian standards as num methods of testing concrete method for making and curing concrete compression and indirect tensile test specimens as num determination of properties related to the consistency of concreteslump flow tnum and j ring test as num chemical admixtures for concrete mortar and grout part num admixtures for concrete as num general purpose and blended cements as num supplementary cementitious material for use with portland and blended cement fly ash as num supplementary cementitious material for use with portland and blended cement slag ground granulated iron blast furnace main roads specifications specification num culverts num definitions num .
low strength infill lsi shall consist of a mixture of cementitious binder water aggregate and admixtures .
the cementitious binder may include portland cement fly ash and ground granulated blast furnace slag in accordance with as num as num and as num respectively .
constituents num .
the compressive strength of the low strength infill shall be defined as the average compressive strength of a minimum of two cylinder samples taken from the mix and made and cured and tested in accordance with the section testing .
the sample age at test shall be as detailed in table num .
where combinations of two or more binders are used the sample age at test shall be the greater of the ages for the binders used .
compressive strength specification num low strength infill num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
settlement shall be defined as the change in volume of the low strength infill between initial placement and the sample age specified in table num measured as a percentage of the initial volume .
the maximum settlement of the proposed mix shall be determined prior to placement in accordance with clause num .
settlement table num ages of test samples binder type sample age at test portland cement num days ground granulated blast furnace slag num days fly ash num days num cement fine aggregates and admixture num .
cement used in the works shall comply with the requirements of type gp cement as specified in as num .
blended cement shall be a combination of type gp cement and fly ash complying with as num .
num .
fine aggregates for low strength infill shall be natural sand and shall comply with the requirements of as num .
num .
any admixture shall comply with the requirements of and be used in accordance with as num .
num not used products and materials num properties num .
low strength infill shall be homogeneous free of lumps of unmixed material and without segregation .
the highly flowable mixture is selfcompacting and can be placed easily without vibration or tamping .
num .
low strength infill shall comply with the requirements of table num .
num .
the contractor may submit alternate mix designs to the superintendent for approval prior to placement of the low strength material .
num .
documentary evidence that the mix will comply with the specified requirements of the contract under consideration from previous production of the mix the test results must not be more than num months old .
specification num low strength infill num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num acceptance limits property limit minimum compressive strength numkpa maximum compressive strength numkpa maximum allowable settlement num num .
multiple pours are permitted to achieve the maximum allowable settlement specified provided the contractor can demonstrate that the void can be completely filled with the low strength infill .
multiple pours num num not used testing num compressive strength num .
all cylinder moulds shall be nummm diameter by nummm long conforming to as num .
each cylinder mould shall be filled in approximately num equal layers by pouring the low strength infill into the mould .
air bubbles in the sample may be removed by gentle tapping of the mould .
the sample shall not be compacted by rodding or vibration .
following removal of air bubbles the mould should be sealed with a tight fitting lid .
test cylinders num .
the mould may be stripped from the specimen when sufficient strength has been attained to ensure the specimen is removed without damage .
num .
store specimen in a num humidity environment at a temperature of numc numc until the age specified for testing in clause num is achieved .
storage num .
the rate of loading during compressive strength testing shall be num mm per minute .
loading rate num settlement num .
the percentage settlement shall be determined by completely filling a vertical num metre section of num millimetre nominal bore upvc pipe capped at the base with the proposed low strength infill mix .
air bubbles in the sample may be removed by gentle tapping of the mould .
the sample shall not be compacted by rodding or vibration .
num .
the exposed surface of the sample should be screeded level with the top of the upvc pipe then sealed to prevent loss of water and stored in a vibration free environment at numc numc .
specification num low strength infill num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the sample settlement shall be measured daily until the difference between any two consecutive readings is less than num millimetre .
where free water is seen to collect on the surface of the sample this shall be noted and the depth of water measured .
a final reading shall be taken of settlement at the sample age specified in table num .
the total change in volume from sample preparation is calculated as a percentage of the initial sample volume .
settlement measurement num flow consistency the slump flow of the lsi shall be determined in accordance with as num .
table num flowability for fine aggregates properties of low strength infill measurement of the slump flow slump flow num mm spread the slump flow of the lsi shall comply with the requirements of table num .
num num not used construction num placement num .
prior to the commencement of filling operations the superintendent shall be provided with details of the proposed mix design and results of testing e.g .
site performance testcheck demonstrating conformance with the specification .
hold point num .
pipes culverts and other buried structures shall be filled with low strength infill strictly to the limits shown on the drawings .
to place low strength materials use a pump suitable for the type of void to be filled and its accessibility or other means acceptable to the superintendent .
num .
any formwork used to contain the infill shall be removed on completion of the works .
the contractor shall remove at its own cost any low strength infill placed outside these limits without damage to the surrounding permanent structure .
any damage resulting from this work shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
num .
the filling of each section of pipe shall proceed from both ends .
the job shall only be considered complete when the material is seen to flow out of the other end full to the soffit i.e .
the soffit of the pipe must be wet by the material .
where both ends of the pipe can not be open the lsi must be injected via a sacrificial hose inserted to the far end of the pipe being filled .
the superintendent shall be provided with details of the volume of low strength infill placed after each pour .
specification num low strength infill num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
disused pipes and pits must be removed or entirely filled insitu by injecting with low strength infill under pressure .
the lsi shall be placed in a manner that allows all air or water or both to be displaced readily as the flowable lsi fills the enclosure .
num .
at no time after final set of the low strength infill shall any vertical cross section of the filled void be less than num of the total void filled with low strength infill of the specified compressive strength range .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num low strength infill num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is geomechanical and structural materials engineer .
num .
use of low strength infill num .
for redundant or disused pipes and associated drainage structures which are located under roadways or portions of roadways not scheduled for reconstruction the use of a low strength infill is an acceptable alternative to removal and backfilling to avoid unnecessary destruction of an existing pavement .
num .
in such cases existing culverts and drainage structures which may be treated in this way must be indicated on the drawings .
it would normally only apply to the smaller diameter num mm pipes culverts and associated drainage structures .
specification num low strength infill num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num low strength infill num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title low strength infill revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num pavements copyright main roads western australia specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date mme num references added wa num wa num table num amended cbr criterion for gravel subbase num added sustainability considerations table num amended cbr criterion for crb subbase tables num num num num num included vertical modulus criterion num added trimmings clause num amended hold point num amended num amended table numanum amended basecourse dryback sprayed seal criterion table numanum amended psd criterion guidance notes amended notes num num num num guidance note num added note num for basecourse vertical modulus guidance note num added ger basecourse and subbase specifications guidance note added note num for reclaimed pavement sub base whole document reformatted sco num num add crushed rock subbase material pm num table num amended ucs criteria num amended maximum basecourse thickness num num num num num amended compaction moisture num num guidance notes num num amended rework requirements guidance note num amended limitations on ferricrete use guidance note num add wheatbelt region gravels guidance note num amended lime demand requirements tables num.gnum num.gnum num amended design traffic limits specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num not used num products and materials num num sustainability considerations num num water num num gravel subbase supplied by the contractor num num crushed limestone subbase supplied by the contractor num num crushed rock subbase supplied by the contractor num num gravel basecourse supplied by the contractor num num crushed rock base basecourse supplied by the contractor num num hydrated cement treated crushed rockbase basecourse supplied by the contractor num num bitumen stabilised limestone basecourse supplied by the contractor num num cement for stabilised pavements num num cement for hctcrb num num num not used num construction num num general num num dryback requirements num num spreading num num compaction num num cement stabilisation num num blend areas num num drainage layer num specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used num acceptance num num general num num compaction num num dryback num num layer width num num surface shape num num surface levels num num surface finish num num num not used num maintenance num num maintenance of compacted layers num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure num a num construction requirements num annexure num b num cementitious materials for concrete num specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num pavements general num scope the work under this specification consists of the supply of materials and construction of all types of unbound granular and modified granular pavement layers including stabilisation of layers .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are shown below australian standards as num methods for sampling and testing aggregates as num bitumen emulsion for construction and maintenance of pavements as num methods of testing soils for engineering purposes as num limes and limestones for building as num residual bitumen for pavements as num methods of testing portland and blended cements as num geotextiles identification marking and general data as num geotextiles methods of test as num portland and blended cement austroads test methods agpttnum determination of permanent deformation and resilient modulus characteristics of unbound granular materials under drained conditions main roads publications road note no num interim guide to prediction of pavement moisture for strength assessment of granular basecourse and subbase materials specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name road note no num statistically based quality control for density in road construction road note no num procedure for the design of flexible pavements num water to be used in pavement construction main roads test methods wa num random sample site location wa num sampling procedures for soil and granular pavement materials wa num preparation of disturbed soil and granular pavement material samples wa num moisture content convection oven method wa num moisture content microwave oven method wa num particle size distribution sieving and decantation method wa num particle size distribution abbreviated method for coarse materials wa num liquid limit cone penetrometer method wa num plasticity index wa num linear shrinkage wa num dry densitymoisture content relationship modified compaction fine and medium grained soils wa num dry densitymoisture content relationship modified compaction coarse grained soils wa num dry density ratio wa num moisture ratio percent wa num maximum dry compressive strength wa num california bearing ratio wa num main roads wa supplement to agpttnum wa num main roads wa supplement hctcrb to agpttnum wa num determination of the unconfined compressive strength of laboratory compacted specimens wa num determination of the unconfined compressive strength of hydrated cement treated crushed rock base wa num flakiness index specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name wa num los angeles abrasion value wa num los angeles abrasion value of crushed limestone wa num surface profile three metre straight edge wa num dry density and moisture content nuclear method wa num layer thickness direct measurement wa num dispersion of bitumen in soil wa num bitumen content and particle size distribution of asphalt and stabilised soil centrifuge method wa num chlorides and total soluble salts in soils and water wa num calcium carbonate content main roads specifications specification num general requirements specification num quality systems specification num earthworks specification num pits and quarries specification num bituminous surfacing specification num asphalt surfacing specification num full depth asphalt pavement australian technical infrastructure committee atic specification spnum cementitious materials for concrete num definitions num .
the portion of the road placed above the design subgrade level including shoulders .
pavement num .
a portion of the pavement placed and compacted as an entity .
pavement layer num .
one or more layers of material usually constituting the uppermost structural element of a pavement on which the surfacing may be placed .
basecourse specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the material laid on the subgrade and below the basecourse either for the purpose of making up the additional pavement thickness required to prevent intrusion of the subgrade into the base or to provide a working platform .
subbase num .
the trimmed or prepared portion of the formation on which the pavement is constructed .
the subgrade may comprise in situ or imported materials .
subgrade num not used products and materials num sustainability considerations num .
materials for road pavements shall be managed under the sustainability hierarchy of reduce reuse and recycle .
num .
unless defined otherwise the materials described in this specification shall be sourced from pits or quarries of natural materials and shall be blended crushed or processed as applicable to produce a homogenous material .
these materials are a finite resource and waste shall be reduced to a minimum .
num .
where practical redundant pavement materials should be recovered and reused or otherwise recycled to the highest level use practical .
reused materials shall be processed to produce a homogenous material and shall meet the specified applicable requirements for subbase or basecourse .
num .
this specification also includes manufactured materials sourced from recycled construction demolition waste .
recycled materials for pavement construction shall be blended crushed or processed as applicable to produce a homogenous material by a recycling premises licensed by dwer .
recycled materials shall only be included in materials which are designated as recycled .
num water reduce reuse recycle num .
water used in any pavement construction or pavement material manufacture process shall comply with the requirements of main roads western australia publication num water to be used in pavement construction and shall be clean and substantially free from detrimental impurities such as oils salts acids alkalis and vegetable substances .
water sources classified by the relevant water authority as potable water shall be exempt from this requirement .
water num gravel subbase supplied by the contractor num .
gravel subbase material shall consist of durable pebble in soil mortar .
the material shall be free from cobbles greater than nummm and free from clods stumps roots sticks vegetable matter or other deleterious materials .
general specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the subbase material shall meet the grading requirements shown in table num when tested in accordance with test method wa num .
the grading of material passing the nummm sieve shall vary from coarse to fine in a uniform and consistent manner .
the material shall not be gap graded as represented by the grading crossing from the maximum limit for one sieve size to the minimum limit for another sieve size .
particle size distribution table num particle size distribution gravel subbase as sieve size mm passing by mass minimum and maximum limits num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num other acceptance limits gravel subbase test limits test method liquid limit num maximum wa num plasticity index num maximum wa num linear shrinkage num maximum wa num california bearing ratio soaked num days with numkg surcharge at num of mdd and num of omc num minimum wa num secondary mineral content in basic igneous rocks num maximum as num accelerated soundness index by reflux num minimum as num specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num crushed limestone subbase supplied by the contractor num .
the source material for the supply of crushed limestone shall be free of organic material clay lumps cap rock or any other foreign material deleterious to its performance in the pavement .
general num .
the material shall comply with the grading limits shown in table num when tested in accordance with test method wa num particle size distribution table num particle size distribution crushed limestone subbase as sieve size mm passing by mass minimum and maximum limits num num num num num num num num num .
the material shall also comply with the limits shown in table num .
other acceptance limits table num other acceptance limits crushed limestone subbase test limits test method los angeles abrasion value of crushed limestone num minimum num maximum wa num calcium carbonate content num minimum wa num california bearing ratio soaked num days with numkg surcharge at num of mdd and num of omc num minimum wa num num crushed rock subbase supplied by the contractor num .
all crushed rock subbase shall consist of a uniform blended mixture of coarse and fine aggregate .
the mixture shall be free from vegetable matter lumps of clay overburden or any other deleterious matter .
general num .
the particle size distribution of the material when tested in accordance with test method wa num shall comply with the requirements shown in table num .
particle size distribution specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the crushed rock subbase shall also meet the other limits as shown in table num .
the secondary mineral content in basic igneous rock test is only applicable to basic igneous rock .
the accelerated soundness index test is only applicable to basic igneous rock .
other acceptable limits table num particle size distribution crushed rock sub base as num sieve size mm passing by mass target grading passing by mass minimum and maximum limits num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num other acceptance limits crushed rock sub base test limits test method plasticity index num maximum wanum linear shrinkage num maximum wanum california bearing ratio soaked num days with numkg surcharge at num of mdd and num of omc num minimum wanum secondary mineral content in basic igneous rock num maximum as num accelerated soundness index by reflux num minimum as num specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num gravel basecourse supplied by the contractor num .
gravel basecourse material shall consist of durable pebble in soil mortar .
the material shall be free from particles having any dimension greater than nummm and free from clods stumps roots sticks vegetable matter or other deleterious materials .
general num .
when the stockpiled material contains oversized material the contractor shall screen the stockpiles to ensure that the pavement material does not contain more than num by mass of material retained on a nummm sieve .
oversized material num .
the screen aperture shall be selected so that only the minimum quantity of material is removed from the existing stockpile to satisfy this requirement .
screen aperture num .
basecourse material having any dimension greater than nummm shall be deemed oversize and shall not be delivered to the pavement construction area .
note check need for alternative paragraphs num to num and then delete this note refer guidance note num num .
the particle size distribution shall be determined in accordance with test method wa num .
the particle size distribution of the portion passing a nummm as sieve shall conform to the grading limits shown in table num .
the grading of material passing the nummm sieve shall vary from coarse to fine in a uniform and consistent manner .
the material shall not be gap graded as represented by the grading crossing from the maximum limit for one sieve size to the minimum limit for another sieve size and shall conform as closely as possible to the specified target grading .
particle size distribution num .
the material shall also comply with the limits shown in table num .
the secondary mineral content in basic igneous rock test is only applicable to basic igneous rock .
the accelerated soundness index test is only applicable to basic igneous rock .
other acceptance limits specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num particle size distribution gravel basecourse gravel basecourse is not suitable for use in freeways and controlled access highways in the metropolitan area as sieve size mm passing by mass target grading passing by mass minimum and maximum limits num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num other acceptance limits gravel basecourse gravel basecourse is not suitable for use in freeways and controlled access highways in the metropolitan area test limits test method liquid limit num maximum wa num linear shrinkage num maximum wa num maximum dry compressive strength nummpa minimum wanum california bearing ratio soaked num days with numkg surcharge at num of mdd and num of omc num minimum wa num secondary mineral content in basic igneous rock num maximum as num accelerated soundness index by reflux num minimum as num resilient modulus additional requirement if specified in pavement design at num of mdd and num of omc see guidance notes and delete this note agpttnum wa num num crushed rock base basecourse supplied by the contractor num .
all crushed rock base crb shall consist of a uniformly blended mixture of coarse and fine aggregate .
the mixture of fine and coarse aggregate forming the rock base shall be free from vegetable matter lumps of clay overburden or any other deleterious matter .
general num .
coarse aggregate retained nummm sieve shall consist of clean hard durable angular fragments of rock produced by crushing sound unweathered rock and shall not include materials which break up when alternately wetted and dried .
coarse aggregate num .
fine aggregate passing nummm sieve shall consist of crushed rock fragments or a mixture of crushed rock fragments with natural sand or clayey sand .
crushed rock fine aggregate from each source shall except as to size comply with all the provisions specified for coarse aggregate .
fine aggregate num .
refer to hydrated cement treated crushed rock base hctcrb basecourse clauses num and num below for details on the manufacture of hctcrb .
hctcrb specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the particle size distribution of the material when tested in accordance with test method wa num shall comply with the requirements shown in table num .
the grading of material passing the nummm sieve shall vary from coarse to fine in a uniform and consistent manner .
the material shall not be gap graded as represented by the grading crossing from the maximum limit for one sieve size to the minimum limit for another sieve size and shall conform as closely as possible to the specified target grading .
particle size distribution table num particle size distribution crushed rock base basecourse as num sieve size mm passing by mass target grading passing by mass minimum and maximum limits general crb crb for hctcrb manufacture num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
the dust ratio defined as the ratio of the percentage passing by mass the nummm sieve to the percentage passing by mass the nummm sieve shall be within the range num to num .
dust ratio num .
the crushed rock base shall also meet the other limits as shown in table num .
the secondary mineral content in basic igneous rock test is only applicable to basic igneous rock .
the accelerated soundness index test is only applicable to basic igneous rock .
other acceptance limits specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num other acceptance limits crushed rock base basecourse test limits test method liquid limit cone penetrometer num maximum wanum linear shrinkage num maximum num minimum wanum flakiness index num maximum wa num los angeles abrasion value num maximum wa num maximum dry compressive strength nummpa minimum wa num california bearing ratio soaked num days with numkg surcharge at num of mdd and num of omc num minimum wanum wetdry strength variation num maximum asnum secondary mineral content in basic igneous rock num maximum as num accelerated soundness index by reflux num minimum as num resilient modulus additional requirement if specified in pavement design at num of mdd and num of omc see guidance notes and delete this note agpttnum wa num num .
crushed rock base shall be thoroughly mixed with water using a pugmill to produce a homogeneous product suitable for placement into final position .
mixing num .
crushed rock base shall be prewet to greater than num of the optimum moisture content as determined by test method wa num .
prewetting num hydrated cement treated crushed rockbase basecourse supplied by thecontractor num manufacture of hctcrb num .
the hydrated cement treated crushed rock base hctcrb shall be manufactured by blending num num by dry mass of cement with crushed rock base crb .
the untreated crb must comply with the requirements for crb as specified in clause num .
general num .
the cement used in the manufacture of hctcrb shall be general purpose type gp .
cement type specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the hctcrb shall be manufactured by blending water and a target num by dry mass of cement with the crb .
the mixing process shall produce a homogeneous mixture of crushed rock base cement and water in which the water and cement are uniformly distributed .
mixing shall be carried out as either a batch or continuous process in an approved plant .
this plant shall include measuring equipment which will determine the mass of cement added to a known mass of crushed rock base at all stages of the mixing process .
the superintendents approval of the tenderers plant will be conditional on this equipment being capable of determining the mass of cement added to the basecourse to within num of the dry mass of the crb .
blending num .
prior to the use of the plant proposed to be used for the modification process the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the plant is capable of determining the mass of cement added to the basecourse to within num of the dry mass of the crb .
hold point num .
during the initial hydration period the moisture content of the mixed and stockpiled hctcrb shall be at least num of the optimum moisture content omc of the crushed rock base used to produce the hctcrb .
the moisture content shall be determined in accordance with test method wa num .
moisture content num .
the hctcrb shall be stockpiled at the quarry for a period of not less than num days after the addition of cement and water to the crb i.e .
minimum initial hydration period .
initial hydration period num .
the hctcrb must be compacted into the pavement in its final position not less than num days or greater than num days after the addition of cement and water to the crb i.e .
minimum and maximum construction hydration periods .
construction hydration period num .
the hydrated cement treated crushed rock base shall also meet the other limits as shown in table num .
other acceptance limits table num other acceptance limits hydrated cement treated crushed rock base supplied by the contractor test limits test method unconfined compressive strength at numdays .
at the in service density condition num mpa maximum wa num unconfined compressive strength at numdays .
at the in service density condition num mpa maximum wa num vertical modulus of the top sublayer at the in service conditions including inservice stress construction hydration period moisture and density conditions num mpa minimum num mpa maximum laboratory repeated load triaxial test agpttnum using internal displacement measuring device wa num specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num hctcrb trial mixes num .
the contractor shall prepare trial mixes from each source of hctcrb to be used in the works .
the trial mixes must cover the range of crushed rock base material and cement properties from each source that will be used to manufacture hctcrb for the works .
the mixes must be made using the plant and degree of quality control proposed for the works .
trial mixes num .
as a minimum the contractor must undertake sufficient particle size distribution la abrasion flakiness index mdcs linear shrinkage and soaked cbr tests on the crushed rock from each source to establish the range of its properties .
repeated load triaxial tests and unconfined compressive strength tests must be undertaken to establish that the hctcrb from each source conforms to the specified acceptance limits i.e .
within the range of the source materials properties construction hydration period density and dryback moisture that will occur within the works .
as a minimum repeated load triaxial tests and unconfined compressive strength tests must be undertaken on samples compacted at hydration periods of num days and num days after the cement and water are added to the crushed rock base laboratory testing num .
prior to the manufacture of any hctcrb for use in the works the contractor must provide to the superintendent for approval results of the trial mixes demonstrating that the hctcrb and its constituents conform with all specified requirements .
in seeking this approval the contractor must specify the construction hydration period range that will be used in the works .
the construction hydration period must not be less than num days or greater than num days .
hold point num bitumen stabilised limestone basecourse supplied by the contractor num .
bitumen stabilised limestone bsl shall be produced by the addition of num residual bitumen by dry mass of crushed limestone material .
the limestone shall be free from sand roots and other foreign material .
general num .
the bitumen emulsion used to stabilise modify the crushed limestone shall comply with the requirements of as num bitumen emulsion for construction and maintenance of pavements for grade assnum emulsion .
the emulsifier used in the manufacture of the emulsion shall be vinsol resin .
the bitumen used in the manufacture of the emulsion shall be class num bitumen conforming to as num residual bitumen for pavements .
tenderers shall nominate the source of supply of bitumen emulsion with their tender .
the contractor shall make arrangements for the superintendent to sample the emulsion or any of its components at any time during normal working hours .
these arrangements shall include a means of identifying lots of emulsion or the component material which will be used in the works .
bitumen emulsion num .
all water added during the mixing process and field moisture requirements during construction shall contain a wetting agent such as teepol comprox or similar which shall be added at a rate of num litre of wetting agent per num litres of water used .
wetting agent specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
all stabilised limestone shall be stockpiled for at least three days before delivery to site .
the mixture shall have a moisture content of at least num of the optimum moisture content as determined by test method wa num .
the moisture content shall be determined in accordance with test method wa num from samples taken from trucks prior to delivery .
moisture content num .
the mixing process shall produce a homogeneous mixture of limestone bitumen and water in which the bitumen is uniformly distributed in the form of a thin film covering the particles of the crushed limestone .
mixing shall be carried out as either a batch or continuous process in a suitable plant .
this plant shall include measuring equipment which will determine the mass of bitumen emulsion added to a known mass of crushed limestone at all stages of the mixing process .
mixing process num .
prior to the use of the plant proposed to be used for the modification process the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the plant is capable of determining the amount of bitumen emulsion added to the basecourse to within num to num of the dry mass of the limestone .
hold point num .
prior to modification of the basecourse the contractor shall give the superintendent at least three num working days notice of such modification .
hold point num .
the particle size distribution of the bsl after mixing and delivery shall be determined in accordance with test method wa num and shall comply with the details shown in table num .
particle size distribution table num particle size distribution bsl as sieve size mm passing by mass minimum and maximum limits num num num num num num num num num num num num .
the bitumen stabilised limestone shall also meet the other acceptance limits as shown in table num .
other acceptance limits specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num other acceptance limits bsl test limits test method los angeles abrasion value of crushed limestone num minimum num maximum wa num calcium carbonate content num minimum wa num dispersion of bitumen in soil class num wa num bitumen content centrifuge method num minimum num maximum wa num resilient modulus additional requirement if specified in pavement design at num of mdd and num of omc see guidance notes and delete this note agpttnum wa num compliance for bitumen dispersion of any lot shall be based on the results of the assessment of num samples randomly selected from the lot being judged and tested in accordance with test method wa num .
all results must have a dispersion of class num however the superintendent may accept the material if one of the three samples has a dispersion of class num .
num cement for stabilised pavements num .
cement for stabilisation of any pavement layer shall comply with the requirements of as num type lh .
any sampling and testing of cement shall be in accordance with as num .
the cement shall be sufficiently dry to flow freely during application .
cement num .
cement for stabilisation of any pavement layer shall comply with the requirements of australian technical infrastructure committee atic specification spnum .
the cementitious material registration scheme cmrs shall be used to confirm that the cement complies to atic spnum .
the standard application form for cmrs registration is shown in annexure numb .
num .
prior to commencing cement stabilisation the contractor shall confirm that the cement complies with atic spnum and shall provide the cmrs registration number for the cement to the superintendent for approval of the cement .
hold point num .
the contractor shall arrange cement delivery and have on site bulk storage facilities .
the contractor shall be responsible for all arrangements in regard to the transfer of cement between delivery vehicles on site bulk storage facilities and cement spreaders .
delivery num .
the contractor shall use cement in approximately the chronological order in which it is delivered from the manufacturer .
chronological order specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
transportation units and storage bins for bulk cement shall be weatherproof and shall be constructed so that there is no dead storage .
the contractor shall demonstrate that the storage bins for bulk cement do not have any dead storage .
if dead storage exists the bins shall be emptied completely at least once every three months .
cement delivered in bags shall be stored in weatherproof structures having floors raised above the ground .
cement that is more than three months old shall not be used .
storage num .
prior to commencing cement stabilisation the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the cement is no more than num months old holdpoint num cement for hctcrb num .
cement for use in hctcrb shall comply with the requirements of as num type gp .
any sampling and testing of cement shall be in accordance with as num .
the cement shall be sufficiently dry to flow freely during mixing with the crb .
cement num .
cement used for the manufacture of hctcrb shall comply with the requirements of australian technical infrastructure committee atic specification spnum atic spnum .
the cementitious material registration scheme cmrs shall be used to confirm that the cement complies to atic spnum .
the standard application form for cmrs registration is shown in annexure numb .
num .
prior to commencing the manufacture of the hctcrb the contractor shall confirm that the cement complies with atic spnum and shall provide the cmrs registration number for the cement to the superintendent for approval of the cement .
hold point num .
the contractor shall use cement in approximately the chronological order in which it is delivered from the manufacturer chronological order num .
transportation units and storage bins for bulk cement shall be weatherproof and shall be constructed so that there is no dead storage .
the contractor shall demonstrate that the storage bins for bulk cement do not have any dead storage .
if dead storage exists the bins shall be emptied completely at least once every three months .
cement delivered in bags shall be stored in weatherproof structures having floors raised above the ground .
cement that is more than three months old shall not be used .
storage num .
prior to commencing the manufacture of the hctcrb the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the cement is no more than num months old .
num num not used holdpoint specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name construction num general num .
pavement construction includes the supply placing compacting and finishing of pavement materials in accordance with the specifications and drawings to the prepared subgrade surface .
num .
pavement construction shall include construction of stabilised pavements .
num .
where a drainage layer has been constructed on the prepared subgrade surface the drainage layer shall be the foundation for the subsequent pavement layers .
drainage layers num .
prior to the construction of any pavement layer the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the underlying layer has been constructed as specified .
hold point num .
natural gravels and ferricrete including cement stabilised natural gravels and ferricrete shall not be used as basecourse material for freeway pavements or future freeway pavements in the metropolitan area .
gravel ferricrete restrictions num .
pavers including those that utilise transverse augers shall not be used for pavement construction .
pavers num .
transverse joints shall be offset from one layer to the next by not less than num metres .
transverse joints num .
longitudinal joints shall be located within nummm of the planned position of traffic lane lines or within nummm of the centre of a traffic lane .
longitudinal joints num dryback requirements num .
pavement construction shall not commence until the layer nummm below the subgrade has dried back to the requirements specified in clause num .
subgrade dryback num .
basecourse construction shall not commence until the subbase has dried back to the requirements specified in clause num .
subbase dryback num .
no binder shall be applied to a basecourse lot until it has dried to the requirements specified in clause num .
basecourse dryback num spreading num .
each pavement layer worked shall be generally parallel to the finished pavement surface and shall extend the full width of the layer .
general num .
subbase shall be worked in compacted layers not greater than nummm nor less than nummm .
where less than nummm is required to be worked the underlying subbase shall be scarified to such a depth that the resulting compacted thickness of the layer to be worked is not less than nummm .
subbase layer specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
basecourse shall be worked in compacted layers not more than nummm nor less than nummm compacted thickness .
except that hctcrb basecourse shall be worked in compacted layers not less than nummm compacted thickness .
basecourse layer num .
for in situ rehabilitation works the superintendent may give approval for the basecourse to be worked in a compacted layer of up to nummm compacted thickness .
this approval shall not be unreasonably withheld but can be withdrawn at any time if the superintendent is not satisfied that all the requirements of the contract are being met .
rehabilitation works num compaction num general num .
pavement material shall be spread mixed and compacted to achieve uniformity free from any evidence of segregation .
num .
compaction shall be carried out at a construction moisture content at any point in the lot within the range of num num of the optimum moisture content and with a uniform compactive effort applied longitudinally and transversely to the road alignment to achieve the density as shown in annexure numa as well as the width shape level and surface finish as specified in clauses num to num .
construction moisture content num hydrated cement treated crushed rock base hctcrb num .
compaction and trimming of hctcrb to shape and level shall be completed within twelve num hours of the incorporation of the hctcrb into the pavement layer .
hctcrb basecourse shall be compacted to a characteristic dry density ratio shown in annexure numa or greater .
timing num .
the maximum dry density used in the calculations shall be determined on pretreated material sampled from the basecourse lots prior to compaction and shall be determined in accordance with test method wa num .
pre treatment shall comprise mixing hctcrb material at a moisture content dry of omc in a cement mixer with a bowl of approximately num cubic metres for num revolutions at the construction hydration period that corresponds to that of the lot being tested .
sample pre treatment num .
basecourse dryback prior to bituminous surfacing shall be in accordance with annexure numa and shall be based on the omc determined at clause num .
basecourse dryback num .
bituminous surfacing of the hctcrb shall not commence until the basecourse stiffness has achieved a characteristic clegg impact value of num or greater when tested in accordance with as num .
the clegg impact values shall be determined at num locations per lot .
the locations shall be selected in accordance with wa num .
basecourse stiffness specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the characteristic clegg impact value civc is defined by the expression clegg impact value civc civ nums where civ the mean of the results of clegg impact value on the lot being assessed reported to the nearest num. s the standard deviation of the results of the clegg impact value on the lot being assessed calculated in accordance with specification num quality systems annexure numa num and reported to the nearest num .
num .
hctcrb trimmed from a lot shall not be incorporated into another basecourse lot .
if a completed layer of hctcrb basecourse does not satisfy all of the requirements of the specification and has to be reworked the contractor shall repeat all the requirements for hctcrb at no cost to the principal .
rework shall include any disturbance to the surface of the hctcrb basecourse during trimming to meet shape or level requirements that occurs more than twelve num hours after the incorporation of the hctcrb into the pavement layer .
the rework depth shall not be less than the full depth of the affected layer .
trimming rework num bitumen stabilised limestone bsl num .
during the construction process the bitumen stabilised limestone bsl shall not be ripped up and reworked more than once .
if the bsl has dried back to less than num of omc it shall not be reworked .
bsl trimmed from one lot shall not be incorporated into another basecourse lot .
num cement stabilised basecourse gravel num .
cement stabilised gravel basecourse trimmed from one lot may be incorporated into another gravel basecourse lot provided it is uniformly spread .
trimming rework trimming num cement stabilisation num general num .
the contractor shall cement stabilise the specified pavement layer with the proportion of cement and to the depth of the pavement layer as shown in annexure numa .
num .
the cement stabilised pavement layer shall be constructed at the locations shown in annexure numa and to the tolerances and requirements specified for this type of pavement .
num trial section num .
the contractor shall carry out a preliminary trial of the proposed stabilising operations .
the trial shall determine i. the effectiveness of the plant specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name ii .
the number of passes of the stabilising machine necessary to achieve the specified mixing and iii .
the compacted depth of layer being worked including the allowance for trimming to spoil and level tolerances .
num .
the trial section shall be located within the works area .
num .
prior to conducting such a trial the contractor shall agree with the superintendent the location length and width of trial sections within the works .
hold point num .
the contractor shall not change the method developed during the trial without approval from the superintendent .
num plant and equipment num .
the spreading equipment shall be a stabilising agent spreader which has been specifically designed for such work .
the spreader shall be capable of uniformly distributing cement and accurately controlling the spread rate such that when mixing is complete the cement content shall be in accordance with the requirements of the spreading of cement clause below .
the spreader shall be equipped with gates to vary the width of spread and with electronic weigh scales to give daily totals of product used .
cement spreader num .
cutting pulverising mixing adding water and spreading of mixed material shall be accomplished using a stabilising machine specifically designed for stabilisation .
the stabilising rotor action shall be such that the rotor revolves in an upwards and forwards cutting direction .
the rotor shall be of the recycler type and fitted with bullet teeth cutting tips .
the stabilising machine shall also satisfy the following requirements stabilising machine i .
it shall be capable of producing a uniformly mixed material throughout the specified depth of the work .
ii .
it shall be equipped with a variable depth of cut control and an accurate gauge to measure depth of cut which is readily visible to the operator .
iii .
it shall have provision for adding water automatically through a system comprising a pump flow meter variable control valve and full width spray bar .
each nozzle on the spray bar shall be fully and independently adjustable and the water pump shall have the capacity to supply up to num litres per minute .
num preliminary treatment num .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to determine whether preripping the insitu pavement material is necessary .
under no circumstances shall ripping to a depth exceeding the depth to be stabilised be permitted .
preripping specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num spreading of cement num .
the cement stabilised pavement layer shall contain the proportion of cement as a percentage of the dry mass of pavement material as shown in annexure numa .
cement shall be spread uniformly at a controlled rate over the area to be stabilised using a suitable cement spreader .
cement content num .
the contractor shall provide to the superintendent daily records of the amounts of cement used and actual spread rates obtained per section treated .
num .
the percentage cement shall be determined by either calculation methods i. placing three num trays each of one third of a square metre in area in front of the cement spreader and measuring the mass of cement deposited on the trays for each lot or ii .
by use of an onboard calibrated electronic weight scale system .
the percentage cement p shall be calculated thus p m x num a x t x mdd where m total mass of cement kg as determined by one of the following methods a on each tray b onboard calibrated electronic weight scale system .
a method a total area of the trays m method b total measured area spread m t thickness to be stabilised mm including allowances for tolerances and trimming mdd maximum dry density of the pavement material without the addition of cement kgm num .
the percentage cement determined for each tray in accordance with this clause shall be maintained within num by mass of the cement content specified in this clause throughout the stabilisation works .
num .
the use of method b in determining the values m and a is subject to satisfactory calibration of the measuring device and the production of associated certification in accordance with the contractors quality system .
audits on this method shall be carried out using the measuring tray method .
calibration requirement num .
once the cement has been spread no other plant other than that needed for spreading or for mixing and spreading the mixed material shall be permitted to travel over the area to be stabilised .
specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num incorporation of cement num .
the spreading of cement shall not proceed when rain is imminent .
the spread cement shall be incorporated into the pavement layer immediately following the spreading operation .
all spread cement shall be incorporated into the pavement layer within the same working day .
cement shall not be spread when the prevailing wind velocity is sufficient to make the cement particles airborne .
num .
cutting stabilising mixing adding water and spreading of mixed material shall take place as a single operation within the stabilizing machine .
num .
cutting stabilising mixing adding water and spreading of mixed material shall continue until the maximum size of all material other than rock is not greater than nummm and the cement and water are uniformly incorporated into the mixed material without streaks or pockets of cement .
num compaction num .
initial compaction must be carried out using a vibratory padfoot roller meeting the requirements of specification num earthworks clause num .
initial compaction num .
compaction and trimming of the mixed material to shape and level shall be completed within six num hours of the completion of incorporation of cement into the pavement layer and shall be compacted to the characteristic dry density ratio as shown in annexure numa or greater .
time for compaction num the contractor shall achieve and maintain the construction moisture content at any point in the lot in the range num num of the omc of the stabilised material by controlling the amount of water added during the mixing process within the stabilising machine .
moisture content num rework num .
if a completed layer of cement stabilisation does not satisfy all of the requirements of the specification and has to be reworked the contractor shall rework the layer without the addition of cement at no cost to the principal .
rework num .
rework shall include any disturbance to the surface of the cement stabilized layer during trimming to meet shape or level requirements that occurs more than six num hours after the completion of incorporation of cement into the pavement layer .
the rework depth shall not be less than the full depth of the affected layer .
num construction joints num .
if the stabilized work is such that it can not be completed in one continuous operation the contractor shall provide construction joints at each discontinuity in the operation .
num .
all construction joints shall be made transverse to andor parallel to the direction of the stabilised run and shall be made just prior to the commencement of the next stabilised run .
specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the joints shall be formed by cutting back into the compacted stabilised material to form a vertical face .
the loose trimmed material shall be removed from the joint before the next section is mixed and compacted .
num blend areas num .
in areas denoted as blend areas or match existing pavement on the drawings the cut edge of the existing bituminous surfacing and the wall of the excavation shall be in accordance with the requirements stated in specification num earthworks .
cut edge num .
the work shall comprise removal of the existing pavement to a sufficient depth to place the new pavement to the required levels shaping and compaction .
num .
pavement shall be supplied placed and compacted in accordance with this specification .
num .
within the blend areas the level of the subgrade or pavement layer shall be in accordance with the detail shown on the drawings .
num .
the appropriate bituminous surfacing treatment shall then be applied in accordance with specification num bituminous surfacing and where applicable with specification num asphalt surfacing or specification num full depth asphalt pavement to provide a flush join and smooth transition between new and old construction including any required matching of concrete kerbing to line and level .
num drainage layer num general num .
the drainage layer shall consist of a geotextile lining and a sand material of the material type and thickness as shown in annexure numa .
the drainage layer shall be constructed immediately below the pavement to the details shown in the drawings and connected to a positive drainage system .
num geotextile num .
the geotextile shall be a nonwoven fabric consisting of long chain synthetic polymer fibres composed of at least num by mass of polyesters polyolefins or polyamides .
the fibres shall be formed into a fabric by needle punching heat or chemical bonding processes such that they are capable of retaining their relative position in the geotextile .
num .
in addition the fibres shall be stabilised against ultraviolet uv radiation and shall have low water absorbency .
num .
the geotextile shall be free of any flaws or defects that may adversely affect the mechanical or physical properties of the fabric .
num .
each roll of geotextile shall be provided with a suitable covering to protect the fabric against moisture and ultraviolet radiation .
each roll shall be marked in conformance with as num .
covering specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
rolls shall be stored on site under a waterproof cover and shall be supported off the ground .
the contractor shall take appropriate measures to protect the geotextile from damage .
storage num .
the geotextile shall comply with the requirements shown in table numanum and table numanum of annexure numa .
properties num .
all properties represent minimum roll values that is the test result from any sampled roll shall exceed the minimum value in table numanum .
num installation of geotextile num .
the contractors process of installation of the geotextile shall ensure that fabric is not damaged .
num .
the initial lift thickness of fill materials placed directly over the geotextile shall be a minimum uncompacted thickness of nummm .
the use of vibratory compaction equipment over the geotextile should be minimized for the initial lift .
initial lift num .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings the minimum overlap requirement shall be nummm .
successive sheets of geotextile shall be overlapped a minimum of nummm with the upslope section overlying the down slope .
overlap num .
the period of time between laying out and cover of the geotextile shall not exceed num days .
timing num .
damaged areas of geotextile may be repaired by overlaying the damaged section with a patch .
the patch shall extend a minimum of num metre beyond the area of damage .
repairs num .
the contractor shall certify that the geotextiles delivered to site meet the specification requirements .
sampling conditioning and statistical analysis of results shall be carried out in accordance with as num .
sampling frequency shall be in accordance with appendix a of the standard .
if directed otherwise duplicate samples shall be provided to the superintendent .
sampling and testing num drainage layer sand num .
the particle size distribution of the drainage layer sand shall comply with the requirements shown in table numanum of annexure numa when tested in accordance with test method wa num .
particle size distribution num .
the linear shrinkage of the drainage layer sand shall not exceed num when tested in accordance with test method wa num .
linear shrinkage num .
construction of the drainage layer shall be as specified for subbase .
construction num num not used specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name acceptance num general num .
each pavement layer shall be constructed to the dimensions and details shown on the drawings and shall be constructed in accordance with this specification to satisfy the criteria shown in annexure numa .
num .
where a pavement material has been supplied by the contractor the contractor must undertake required testing of that material sampled from the stockpiles in accordance with specification num quality systems to demonstrate that the material complies in all respects with the specified requirements .
stockpile material num .
prior to the construction of any pavement layer the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the pavement material supplied by the contractor complies in all respects with the specified requirements .
hold point num .
where a pavement material has been supplied by the contractor the contractor must undertake required testing of that material sampled from the pavement after compaction is completed to demonstrate that the pavement material particle size distribution and linear shrinkage complies with the specified requirements .
pavement material num .
prior to the application of bituminous surfacing the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the pavement material supplied by the contractor complies with the specified linear shrinkage and particle size distribution after compaction into the pavement .
hold point num compaction num .
each pavement layer shall be compacted to the characteristic dry density ratio shown in annexure numa or greater .
general num .
the characteristic dry density ratio shall be determined in accordance with specification num quality systems annexure numa num .
characteristic dry density ratio num .
where the pavement material contains more than num by mass of material retained on a nummm sieve the maximum dry density shall be determined on that portion of the material that passes a nummm sieve .
oversize material num dryback num .
each pavement layer and the layer nummm below the subgrade shall be dried back such that the dryback characteristic moisture content dmc is equal to or less than the proportion of the optimum moisture content as shown in annexure numa as determined by test method wa num or wa num as appropriate .
general num .
the dryback characteristic moisture content shall be determined in accordance with specification num quality systems annexure numa num .
dryback characteristic moisture content specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
where the pavement material or the material in the layer nummm below the subgrade contains more than num by mass of material retained on a nummm sieve the optimum moisture content and the maximum dry density shall be determined on that portion of the material that passes a nummm sieve .
oversize material num layer width num .
the outer top edge of any layer of the pavement shall be no closer to the road centreline and no more than nummm further away from the road centreline than the positions shown in the drawings .
num surface shape num subbase num .
the shape of the subbase in granular pavement shall be judged to be acceptable when the maximum deviation from a num metre straight edge placed in any position on the surface does not exceed nummm .
max deviation nummm num .
the shape of the subbase under full depth asphalt shall be judged to be acceptable when the maximum deviation from a num metre straight edge placed in any position on the surface does not exceed nummm .
max deviation nummm num .
additionally for pavement widening work the crossfall at any position on the new surface measured at right angles to the centreline shall be within num of the existing crossfall on the outer num metres of the adjacent traffic lane at that location .
widening num basecourse num .
the shape of the basecourse shall be judged to be acceptable when the maximum deviation from a num metre straight edge placed in any position on the surface does not exceed nummm .
max deviation nummm num .
additionally for widening work the crossfall measured at any position on the new surface at right angles to the centreline shall be within num of the existing crossfall or of the crossfall on the outer num metres of the adjacent traffic lane at that location .
widening num surface levels num subbase num .
the level of the completed subbase surface shall be deemed to be conforming when the level measured at any point on the surface is within nummm nummm of the subbase level at that point as determined from the drawings .
construction sections num .
for pavement widening sections the level of the completed subbase surface shall be deemed to be conforming when the levels of the subbase at its junction with the existing pavement are within nummm nummm of the levels as determined from the basecourse depth making due allowances for the effect of the existing crossfall of the pavement .
widening sections specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num basecourse num the level of the completed basecourse surface shall be judged to be acceptable when the level measured at any point on the surface is within the following tolerances for the basecourse level for that point as determined from the drawings construction sections i. where final surface is asphalt nummm nummm ii elsewhere nummm nummm num where the basecourse is stabilised the depth of stabilisation shall be deemed to be acceptable when the actual depth of the stabilised material after compaction shall nowhere depart from the specified depth by more than nummm nummm .
stabilised basecourse num for pavement widening sections the level of the completed basecourse surface shall be judged to be acceptable when the levels of the basecourse at its junction with the existing seal are within nummm nummm of the top cut edge level of the existing seal .
widening sections num surface finish num .
completed pavement layers shall be in a homogeneous uniformly bonded condition with no evidence of layering cracking disintegration or surface tearing .
the finished surface should appear as a stone mosaic interlocked with fine material and shall be dense even textured and tightly bonded .
basecourse must retain those characteristics after rotary brooming and be suitable to receive bituminous surfacing .
prior to the application of a bituminous surfacing the surface of the basecourse shall be uniformly dry .
pavement num num not used maintenance num maintenance of compacted layers num .
the surface of any compacted pavement layer or prepared subgrade shall be maintained in such a way as to minimise dust prevent ravelling erosion deformation or any other damage to the layer resulting from environment conditions traffic or construction activities .
the layer shall be kept free from contamination until any subsequent pavement work under the contract is commenced .
general num .
completed subgrade and pavement layers shall be maintained to the specified standards of surface shape level dryback and compaction up to the time of construction of the subsequent pavement layer or application of the bituminous surfacing .
shape level dryback compaction num .
watering shall be continued as necessary to prevent dusting or loosening of the surface .
watering specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure num a construction requirements num .
compaction of pavement layers num pavement layers shall be compacted to the densities shown in table numanum .
compaction requirements for embankments and subgrades can be found in specification num earthworks annexure numb table numanum compaction values pavement layer minimum characteristic dry density ratio rc drainage layer num all subbase num cement stabilised basecourse num lime stabilised basecourse num bitumen stabilised limestone basecourse num crushed rock base basecourse num hydrated cement treated crushed rock base basecourse num other basecourse materials final surfacing sprayed seal num or num select appropriate value then delete this note .
refer to guidance notes other basecourse materials final surfacing asphalt num specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
dryback of pavement layers num pavement layers shall be dried back to the requirements shown in table numanum or table numanum prior to the application of bituminous binder or the construction of the overlying layer .
table numanum dryback on subgrade or subbase layers subgrade or pavement layers maximum dryback characteristic moisture content dmc as a proportion of optimum moisture content layer nummm below subgrade surface except for perth sand num drainage layer not required subbase num table numanum basecourse dryback basecourse material type maximum dryback characteristic moisture content dmc as a proportion of optimum moisture content basecourse final surfacing sprayed seal num num select appropriate value then delete this note .
refer to guidance notes basecourse final surfacing asphalt num crushed rock base all surfacing types num hydrated cement treated crushed rock base all surfacing types num specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
cement stabilised pavements num cement stabilised pavement layers shall be constructed at the locations and with the parameters as shown in table numanum table numanum cement stabilised pavements section depth of stabilisation mm width of stabilisation m cement content by dry mass of pavement layer from to subbase layers basecourse layers num .
lime stabilised pavements num lime stabilised pavement layers shall be constructed with the parameters as shown in table numanum table numanum lime stabilised pavements section depth of stabilisation mm width of stabilisation m equivalent pure hydrated lime content by dry mass of pavement layer from to subbase layers basecourse layers specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
drainage layer num geotextile table numanum mechanical properties subsoil drains drainage blanket test method minimum g rating as defined in austroads guide to geotextiles as num as num note num burst strength cbr plunger method shall be the numth percentile value determined in accordance with a snum as num and puncture resistance drop cone method shall be the numth percentile value determined in accordance with as num as num .
table numanum hydraulic properties subsoil drains drainage blanket test method maximum equivalent opening size eos m as num minimum qnum lmsec as num note num maximum equivalent opening size eos and minimum qnum are mean values .
note num qnum flow rate under nummm constant head determined using the perpendicular flow test .
num drainage layer sand drainage layer sand shall comply with the requirements shown in table numanum and shall have linear shrinkage not exceeding num when tested in accordance with test method wa num .
table numanum particle size distribution as sieve size mm passing by mass minimum and maximum limits num num num num num num num num specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure num b cementitious materials for concrete request for registration by manufacturer cement or blend details product name type proportions manufacturer place of manufacture source of constituent materials cement clinker fly ash slag limestone gypsum grinding aids supply details dispatching supplier contact name contact phone no .
contact address suppliers abn send this form with the sample to rms russell vale laboratory attn laboratory officer num york place russell vale nsw num for rms laboratory use only date of registration registration no specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is pavements manager .
num .
pavement material specifications num basecourse num for roads with a design traffic loading of less than num x num esa the applicable gravel basecourse particle size distribution table num.gnum and consistency limits table numgnum may be selected .
delete the tables not required .
num for roads with a design traffic loading of less than num x num esa the mdcs criteria in table num.gnum other acceptance limits gravel basecourse may be reduced from num mpa to num mpa .
delete note from the specification .
num for roads with a design traffic loading of less than num x num esa the applicable ferricrete basecourse particle size distribution table num.gnum and consistency limits table num may be selected .
delete the tables not required .
num for roads with a design traffic loading of less than num x num esa the mdcs criteria in table num other limits ferricrete may be reduced from num mpa to num mpa .
delete note from the specification .
num ferricrete basecourse is not suitable for use in freeways and asphalt surfaced highways with design traffic greater than num x num esa .
specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num.gnum particle size distribution gravel basecourse and ferricrete basecourse suitable for design traffic num x num esa as sieve size mm passing by mass target grading passing by mass minimum and maximum limits num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num.gnum other acceptance limits gravel basecourse suitable for design traffic num x num esa test limits test method liquid limit num maximum wa num linear shrinkage num maximum wa num maximum dry compressive strength nummpa minimum wanum california bearing ratio soaked num days with numkg surcharge at num of mdd and num of omc num minimum wa num secondary mineral content in basic igneous rocks num maximum as num accelerated soundness index by reflux num minimum as num num subbase modification of the gravel subbase specification for design traffic less than num x num esa may also be considered in accordance with num basecourse above .
specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num gravel rework refer clause num the clause below may be required for inclusion in clause num for basecourse material with gravel particles prone to excessive wear during mixing and compaction .
a high los angeles abrasion value or past experience of excessive breakdown during construction with similar material would justify the use of this clause to limit rework of gravel basecourse .
num .
gravel basecourse material is prone to breakdown under the action of construction plant .
the contractor shall compact any lot using this material for basecourse only twice .
any basecourse that requires rework after having been already compacted twice shall be removed and replaced at no cost to the principal .
gravel basecourse rework insert paragraph as required and remove grid lines num construction of plastic materials refer clause num for construction of plastic materials the following clause should be included in clause num for gravel basecourse or gravel subbase materials .
num .
all gravel basecourse or subbase materials shall be mixed to a uniform moisture content in the range of num to num of optimum moisture content and left to cure for at least num hours prior to compaction commencing .
compaction shall be carried out within num hours of the time of gravel curing commencing .
gravel material curing insert paragraph as required and remove grid lines num .
regional subbase and basecourse gravel specifications when regional natural gravel specifications are different from clause num gravel subbase and clause num gravel basecourse those specifications are provided below .
num southwest regional gravel specification num gravel subbase for southwest regional roads with a design traffic loading of less than or equal to num x num esa specification for gravel subbase remains the same as in clause num geavel subbase supplied by the contractor with the following exceptions the portion of the sample passing the nummm sieve shall conform to the following a .
liquid limit wa num not greater than num b .
linear shrinkage wa num not greater than num num gravel basecourse for southwest regional roads with a design traffic loading of less than or equal to num x num esa gravel basecourse shall meet the grading requirements in table num.gnum and comply with the other requirements in table num.gnum .
specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num.gnum particle size distribution southwest gravel basecourse as sieve size mm passing by mass minimum and maximum limits num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num.gnum other acceptance limits southwest gravel basecourse test limits test method liquid limit num maximum wa num linear shrinkage num maximum wa num maximum dry compressive strength nummpa minimum wanum california bearing ratio soaked num days with numkg surcharge at num of mdd and num of omc num minimum wa num secondary mineral content in basic igneous rocks num maximum as num accelerated soundness index by reflux num minimum as num specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num wheatbelt region gravel specification num natural laterite pedocrete gravel unaltered subbase for wheatbelt region roads the specification for natural laterite pedocrete gravel unaltered subbase materials in wheatbelt region remains the same as in clause num gravel sub base supplied by the contractor with the following exception the numday soaked cbr is num minimum at num of omc and num mdd num compaction of natural laterite pedocrete unaltered gravel sub base natural laterite pedocrete gravel unaltered subbase shall be compacted at num of omc and shall achieve characteristic density no less than num of mdd for design traffic num x num esa num of mdd for design traffic num x num esa .
num natural laterite pedocrete gravel unaltered basecourse for wheatbelt region roads the natural laterite pedocrete gravel basecourse in wheatbelt region shall be unaltered in any way and shall meet the grading requirements in table num.gnum and comply with the limits in table num.gnum .
should the material be altered through crushing screening or blending then the material shall comply with the limits in tables num and num .
table num.gnum particle size distribution wheatbelt region natural laterite pedocrete gravel unaltered basecourse as sieve size mm passing by mass target grading passing by mass minimum and maximum limits num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num.gnum other acceptance limits wheatbelt region natural laterite pedocrete gravelunaltered basecourse test limits test method liquid limit num maximum wa num linear shrinkage num maximum wa num maximum dry compressive strength num mpa minimum wanum california bearing ratio soaked num days with numkg surcharge at num of omc and num of mdd num minimum wa num num compaction of natural laterite pedocrete unaltered gravel basecourse natural laterite pedocrete gravelunaltered basecourse shall be compacted at num of omc and shall achieve characteristic density no less than num of mdd for design traffic num x num esa num of mdd for design traffic num x num esa .
num goldfields esperance region gravel specifications for goldfields esperance region roads the following specifications are suitable for all roads .
table num.gnum particle size distribution goldfields esperance gravel basecourse as sieve size mm passing by mass minimum and maximum limits num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num.gnum other acceptance limits goldfields esperance gravel basecourse test limits test method liquid limit num maximum wa num plasticity index num maximum wanum linear shrinkage num maximum wa num maximum dry density num tmnum minimum wanumwanum maximum dry compressive strength num mpa minimum wa num california bearing ratio soaked num days with numkg surcharge at num of mdd and num of omc num minimum wa num table num.gnum particle size distribution goldfields esperance gravel basecourse as sieve size mm passing by mass minimum and maximum limits num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num.gnum other acceptance limits goldfields esperance gravel basecourse test limits test method liquid limit num maximum wa num plasticity index num maximum wanum linear shrinkage num maximum wa num maximum dry density num tmnum minimum wanumwa num maximum dry compressive strength num mpa minimum wa num california bearing ratio soaked num days with numkg surcharge at num of mdd and num of omc num minimum wa num table num.gnum particle size distribution goldfields esperance gravel basecourse as sieve size mm passing by mass minimum and maximum limits num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num.gnum other acceptance limits goldfields esperance gravel basecourse test limits test method liquid limit num maximum wa num plasticity index num maximum wanum linear shrinkage num maximum wa num maximum dry compressive strength num mpa minimum wa num california bearing ratio soaked num days with numkg surcharge at num of mdd and num of omc num minimum wa num table num.gnum particle size distribution goldfields esperance gravel subbase as sieve size mm passing by mass minimum and maximum limits num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num.gnum other acceptance limits goldfields esperance gravel sub base test limits test method liquid limit num maximum wa num plasticity index num maximum wanum linear shrinkage num maximum wa num california bearing ratio soaked num days with numkg surcharge at num of mdd and num of omc num minimum wa num num .
gravel basecourse oversize material refer clause num num an alternative paragraphs num to num in clause num is provided where it is considered necessary to ensure the removal or treatment of oversize material in excess of nummm in size .
num if applicable insert the alternative paragraphs num to num in clause num provided below and remove grid lines num .
gravel basecourse material shall consist of durable pebble in soil mortar .
the material shall be free from particles having any dimension greater than nummm and free from clods stumps roots sticks vegetable matter or other deleterious materials .
component num .
the contractor shall remove all oversize material with any dimension greater than nummm and this material shall not be delivered to the pavement construction area .
this material and all other oversize material are to be included in the measurement of the stockpile for determining the volume of material used .
removal of materials nummm num .
all other oversize material shall be crushed by rolling with a minimum of six num passes of a grid roller as specified in the compaction principals method specification clause num of specification num earthworks .
rolling crush num .
after the initial crushing any material having any dimension greater than nummm shall be deemed to be oversize and shall not be used in pavement construction .
additional crushing shall then be undertaken until the pavement material does not contain more than num by mass of material retained on a nummm sieve .
additional crushing specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
principal supplied materials refer clause num num materials are normally required to be supplied by the contractor .
where supply is by the principal for example gravel in stockpiles clause num in the section contract specific requirements or a suitably edited version of this clause is applicable .
num amend this clause as shown to indicate whether the material is supplied at a cost to the contractor or is supplied free of charge .
applying a charge may conserve material where there is a limited supply but appropriate supervision and a suitable means of measurement must be established .
num insert details of any other principal supplied materials as required .
num .
optional pavement materials refer clauses num to num num the section products and materials includes commonly used pavement materials .
other pavement materials should be included under contract specific requirements and selected as required .
num pavement materials not listed should be researched and approved as required before inclusion .
num .
drainage layer refer clause num num geotextile num .
where a drainage layer is required it is usually constructed immediately below the lower pavement layer .
num .
a geotextile may or may not be required as part of the drainage layer .
typical details of geotextile are as follows table num.gnum mechanical properties subsoil drains drainage blanket test method minimum g rating as defined in austroads guide to geotextiles num num as num as num note typical g rating values only are shown insert appropriate values to suit specific conditions table numgnum hydraulic properties subsoil drains drainage blanket test method maximum equivalent opening size eos m num num asnum minimum qnum lmsec num num asnum note typical eos and qnum values only are shown insert appropriate values to suit specific conditions specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num sand for drainage layer num .
bassendean sand is commonly used as a drainage layer in the metro area with the grading limits following table numanum .
num .
insert appropriate details of the specified drainage layer material .
num .
pavement compaction num where a range is given for the minimum characteristic dry density ratio in table num anum the higher value in the range should be selected unless there is evidence that the basecourse properties will be damaged by so doing e.g .
if a higher compactive effort causes breakdown of the stone and adversely affects the grading or the linear shrinkage of the basecourse .
a higher compactive effort will reduce the risk of post construction wheel path rutting under traffic loading .
a more uniform pavement layer can be expected when a higher minimum characteristic dry density ratio is specified .
to achieve the higher density the contractor will need to exercise greater control over the uniformity of the mixing and compaction processes e.g .
especially over the amount and uniformity of moisture in the pavement layer during compaction .
num cement stabilised or lime stabilised basecourse must not be used under asphalt wearing courses unless approved by the manager materials engineering .
num refer to engineering road note no .
num for guidance to augment engineering judgement and knowledge of local materials .
num plastic pavement materials should be moist cured for at least num hours before compaction takes place if the in situ or imported basecourse is in a dry condition .
refer guidance note num num .
dryback of pavement and subgrade layers num the dryback criterion of num for basecourse with a spray seal surface is usually suitable however consideration should be given to adjusting the criterion if required to reduce aggregate embedment and the risk of subsequent seal flushing .
the risk is higher when commercial vehicle numbers are high .
num .
dieback control num insert as a contract specific requirement if dieback controls should be included in pavement construction .
num refer to any general requirements shown in specification num environment .
num .
cement stabilised pavements refer clause num num cement stabilisation can be applied to any pavement layer but typically only to the basecourse layer .
num if cement stabilisation of the basecourse is specified e.g .
at floodways determine the following and insert into annexure numa in addition to required compaction specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name a .
depth of stabilisation typically nummm to nummm .
b .
cement content typical values are num num or num by dry mass of the basecourse material .
c. the cement content required will be determined by the unconfined compressive strength ucs of the material when tested in accordance with wa num .
the ucs specimens shall be compacted using general purpose type gp cement cured for seven num days in a controlled environment and immersed in water for four num hours prior to compression testing .
the specimens are to be compacted at the specified density and num of omc .
the numday ucs must be in the range of num nummpa .
num the minimum practical spread rate that can be achieved by most cement spreaders is numkgmnum which equates to approximately num cement for a laterite gravel stabilised to a depth of nummm .
num the mandatory use of padfoot rollers for initial compaction is recommended in the following circumstances a .
when the section length is numm or more .
b .
the depth of material to be stabilised is nummm or more .
padfoot rollers are more efficient in achieving density but trimming out the padfoot marks is difficult in short sections and those with coarse material that could tear the surface .
delete clause num if padfoot rollers are not required .
num check clause cross reference number numin clause num is still current as any revision to specification num could affect the clause numbering of that specification and is not automatically picked up in this specification num .
lime stabilisation refer clause num num if lime modification is specified determine the following and insert into annexure numa in addition to required compaction a .
depth of stabilisation typically nummm to nummm .
b .
lime content is determined by laboratory testing .
because lime varies in purity depending on manufacture and strength depending on whether it is quicklime or hydrated lime the optimum lime content must be expressed as a percentage of equivalent pure hydrated lime calcium hydroxide by dry mass of the pavement material num the process for determining whether lime modification is appropriate and the required of pure hydrated lime for pavement modification is a .
refer to section num preliminary binder selection of the austroads guide to pavement technology part numd stabilised materials to determine if lime is a suitable additive for the selected pavement material .
b .
determine the ucs of the modified material in accordance with main roads test method wa num .
the test specimens are to be compacted at the specified density and num of omc and must be num day cured .
c. the optimum lime content of the soil for modification produces a numday ucs in the range nummpa to nummpa .
specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num the minimum practical spread rate that can be achieved by most lime spreaders is numkgmnum which equates to approximately num lime for a laterite gravel stabilised to a depth of nummm .
num the safety aspects of lime stabilisation are referred to in clause num .
num .
durability of basic igneous rocks tests asnum asnum have been included for the purpose of excluding material that has the potential to degrade in service when used as subbase and basecourse .
the colour of the rocks may be green grey or black but the basaltic rocks that most commonly present a risk of degradation are often dark green .
standard classification and strength tests are not suitable to identify the presence of material prone to degradation .
vic roads code of practice rc num provides additional guidance on this topic .
num .
hydrated cement treated crushed rock base hctcrb refer clause num num a geotextile reinforced seal must be specified whenever hctcrb basecourse is used .
the grs must comprise a doubledouble seal nummmnummm with heavy grade fabric in accordance with the requirements in specification num or specification num as applicable .
the purpose of the grs is to maintain a waterproof seal on the hctcrb basecourse .
hctcrb should not be specified for pavements with a sprayed seal wearing course or pavements at intersections .
num .
crushed recycled concrete subbase refer clause num crushed recycled concrete subbase in accord with clause num is suitable to be used as the subbase layer for full depth asphalt pavements .
the crc subbase material specification is available from the materials engineering branch .
the crc subbase specification is generally only used in alliance contracts where the risk of contamination is jointly managed .
num .
resilient modulus the basecourse vertical modulus adopted in the pavement design should be inserted in the relevant table .
refer to the pavement design for the appropriate criterion .
the criterion will typically be in the range num mpa num mpa in accordance with austroads guide to pavement technology part num guidance .
num .
reclaimed pavement subbase num if it is likely that existing pavement material will be reused as subbase compliance to the appropriate subbase specifications is applicable .
num .
contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num pavement materials principal supplied num .
where pavement materials are supplied by the principal details of such materials are provided in specification num general requirements annexure nume .
specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
pavement material will be made available to the contractor free of charge at a specified cubic metre rate measured in the stockpile from stockpiles located as described in specification num general requirements annexure nume .
the material shall be extracted from the stockpiles without contamination from the underlying strata and shall be free from boulders clods stumps roots stocks vegetable matter or other deleterious material prior to loading and carting .
authors select as applicable availability num .
if the pavement material is made available from borrow pits any removed vegetation or material that is discarded may be stockpiled separately and used later in pit reinstatement in accordance with specification num pits and quarries .
vegetation num .
when the stockpiled material contains oversized material the contractor shall screen the stockpiles to ensure that the pavement material does not contain more than num by mass of material retained on a nummm sieve .
the screen aperture shall be selected so that only the minimum quantity of material is removed from the existing stockpile to satisfy this requirement .
basecourse material having any dimension greater that nummm shall be deemed oversize and shall not be used in pavement construction .
oversize material num .
any oversize material discarded in the stockpile area or any oversize material discarded from the pavement shall be removed to be stockpiled in borrow pits and respread evenly over the pit excavation area prior to the rehabilitation of the pit .
num .
access tracks to pavement material stockpiles and pits shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with specification num pits and quarries .
access tracks num crushed recycled concrete subbase supplied by the contractor contact materials engineering branch num ferricrete basecourse supplied by the contractor num .
ferricrete basecourse shall predominantly consist of crushed indurated ferricrete and may include natural fragmented ferricrete and lateritic gravel .
for blended materials the proportion of crushed material shall not be less than num .
the material shall be generally free from organic matter and other deleterious materials .
general num .
the source rock shall also conform to the following limits shown in table num .
source rock acceptance limits specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num source rock acceptance limits ferricrete basecourse test limits test method los angeles abrasion value num maximum wa num num .
the particle size distribution of the material when tested in accordance with test method wa num shall comply with the requirements shown in table num particle size distribution gravel basecourse or table num.gnum particle size distribution gravel basecourse suitable for design traffic num x num esa .
the grading of material passing the nummm sieve shall vary from coarse to fine in a uniform and consistent manner .
the material shall not be gap graded as represented by the grading crossing from the maximum limit for one sieve size to the minimum limit for another sieve size and shall conform as closely as possible to the specified target grading .
particle size distribution num .
the dust ratio defined as the ratio of the percentage passing by mass the nummm sieve to the percentage passing by mass the nummm sieve shall fall within the range num to num .
dust ratio num .
the material shall also conform to the following limits shown in table num and table num .
other acceptance limits specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num other acceptance limits ferricrete basecourse ferricrete basecourse is not suitable for use in freeways test limits test method liquid limit num maximum wa num linear shrinkage num maximum wa num maximum dry compressive strength nummpa minimum wa num maximum dry density num tmnum minimum wa num california bearing ratio soaked num days with numkg surcharge at num of mdd and num of omc num minimum wa num flakiness index num maximum wa num resilient modulus additional requirement if specified in pavement design at num of mdd and num of omc see guidance notes and delete this note agpttnum wa num table num other acceptance limits ferricrete basecourse suitable for design traffic num x num esa test limits test method liquid limit num maximum wa num linear shrinkage num maximum wa num maximum dry compressive strength nummpa minimum wa num maximum dry density num tmnum minimum wa num california bearing ratio soaked num days with numkg surcharge at num of mdd and num of omc num minimum wa num flakiness index num maximum wa num resilient modulus additional requirement if specified in pavement design at num of mdd and num of omc see guidance notes and delete this note agpttnum wa num specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num not used num lime stabilised pavements num materials num .
lime for stabilisation of any pavement layer shall comply with the requirements of as num .
the lime shall be sufficiently dry to flow freely during application .
lime num .
the contractor shall arrange lime delivery and have on site bulk storage facilities .
the contractor shall be responsible for all arrangements in regard to the transfer of lime between delivery vehicles on site bulk storage facilities and lime spreaders .
delivery num general num .
the pavement material shall be stabilised with lime for the sections and to the compacted depths shown either in annexure numa or as shown on the drawings .
num .
stabilisation shall include preliminary loosening of the pavement layer mixing and compacting the pavement material as necessary spreading lime over the area to be treated and the thorough blending of insitu pavement material lime and water as required to produce a homogeneous stabilised layer over the specified lengths and widths .
num .
the contractors shall handle and use the quicklimeslaked lime in a safe manner and shall provide adequate protection to the workforce the public stock and property .
safety requirements num plant and equipment a lime spreader lime spreader num .
the spreading equipment shall be a mechanical stabilising agent spreader that has been specifically designed for such work .
the spreader shall be capable of uniformly distributing lime and accurately controlling the spread rate such that when mixing is complete the lime content shall be in accordance with the requirements of clause num .
num .
the spreader shall be equipped with gates to vary the width of spread and with electronic weigh scales to give daily totals of product use .
b stabilising machine stabilising machine num .
cutting pulverising mixing adding water and spreading of blended material shall be accomplished using a machine specifically designed for pavement recycling .
the stabilising machines rotor action shall be such that the rotor revolves in an upwards and forwards cutting direction .
the rotor shall be of the recycler type and fitted with bullet teeth cutting tips .
specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
rotary hoes and other implements normally used for agricultural work shall not be used .
the stabilising machine shall also satisfy the following requirements i .
be capable of producing a uniformly mixed material throughout the specified depth of the work .
ii .
be equipped with a variable depth of cut control and an accurate gauge to measure depth of cut which is readily visible to the operator .
iii .
have provision for adding water automatically through a system comprising a pump flow meter variable control valve and full width spray bar .
each nozzle on the spray bar shall be fully and independently adjustable and the water pump shall have the capacity to supply a minimum of num litres per minute .
num preliminary treatment num .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to determine whether pre loosening and mixing of the in situ material is necessary .
num .
under no circumstances shall the first loosening and mixing operation of the pavement layer exceed the final stabilised depth .
num spreading of lime num .
lime shall be spread uniformly at a controlled rate over the area to be stabilised using a suitable lime spreader .
num .
the lime stabilised pavement layer shall contain an average of not less than the equivalent percentage of hydrated lime calcium hydroxide as stated in annexure numa .
the percentage stated is a percentage of the dry mass of the pavement layer material .
the contractor shall keep daily records of the amounts of lime used and actual spread rates achieved per section treated and shall make such records available to the superintendent upon request .
composition num .
the actual spread rate of lime achieved shall be determined by either i. placing three trays each of approximately one third of a square metre in area in front of the lime spreader and measuring the mass of lime deposited on the trays for each lot or ii .
by the use of an onboard electronic weigh scale system .
num .
the percentage lime p shall be calculated thus p m x num a x t x mdd where m total mass of lime kg as determined by one of the following methods a on each tray b onboard electronic weight scale system .
specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name a method a total area of the trays m method b total measured area spread m t thickness to be stabilised mm including allowances for tolerances and trimming mdd maximum dry density of the pavement material without the addition of lime kgm num .
the percentage lime determined for each tray in accordance with this clause shall be maintained within num by mass of the specified lime content throughout the stabilisation works .
num .
the use of method b in determining the values m and a is subject to satisfactory calibration of the measuring device and the production of associated certification in accordance with the contractors quality system .
audits on this method shall be carried out using the measuring tray method .
num .
once the lime has been spread no other plant other than that needed for spreading or for mixing and spreading the mixed material shall be permitted to travel over the area to be stabilised .
num incorporation of lime num .
the spreading of lime shall not proceed when rain is imminent .
the spread lime shall be incorporated into the pavement layer immediately following the spreading operation .
all spread lime shall be incorporated into the pavement layer within the same working day .
lime shall not be spread when the prevailing wind velocity is sufficient to make the lime particles airborne .
num .
cutting pulverising mixing adding water and spreading of mixed material shall take place as a single operation within the stabilising machine .
num .
cutting pulverising mixing adding water and spreading of mixed material shall continue until the maximum size of all material other than rock is not greater than nummm and the lime and water are uniformly incorporated into the mixed material without streaks or pockets of lime .
num moisture content num .
compaction shall be carried out at a moisture content at any point in the lot that is within the range num num of the optimum moisture content .
num .
the contractor shall be responsible for achieving and maintaining the required moisture content by controlling the amount of water added during the mixing process within the stabilising machine .
num compaction num .
compaction and trimming of the mixed material to shape and level shall be completed within the same working day that the lime is incorporated into the pavement layer .
the mixed material shall be compacted to the characteristic dry density ratio as shown in annexure numa or greater .
specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall be responsible for any additional stabilising including the supply and incorporation of additional lime required as a result of non compliance with this clause as directed by the superintendent .
num rework num .
if a completed layer of lime stabilisation does not satisfy all of the requirements of the specification and has to be reworked the contractor shall repeat all the requirements for lime stabilisation without the addition of lime at no cost to the principal .
rework num .
rework shall include any disturbance to the surface of the lime stabilized layer during trimming to meet shape or level requirements that is undertaken after the working day that the lime is incorporated into the pavement layer .
the rework depth shall not be less than the full depth of the affected layer .
num construction joints num .
when the stabilising work can not be completed in one continuous operation the contractor shall provide construction joints at each discontinuity in the operation .
num .
construction joints shall be made transverse to andor parallel to the direction of the stabilising run and shall be made just prior to the commencement of the next stabilising run .
num .
the joints shall be formed by cutting back into the compacted stabilised material to form a vertical face .
the loose trimmed material shall be removed from the joint before the next section is mixed and compacted and shall be disposed of to the contractors spoil area .
num preliminary trial num .
the contractor shall carry out a preliminary trial of the proposed stabilising operations .
the trial shall determine i .
the effectiveness of the plant .
ii .
the number of passes of the stabilising machine necessary to achieve the specified mixing .
num .
the trial section shall be located within the works area .
num .
prior to conducting such a trial the contractor shall agree with the superintendent the location length and width of trial sections within the works .
hold point specification num pavements num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title pavements revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager contracts .
clause deletes shows as not used .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
project managers review completed .
specification guidance notes deleted .
table of contents updated .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num stone mastic asphalt copyright main roads western australia specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num whole document reformatted to corporate branding guidelines bpc num num amended wording common with specification num bpc num num corrected title of wa num num requirement for dilution of emulsion moved to num table num corrected title of binder drain off test limit on nummm sieve for nummm sma modified num added binder drain off num new wording common with specification num num new clause common with specification num num corrected title of particle coating test num new clause common with specification num num num num clause moved from num num removed as a hold point and clarified at what point temperature is applicable num new wording common with specification num num num num new wording common with specification num num new wording common with specification num num amended wording table num added drawing num num moved clause from num num new wording common with specification num num new wording common with specification num num new clause common with specification num on reporting of results general clause numbers amended to be consistent with specifications num and num .
bpc num num clarified scope .
added reference to specificationnum num deleted documents not referenced .
added new test methods specification and aapa advisory note num amended to be consistent with specification num specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num hydrated lime quantity changed to be num num new clause on sample cocks num clause relocated from old num num no rap in sma num new clause on marshall properties when testing plant mix num added test method tnum for moisture content num maximum temperature of mix numc num new clause on truck temperatures num new title num new clause on binder temperature num new clause on use of sasobit num new clause on testing facilities num new hold point num hold point amended to apply to marshall properties only num new hold point on truck dockets num delivery temperatures now numc num breakdown roller mass minimum num tonnes num deleted omission of tack coat num sasobit to be used when air temperature less than numc num new clause on edge compaction num new clause on echelon paving num new clause on asphalt construction drawings num new clauses on compaction num clause relocated from old num num conformance value now num where no separate rates for placing asphalt num new text on appearance of asphalt num new text on levels num surface temperature for opening to traffic now numc specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num bituminous binder num num bitumen emulsion num num aggregate num num fibres num num mineral filler num num adhesion agent num num gritting aggregate num num num not used num mix design num num mix design num num num not used num manufacture transport num num mixing plant num num storage and handling num num use of organic wax compound num num testing num num nonconformance num num transport num num num not used num placing of asphalt num num general num num surface preparation num num equipment num num tack coat num num not used num num weather conditions num num joints num num longitudinal joints num num transverse joints num num terminal joints num num asphalt construction drawings num specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used num num compaction num num density requirements num num surface requirements num num opening finished works to traffic num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num stone mastic application records num annexure numb num stone mastic asphalt additional treatments num annexure numc num material transfer vehicle num specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num stone mastic asphalt general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and application of stone mastic asphalt hereafter referred to as asphalt as a pavement wearing course .
num .
details of the location and extent of asphalt work are either summarised at annexure numa or are shown on the drawings .
details num .
the works shall include surface preparation supply of materials production hauling placing and compaction of asphalt to the areas as shown in the drawings or as otherwise directed by the superintendent but not including correction of existing pavement surfaces .
correction shall be done using a nummm dense graded asphalt meeting the requirements of specification num asphalt wearing course .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia and austroads test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num or wanum .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num hot mix asphalt asnzs num moisture content of asphalt asnzs num degree of particle coating main roads test methods wa num particle size distribution of aggregates wa num surface shape using a straightedge wa num surface profile arrb tr walking profiler wa num sampling and storage of asphalt wa num bitumen content particle size distribution of asphalt stabilised soil centrifuge method wa num stability flow of asphalt marshall method wa num maximum density of asphalt rice method wa num bulk density and void content of asphalt specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name roads maritime services nsw test methods t num moisture content of bituminous mixes mass loss method austroads test methods agpttnum asphalt binder drainoff australian asphalt pavement association advisory note num guide to the heating and storage of binders for asphalt manufacture main roads specification specification num quality system specification num asphalt wearing course specification num materials for bituminous treatments num num not used products and materials num bituminous binder num .
polymer modified binder used in the production of asphalt shall be anume conforming to the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
num bitumen emulsion num .
bitumen emulsion to be used as the tack coat during the preparation of the surface prior to the laying of the asphalt shall be either cationic slow setting emulsion grade crsnum or cationic rapid setting emulsion grade crsnum both conforming to as num mixed num by volume with water .
num aggregate num .
crushed aggregate including its source rock shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
coarse and fine aggregates used to manufacture the asphalt shall only consist of crushed materials sourced from quarries within the perth region .
num fibres num .
fibres shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
num mineral filler num .
mineral filler shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num adhesion agent num .
the adhesion agent shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
num gritting aggregate num .
where the use of surface grit is specified in annexure numb the following materials shall be used .
the nominal size of the grit shall be nummm .
a. black granite from barossa quarries south australia .
b. grey calcined bauxite from guyana num num not used mix design num mix design num design parameters num .
all asphalt produced shall be assessed in accordance with the standard procedures laid down for the marshall method of design as shown in table num .
table num design parameters description test method stability flow of asphalt marshall method wa num maximum density of asphalt rice method wa num bulk density void content of asphalt wa num num .
the design shall produce asphalt which satisfies the limiting values of the various properties listed in table num .
specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num marshall properties stone mastic asphaltnum blow compaction parameter min max marshall stability num kn marshall flow num mm num mm air voids nominal num mm num num nominal num mm num num voids in mineral aggregate nominal num mm num nominal num mm num num .
in addition to achieving all the specified property values all asphalt shall have an adequate workability and shall be suitably resistant to segregation during handling and placing .
workability num conforming mix design for stone mastic asphalt num .
the conforming mix design described in this clause is for asphalt produced using granite aggregates from the perth region .
perth mix only num .
the asphalt shall consist of a mixture of coarse and fine aggregates fibres hydrated lime mineral filler and polymer modified binder .
the materials shall be measured and then mixed in such proportions as to satisfy the properties in table num .
specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num conforming mixes for perth area particle size distribution and binder content australian standard sieve asnum mm percentage passing nominal nummm granite nominal nummm granite num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num binder content by percentage mass of whole mixture num num num num hydrated lime by percentage mass of total aggregate num num fibre content by percentage mass of whole mixture num min .
num min .
binder drainoff at numc num max .
num max .
num num not used manufacture transport num mixing plant num .
asphalt shall be manufactured in a central mixing plant by either batch mixing continuous mixing or drum mixing .
all mixing plant and equipment and associated facilities shall conform to the requirements of as num and shall be such as to prevent segregation of the asphalt at all stages .
plant specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
a sampling cock shall be installed in the inlet pipe between the road tanker and binder storage tanks .
an additional sampling cock shall be installed for sampling at the time of asphalt production between the binder tank and the mixing chamber to facilitate the sampling of any binder being used for asphalt production .
binder sampling cocks num .
for the verification of weights or proportions and character of materials and determination of temperatures used in the preparation of the asphalt the superintendent shall have access at any time to all parts of the plant subject to safety considerations .
num manufacture of asphalt num .
the quantities of coarse and fine aggregates fibres mineral filler adhesion agent and binder shall be accurately and positively controlled so as to produce the asphalt specified for use in the works .
reclaimed asphalt pavement rap shall not be included in the production of any stone mastic asphalt .
control num .
the mixing process shall be such as to produce a uniform distribution of aggregate sizes and a uniform coating of binder on a minimum of num of aggregate particles when tested in accordance with asnzs num .
the mixing process shall be such that there are no clumps of aggregate andor binder is present in the asphalt .
cellulose fibres shall be dry mixed with the aggregates for sufficient time to ensure uniform distribution of the fibres .
cellulose fibres shall not be added to aggregates that are at a temperature of greater than numc .
mixing num .
the particle size distribution and the percentage of binder shall be within the limits as specified in table num when tested in accordance with wa num .
psd and binder content num .
the air voids vma stability and flow shall be in accordance with table num when tested in accordance with wa num and num .
marshall properties num .
the moisture content of the asphalt at the completion of the mixing process shall not be greater than num by mass when measured in accordance with asnzs num or tnum .
moisture content num .
the binder drain off shall be within the limits as specified in table num when tested in accordance with agpttnum .
binder drain off num .
in a batch mixer the volume of material shall be limited to an amount allowing the paddle tips to be seen when passing through the top vertical position during mixing .
volume of material num .
the temperature of the mixed asphalt shall be measured and recorded at the discharge point of the pugmill or mixing drum .
the temperature of the asphalt shall not exceed numc unless otherwise directed by the superintendent .
temperature at discharge point specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num storage and handling num .
binder shall be heated and stored to meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments and the aapa advisory note num .
at no time after delivery shall binder be heated to a temperature greater than numc .
storage temperature num use of organic wax compound num .
where the asphalt is to be placed with an air temperature of less than numc but greater than numc sasobit shall be added to the binder at a rate of num by mass of binder .
use of sasobit num .
the mixing process shall be such as to produce a uniform distribution of aggregate sizes and a uniform coating of binder on num of aggregate particles when tested in accordance with asnzs num .
the mixing and drying processes shall be sufficient to ensure that moisture in asphalt is not greater than specified .
mixing num testing num .
the asphalt producer shall provide and maintain at a suitable location at the site of the mixing plant for the duration of the contract a suitably equipped air conditioned testing laboratory accredited by the national association of testing authorities of australia nata to perform the following tests testing laboratory wa num num or num num num num num num num asnzs num or tnum asnzs num and agpttnum .
num .
the laboratory shall be equipped with all testing equipment necessary to perform these tests .
the asphalt producer shall operate and maintain the equipment in good condition in accordance with nata requirements .
testing equipment num .
asphalt shall be tested for the properties and at the testing frequency shown in specification num quality systems .
tests to be undertaken include testing requirements routine testing full test psd bitumen content wa num maximum density of asphalt rice method wa num bulk density void content of asphalt wa num and num stability and flow of asphalt marshall method wa num routine testing partial test psd bitumen content wa num maximum density of asphalt rice method wa num periodic testing moisture content asnzs num or tnum degree of particle coating asnzs num asphalt binder drain off agpttnum specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
asphalt shall be sampled in accordance with wa num with samples tested immediately they are taken .
the number of tests undertaken shall be evenly spread across the entire period of production within a shift .
sample testing frequency num .
the first sample of asphalt in a shift shall be taken from the first num tonnes of asphalt manufactured in the shift .
first sample num .
if any result of a test sample does not conform to any specified requirements another sample of asphalt shall be taken immediately and tested immediately for a full test .
num .
results of testing shall be reported on a nata endorsed test report within num hours of a sample being taken .
the testing laboratory shall send all results directly to amongst others the contractor the superintendent and a nominated representative at the main roads materials engineering branch .
reporting num nonconformance num .
a hold point will apply when any asphalt test result indicating a nonconformance occurs .
this hold point shall also apply to asphalt produced prior to the nonconforming test result but which has not been placed .
hold point num transport num .
the asphalt shall be transported from the asphalt plant to the works in metal bodied trucks previously cleaned of all foreign materials .
in long distance haul situations the asphalt should be transported in insulated vehicles sufficient to ensure arrival of the asphalt on site in a conforming condition .
vehicle type num .
the temperature of the asphalt in each truck load and each trailer load shall be measured using a calibrated digital probe thermometer before the truck leaves the site of the asphalt manufacturing plant .
the thermometer shall have a digital display readable to numc and have a measurement of uncertainty of not more than numc .
infrared thermometers shall not be used to measure temperature .
the temperature shall comply with the requirements of clause num .
temperature in truck num .
the temperature of the asphalt shall be recorded on a printout showing date time and asphalt temperature for each truck load and each trailer load of mix dispatched .
the printout shall be provided with the load delivery docket .
temperature record num .
each load shall be covered with suitable material of sufficient size to prevent loss of heat from the asphalt .
heat loss num .
the asphalt shall be delivered at a uniform rate within the capacity of the placing and compacting plant .
delivery rate num num not used placing of asphalt specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num general num .
prior to commencing asphalting the contractor shall submit to the superintendent the proposed number and widths of asphalt runs and the proposed joint layout .
bolding hold point num .
placing of the initial asphalt of the day shall not commence until the initial test result confirms that the asphalt conforms to the marshall properties specified in table num .
hold point num .
asphalt shall not be placed if the truck delivery docket does not include a printout of the date time and temperature of asphalt when the truck was dispatched .
num .
asphalt shall be delivered to the work site at temperatures between numc and numc .
delivery temperatures num .
if a delay occurs of more than num minutes between successive truck deliveries to the paver the paver shall be moved clear of the laid asphalt and a proper transverse joint formed .
delays num .
prior to commencing each days operations and also after any delay exceeding half an hour during the day the screed shall be preheated for at least num minutes in order to eliminate drag marks and imperfections in the finished mat .
screed to be preheated num .
all kerbs gullies grates and other structures shall be protected at all times from damage or defacement by asphalt placement works and the site shall be left in a clean and tidy condition .
damage num surface preparation num .
prior to the placement of asphalt the contractor shall carry out preparation work as detailed in the following clauses num .
the contractor shall sweep all road surfaces on which asphalt is to be placed under this contract to a clean condition with no appreciable amounts of loose materials or any other foreign matter remaining .
loose surface material against kerbing shall be removed by handwork if necessary .
the surface to be paved shall be dry .
sweeping num .
where the surface to be covered is asphalt all depressions more than nummm deep shall be filled with a nominal num mm dense graded asphalt meeting the requirements of specification num asphalt wearing course and shall be screeded or raked and then compacted to similar density as the remainder of the surface to be paved .
surface correction num .
where paving tape is shown in asphalt drawings the tape shall be denso paving tape nummm wide or bitac ds multilaminate tape nummm wide .
the tape shall be applied to a surface that is clean dry and all loose material has been removed beyond the width of the tape to be applied .
joins of the tape shall be overlapped and any air bubbles or creases in the tape shall be cut and flattened .
paving tape specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num equipment num .
the asphalt must be placed by a selfpropelled paver equipped with the ability to be operated with automatic thickness control and automatic joint matching facility .
the paver must be equipped with optical sensors a ski or mobile stringline and cross fall controller to maintain levels and also suitable sensing equipment to provide longitudinal joint matching .
it shall further be equipped with a vibrating or tamping screed .
asphalt paver num .
where the use of a material transfer vehicle mtv is specified at annexure numc the mtv shall be a selfpropelled machine capable of receiving asphalt from delivery trucks storing the asphalt heating asphalt in storage and transferring the asphalt to the paver without any contact with the paver .
the mtv must have a minimum storage capacity of num tonnes and the paver must be fitted with a bin in its hopper to transfer asphalt directly to the feed conveyor of the paver .
material transfer vehicle num tack coat num .
a tack coat shall be applied to the prepared surface at the rate of num litresmnum of the dilute emulsion or as directed by the superintendent .
emulsion type num .
no asphalt shall be placed on the tack coat until the emulsion has broken and the water has substantially evaporated .
num .
the superintendent may direct the pavement area ahead of the asphalt paver to be resprayed and may specify the time to be allowed between the spraying of tack coat and the placing of asphalt .
however this area shall not exceed the requirements for half a days placing of asphalt .
respraying num .
the tack coat shall be applied with care to reduce the possibility of concrete kerbs driveways and footpaths being sprayed with bitumen .
any such contamination shall be removed by the contractor at no cost to the principal .
contamination num not used num weather conditions num .
asphalt placement shall not commence or continue upon a surface which is not clean and dry and only when the air temperature is greater than numc and rain is not imminent .
where the air temperature is less than numc but greater than numc sasobit shall be added to the binder in accordance with clause num .
where the air temperature is greater than numc and rising the use of sasobit is not mandated .
air temperature num .
the superintendent may if the weather or surface conditions are considered to be unsuitable instruct the contractor to cease laying operations .
any asphalt laid after this instruction is given will not be paid for and is to be removed at no cost to the principal .
num joints num .
the number and extent of joints in asphalt layers shall be kept to a minimum and the paving pattern shall be designed accordingly in advance of the work paving pattern specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the main paving runs shall be laid first and any smaller or irregular adjacent areas later so that they can be matched to the main run .
num .
each joint shall be neat thoroughly compacted and have a surface finish equal in quality to that of the surrounding asphalt layer .
surface finish num .
where the edge of the previously laid work has become distorted it shall be cut back a sufficient distance to provide the true cross section .
edges num longitudinal joints num .
longitudinal joints shall be continuous and parallel to the pavement lane markings .
joints shall be offset by at least num mm from joints in an underlying layer of asphalt .
joints shall be located away from traffic wheel tracks .
where possible joints shall be located beneath traffic line marking .
the end of the previous run shall be lightly tack coated before the paving of the adjacent run proceeds .
position num .
unconfined edges of a paving run shall be compacted using an edge compaction device to form a bevelled smooth hard edge .
edge compaction num .
where echelon paving occurs with a second paver placing asphalt on an adjacent paving run edge compaction of the asphalt in the first paving run is not required if the temperature of the asphalt in the first paving run is greater than numc .
echelon paving num .
temporary longitudinal ramps shall be provided for any asphalt course that has not been completed to the full carriageway width and is subjected to traffic .
these ramps shall be cut back before the adjacent lane is laid .
temporary ramps num transverse joints num .
transverse joints shall be at right angles to the direction of paving .
they should be staggered by at least one num metre between successive layers and between adjacent runs .
num .
the end of the previous run shall be lightly tack coated before the paving of the next run proceeds .
tack coat num .
temporary transverse ramps shall be provided where traffic is to use the newly laid work prior to a run being completed .
these ramps shall be cut back before the next run is laid .
temporary ramps num terminal joints num .
terminal joints between the new and existing surfaces shall be formed by ramping with a nominal num mm dense graded asphalt meeting the requirements of specification num asphalt wearing course .
the ramp shall extend over a sufficient distance to provide a slope of at least num .
num asphalt construction drawings num .
unless otherwise specified details for transverse joints longitudinal joints and profiles shall be in accordance with the asphalt construction drawings available on the main roads website as listed in table num .
specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num list of asphalt construction drawings drawing number title num pavement series typical details full depth asphalt transverse joints num pavement series typical details granular transverse joints num pavement series typical details full depth asphalt longitudinal joints and profile num wearing course series typical details ogadga transverse joints num wearing course series typical details dga transverse joints num wearing course series typical details sma transverse joints num wearing course series typical details longitudinal joints num num not used num compaction num .
rollers shall be selfpropelled steel wheeled rollers meeting the requirements of as num equipped with a watering system to ensure that the entire area of each wheel is wet .
only steel wheeled rollers shall be used for the compaction of stone mastic asphalt .
the breakdown roller working immediately behind the paver shall have a mass not less than ten num tonnes whilst other rollers shall have a mass of not less than seven num tonnes .
rollers num .
unless otherwise directed by the superintendent rolling shall commence immediately after placing and compacting with the vibrating or tamping screed .
the rolling shall start longitudinally at the sides and proceed towards the centre of the pavement overlapping on successive passes by at least nummm .
successive passes of the roller shall be of slightly different lengths .
num .
roller speed shall be uniform .
stops and starts shall be controlled so that displacement shoving of the asphalt does not occur when changing direction .
any shoving occurring as a result of changing direction or from any other cause shall be corrected at once by the use of rakes and of fresh asphalt when required .
to prevent asphalt from adhering to the roller all wheels shall be kept properly moistened and excess water shall be avoided .
roller stopstarts num .
to prevent adhesion of asphalt to the roller all wheels shall be kept properly moistened but excess of water shall be avoided .
diesel or other petroleum based fluids shall not be applied to pneumatic tyres during the rolling process .
moistened wheels num .
vibratory compaction shall be discontinued in areas where it is considered such vibrations could cause damage to adjacent buildings or structures .
under these conditions initial compaction of the asphalt shall be achieved using the selfpropelled static steel wheeled rollers of appropriate mass to vibratory compaction specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name meet the compaction requirements in clause num .
num .
the contractor shall ensure the protection of services and property from deterioration or damage due to the works .
protection num .
rollers shall be kept in continuous operation as much as practicable and in such a manner that all parts of the pavement receive substantially equal compaction .
in the event of a delay in the laying operation rolling is to be carried out as close as practicable to the paving machine .
rollers shall not be parked on work carried out the same day .
continuous operations num .
a sufficient number of rollers shall be available on site commensurate with the rate of supply of asphalt and the output of the paving machine .
number of rollers num .
all joints must be filled and edges adjacent to kerbing and such other hand work as may be necessary must be rolled with a suitable roller .
joints num .
finish rolling shall be carried out while the material is still warm enough for the removal of tyre marks .
steel wheeled rollers shall be used .
finish rolling num .
at places not accessible to the roller thorough compaction must be ensured by means of hot tampers and at all joints with structures the surface mixture must be effectively sealed .
hot tampers num .
where specified in annexure numb surface grit shall be applied using a mechanical spreader to achieve a minimum spread rate of num kgmnum .
surface grit num .
the surface grit shall be applied during finish rolling when the asphalt is still warm such that the grit is rolled into the surface voids of the asphalt .
num density requirements num .
the characteristic percent marshall density compaction for any lot shall be deemed to be conforming if it attains a value of num or greater .
payment for conforming work shall be at the scheduled rate .
num .
density shall be calculated on the basis of the results of tests of core samples of asphalt sampled from an asphalt layer after laying and compaction in accordance with wa num .
the density of the samples shall be determined in accordance with wa num and expressed as a percentage of the mean marshall density of all asphalt results from the same production shift in accordance with wa num and wa num .
num .
core samples shall be taken within num hours of placement of a lot of asphalt .
results of testing shall be reported on a nata endorsed test report within num hours of the core samples being taken .
the testing laboratory shall send all density results directly to amongst others the contractor the superintendent and a nominated representative at the main roads materials engineering branch .
testing and reporting of results num .
where the characteristic percent marshall density is less than the specified density the quality level shall be deemed to be either nonconformance or conditional conformance depending on the difference between the characteristic percent marshall density and the specified density .
the tolerances applicable to conditional conformance are given in table num .
a pay factor as shown in table num shall be applied for work at the appropriate conformance level in accordance with these tolerances .
the specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name pay factor shall reflect the lower level of serviceability of conditionally conforming asphalt .
table num density requirements characteristic percent marshall density rc quality level pay factor num or greater conformance num less than num and greater than or equal to num conditional conformance num rc num less than num nonconformance na num .
where the contract does not include a separate scheduled rate for the placement of asphalt the asphalt will be considered to either conform where the characteristic percent marshall density rc is greater than or equal to num or be nonconforming where the rc is less than num .
scheduled rates not included num .
where any lot of asphalt work is deemed nonconforming the contractor shall apply remedial action in accordance with the procedures contained in specification num quality system and the lot shall be removed and replaced with fresh asphalt and retested .
removal shall be carried out so as not to damage the underlying layers or any road furniture such as gully gratings .
any such damage shall be repaired or replaced at no cost to the principal .
non conformance num surface requirements num .
the surface of the compacted asphalt shall be smooth and true to the specified crown and grades be of uniform appearance free of dragged areas cracks open textured patches and roller or paver marks .
any section of asphalt that is loose or broken mixed with dirt or other impurities or is in any way defective shall be removed and replaced .
num .
when using the num metre straight edge in accordance with wa num the shape of the compacted asphalt shall be deemed to be conforming when the maximum deviation from the num m straight edge placed in any position on the surface of a layer does not exceed the limits specified in table num .
a numm straight edge shall be provided with each paver .
shape numm straight edge num .
when using the arrb tr walking profiler in accordance with wa num the shape of the compacted asphalt shall be deemed to be conforming when the maximum deviation measured in any direction and within any numm long section of the surface does not exceed the limits specified in table num .
shape arrb profiler specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num surface shape direction of measurement maximum deviation maximum rate of change of deviation longitudinal num mm num mm per num mm transverse num mm num mm per num mm num .
for construction works the upper surface of the compacted asphalt shall be within nummm of the final design levels .
for construction work the thickness of the compacted asphalt layers shall be within nummm of the specified thickness .
on resurfacing works where the underlying levels vary the minimum thickness of compacted asphalt shall be within nummm of the specified thickness .
the thickness of a lot of asphalt shall be determined from the mean thickness of core samples taken for compaction testing .
thickness shall be measured in accordance with wa num .
level and thickness num .
the plan location of the outer edge of the asphalt shall be within nummm of its true location and the rate of change of the edge from its true plan position shall not exceed num in num .
position num .
the contractor shall test for compliance with the specified lines levels thickness and surface finish immediately after initial compaction .
any variations shall be corrected by removing or adding materials as may be necessary .
rolling shall then be continued as specified .
after final rolling out the smoothness of the course shall be checked again .
compliance num .
where work is deemed nonconforming the contractor shall apply remedial action in accordance with the procedures contained in specification num quality system and the lot shall be removed and replaced with fresh asphalt and retested .
non conformance num opening finished works to traffic num .
traffic shall not be allowed on to the completed asphalt if any portion of the work to be opened has a temperature greater than numc .
the temperature shall be measured on a surface free of surface moisture using a thermometer designed for the measurement of surface temperature .
num .
prior to opening the finished asphalt surface to traffic the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the final road surface is completed in accordance with the specification and that the works are properly delineated and safe for public use .
hold point num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa stone mastic application records section length m width m area m depth mm nom agg size mm from to insert appropriate details of asphalt treatments .
supplement with drawings diagrams etc where necessary specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numb stone mastic asphalt additional treatments insert details of surface gritting as required .
refer to the guidance notes for advice on the use of sma or gritting surface gritting section length m width m area m delete shaded column from to specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numc material transfer vehicle materal transfer vehicle a material transfer vehicle is required to be used for the following layers .
location yes no echelon paving echelon paving is required to be used for the following areas .
location yes no specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is bituminous products consultant .
num guidance on the use of stone mastic asphalt num engineering road note no .
num stone mastic asphalt provides guidance on the selection and use of sma including tie in to an existing surfacing or pavement .
num asphalt mix designs refer clause num num under the section mix design the specification only allows the use of the specified conforming mix design for stone mastic asphalt produced in metropolitan perth asphalt plants .
alternative job mix designs must not be considered in the specification .
num anexure numb use of surface grit num the use of surface gritting to improve skid resistance and its extent needs to be decided and included in the annexure .
where used surface grit should be applied for the full width of each lane .
guidance on the need for gritting is available in main roads document number num initial skid resistance of stone mastic asphalt .
specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num stone mastic asphalt num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title stone mastic asphalt revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num bituminous surfacing copyright main roads western australia specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date num deleted rubber seals added bitumen and emulsion instead of conventional and bridge deck changed to structures .
scope excludes polymer modified seals .
bpc num deleted rubber methods deleted ernnum added ernnum deleted aptnum deleted various wa test methods num new definition on term binder num new clause on num rubber num clause on protective paper moved to here num deleted link to annexure numc num deleted clause on antifoaming agent numb numc deleted aptnum added ernnum numd numf deleted clause on pmb seals sam and sami num deleted clause on rubber seals for bridges num new clause on transport and sampling consistent with num num deleted clause on mercury thermometer num precoating moved to num num amended to num rubber for grs num deleted clause on rubber sam and sami seals num changed from bridge decks to concrete structures num new clause on tankers consistent with num num clauses reworded num clause on sprayer for rubber deleted num use of field blending machine removed and rubber to come from a bulk mixing facility .
clause num deleted .
num two sizes of rollers as per table .
includes combination and vibrating multi rollers .
num hold point reworded num asphalt surface preparation moved to num num bridge deck changed to concrete surface num new clause on precoating including heated aggregate num changed to hot binders including num rubber num clause on rubber binders deleted num amended wording on rain for num hours after seal application consistent with num num new hold point num running start moved to num specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name numb hold point deleted numc new clause timing of application num stones to be swept clear of guide posts num amended wording on rain for num hours after seal application consistent with num num new hold point on logistics num temperatures for three types of emulsions num new clause timing of application nume drag brooming removed for emulsion numf clause moved to num table numcnum cnum rubber deleted num.cnum rubber details deleted table numcnum now shows size of roller to be used num.cnum cnum details moved to body of specification guidance notes num table updated guidance note num guidance on use of num emulsion on base guidance note num amended to use of num rubber binder guidance note num new notes on other rollers whole document reformatting sco num revision register num corrected error in reformatting of date field for num update bpc num specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num products and materials num num bitumen num num bitumen emulsion num num rubber binder num num protective paper num num medium curing cutting oil num num slow curing cutting oil num num precoating fluid num num adhesion agent num num rubber granules num num not used num num aggregates num num geotextile fabric num num num not used num design of sprayed seals num num general num num design methods num num designed by the principal num num designed by the contractor num transport and handling of binder num num transport and sampling num num not used num preparatory operations num num storage and disposal facilities for bituminous materials num num aggregate dump sites num application of prime or seal num num general num num bitumen binders num num bitumen emulsion binders num num num not used num num plant and equipment num num num not used num specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num surface preparation num num aggregate preparation num num not used num num provision for traffic num num not used num num binder preparation num num application bitumen or cutback bitumen num num application of geotextile fabric num num application of cover material bitumen seals num num application bitumen emulsions num num num not used num num nonconforming test results num num nonconformance in binder application num num crushed aggregate num num testing frequency num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num works records num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num schedule of works seal reseal num annexure numb num cover materials supplied by the principal num annexure numc num annexure numd num record forms num specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num bituminous surfacing general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and application of the following types of sprayed bituminous treatments .
a. primes .
b. primerseals both aggregate and sandcrusher dust .
c. bitumen and emulsion seals and reseals .
d. geotextile reinforced seals including use of num rubber .
num .
the sprayed bituminous treatment must provide a durable surface that intent a. bonds to the underlying surface whether base course concrete or another bituminous surfacing treatment b. provides a safe wearing surface for traffic and c. waterproofs the pavement or structure .
num .
where applicable for sealing and resealing works a separate schedule of works is included at annexure numa which provides details of specific surfacing treatments .
schedule of works num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia documents and test methods and astm test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num main roads num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num methods for sampling and testing aggregates asnum road tank vehicles for dangerous goods tankers for bitumenbased products main roads test methods wa num sampling procedures for aggregates wa num particle size distribution of aggregate wa num average least dimension wa num texture depth specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name wa num ball embedment wa num sprayed binder application rate carpet tile method wa num sampling procedures for bitumen and oils other standards and publications main roads guide to primersealing with cutback bitumen num engineering road note no num design of sprayed seals document no .
num use and design of geotextile reinforced seals austroads apgnum bitumen sealing safety guide aptnum performance requirements for bitumen sprayers agpttnum calibration of bitumen sprayers general introduction and list of methods agpttnum volumetric calibration of bitumen pumps agpttnum transverse distribution by fixed pit facility agpttnum transverse distribution by field mat agpttnum transverse distribution by portable trough agpttnum road speed calibration aptnum austroads technical report geotextile reinforced seals wa government dangerous goods safety road and rail transport of non explosives regulations num main roads specifications specification num quality systems specification num traffic specification num occupational safety and health specification num clearing specification num earthworks specification num cold planing specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing specification num materials for bituminous treatments specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num definitions num .
the terms seal and reseal have the same meaning except where the context of any particular passage indicates otherwise .
terminology num .
the term binder can mean bitumen rubber bitumen cutback bitumen or bitumen emulsion except where the context of any particular passage indicates otherwise .
num num not used products and materials num bitumen num general num .
the supply of bitumen shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatment .
num audit sampling and testing num .
the superintendent may take audit samples at any stage of the production storage delivery or application process .
the frequency and timing of sampling will be at the superintendents discretion .
the contractor shall provide the superintendent with ready access for sampling of bitumen .
num .
the cost of material taken cleaning of the sampling facility and any delays to road tankers or site operations as a result of the sampling shall be considered to have been included in the schedule of rates item for bitumen application .
sampling may be carried out by the contractor on behalf of the superintendent but a representative of the superintendent shall be present at the time of the sampling .
num bitumen emulsion num .
the supply of bitumen emulsion shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
num rubber binder num .
a rubber binder to be used in a geotextile reinforced seal shall consist of a blend of num by mass of rubber granules in class num bitumen with component materials meeting the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
num protective paper num .
protective paper shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
num medium curing cutting oil num .
the cutting oil shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatment .
specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num slow curing cutting oil num .
the cutting oil shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatment .
num precoating fluid num .
except for fine aggregates such as sands and crusher dust all aggregate used as cover material with bitumen rubber binder or cutback bitumen shall be precoated with a distillate or bitumen based precoating fluid meeting the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatment .
num .
crushed aggregate for bitumen emulsion surfacing work shall not be precoated with precoating fluid .
however the aggregate may be prewetted with water to assist adhesion of the binder .
emulsion seals num adhesion agent num .
the adhesion agent shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
approved adhesion agents num rubber granules num .
the rubber granules shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
num not used num aggregates num coarse aggregates num .
crushed aggregate including its source rock shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
num .
where principalsupplied aggregate cover material is made available to the contractor the contractor shall use all supplied aggregate cover material before use is made of contractorsupplied aggregate cover material .
details of principalsupplied aggregate are given in annexure numb .
principal supplied aggregate num .
the source of aggregate supplied by the contractor shall be nominated with the tender .
num .
the contractor shall make all necessary arrangements with the nominated supplier concerning load size rate for supply timing of the delivery payment and documentation .
num .
prior to the onsite delivery of crushed aggregate the contractor shall provide certification to the superintendent that the aggregate conforms to specified requirements .
hold point num .
the contractor shall organise all cover material supplied under this contract into clearly identifiable stockpiles either at source or on site in order that they may be tested as required by the quality plan .
stockpiles specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the maximum size of a lot shall be no more than one days production when applicable or no more than approximately num mnum whichever is the lesser .
lot size num .
any contamination of aggregate after acceptance that is due in any way to the contractors activities shall be corrected at no cost to the principal .
contamination num crusher dustsand num .
crusher dustsand used for primersealing shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
num geotextile fabric num .
the supply and storage of geotextile fabric shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
num num not used design of sprayed seals num general num .
unless otherwise specified in table numcnum the sprayed seal shall be designed by the principal .
where table numcnum specifies design by the contractor then the contractor shall be responsible for and shall carry out the design for the type of treatment specified .
design responsibility num design methods num .
the design of sprayed seals shall include selection of binder and design of binder and aggregate application rates unless otherwise specified .
design of binder application rates and aggregate spread rates shall be in accordance with the following a. primerseals sand and metal dust the primerseal design binder composition binder application rate and aggregate application rates shall be in accordance with the requirements of the main roads primersealing with cutback bitumen design manual num .
primerseals b. primerseals aggregate the primerseal design binder composition binder application rate and aggregate application rates shall be in accordance with the requirements of engineering road note no .
num or the main roads primersealing with cutback bitumen design manual num .
primerseals c. seals and reseals single and doubledouble seal design binder composition binder application rates and aggregate spread rates shall be in accordance with the requirements of engineering road note no num .
single and double double seals specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name d. geotextile reinforced seals grs guidance on binder application rate designs for grs and the apportionment of bars is provided in austroads technical report ap tnum and main roads document num .
num .
testing for average least dimension ald shall be carried out in accordance with wa num or as num .
sampling for testing of ald shall be in accordance with either asnum .
num or wa num .
testing for surface texture shall be in accordance with wa num .
testing for ball embedment the test shall be in accordance with wa num .
test methods num designed by the principal num .
where binder application rates and other aspects of the sprayed seal have been provided by the principal the superintendent will as necessary order any variations to such design num .
such amended details may include but will not be necessarily limited to design variables a .
average least dimension ald of the aggregate b .
aggregate precoating rate c. binder application rate bar d. binder composition e. aggregate spread rate f. rolling and sweeping requirements num designed by the contractor num general num .
where the contractor is responsible for the design of the sprayed seal the design shall be in accordance with the procedures described in clause num .
design methods num preliminary design num .
the contractor shall carry out a preliminary design based on the following as applicable a .
the type of treatment and the nominal aggregate size specified by the principal .
b .
measurement of the average least dimension of the aggregate proposed for use or if not available an estimate based on past test results from the same aggregate source or an estimate based on typical results for aggregate of the size proposed for use .
c. measurement of the surface texture andor ball embedment of the surface upon which the seal is to be applied .
specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name d. traffic volume and composition data provided by the principal on request .
e. a visual assessment of the condition of the surface on which the seal is to be applied and the defects present .
f. climatic data relevant to the site .
num final design num .
the contractor shall carry out a final design based on the measurement of the average least dimension of the aggregate supplied under this contract and for other factors listed in clause num .
num .
prior to the application of any sprayed seal the contractor shall provide the superintendent with evidence of the application of appropriate design methods as outlined in clause num .
hold point num .
during application of a seal the contractor may vary the design to allow for changes to any of the design factors site conditions or observed performance .
details of the design variations shall be documented and submitted to the superintendent within num days of implementation of the variations .
transport and handling of binder num transport and sampling num general num .
the handling transport and heating of binder shall comply with the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
num .
the contractor shall make all necessary arrangements with its supplier concerning load sizes rates of supply loading temperatures payment of opening fees where applicable and all documentation .
num .
in order to avoid the danger of mixing incompatible bituminous products in any cartage vehicles provided by the contractor for the purpose of transporting binders the contractor shall ensure that the binder suppliers loading procedures are understood and the binder loading docket is fully completed by the contractors driver prior to loading including the signing of any certification concerning the nature of the previous load carried by the cartage vehicle .
dangerous mixes specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num sampling of binder at delivery num .
prior to application or blending with any cutters or adhesion agent the contractor shall sample a minimum of one num load in every five num or part thereof .
two samples shall be taken from each load to be sampled immediately following one another in accordance with wa num such that each is similar and represents the binder in the load .
num .
each of the sample containers in which the samples are taken from a load shall be labelled to identify the supplier the suppliers batch number the date of sampling the road and the slks of the section on which the binder is applied so that traceability between samples and corresponding road sections is maintained .
num .
the contractor shall provide the superintendent with one of each set of samples at no cost to the principal .
num .
in addition to samples provided to the superintendent by the contractor the superintendent may take audit samples at any stage during production storage delivery or application process .
num .
the frequency and timing of sampling will be at the superintendents discretion .
the contractor shall provide the superintendent with ready access for sampling at all times within the hours of work of the contractor or its subcontractors num .
the cost of material taken cleaning of the sampling facility and any delays to road tankers or site operations as a result of the sampling shall be considered to have been included in the schedule of rates item for binder application .
sampling may be carried out by the contractor on behalf of the superintendent but a representative of the superintendent shall be present at the time of the sampling .
num not used preparatory operations num storage and disposal facilities for bituminous materials num storage sites num .
the contractor shall select suitable sites for bulk storage of bituminous materials and notify the superintendent at least five num days in advance of establishment or use .
hold point num .
the contractor shall ensure that site layout and safe handling procedures conform to requirements detailed in austroads document apgnum .
num .
the contractor shall provide and maintain the necessary equipment to receive hold heat circulate handle and protect bulk bituminous materials as required by his method of working from the time of receipt to prevent misuse damage deterioration or loss .
equipment num .
heating and storage tanks shall be fitted with dipsticks for volume measurement and suitable thermometers for indicating the temperature of the bitumen .
specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
suitable equipment shall be supplied by the contractor to facilitate removal of liquid used to flush pumps and lines to authorised waste disposal sites .
num .
storage tanks for slow curing cutting oil and medium curing cutting oil shall be fitted with dipsticks or flow meters for volume measurement and suitable thermometers for indicating temperature .
num .
the accuracy of volume and temperature measurement facilities shall be sufficient to ensure that the binder constituents adhesion agent excepted proportions expressed as percentages are those ordered num .
required accuracy num disposal sites num .
the contractor shall dispose of bituminous products or other disposable items such as protective paper at an authorised waste disposal site .
num .
any area so used without the approval of the superintendent shall be made good immediately at no cost to the principal .
num aggregate dump sites num general num .
the aggregate stockpile sites shall be constructed and maintained in a tidy condition and the contractors operations shall not contaminate aggregate in the stockpiles .
surplus aggregate shall be removed from temporary stockpiles and the aggregate stockpile sites shall be fully cleaned and rehabilitated .
the contractor shall prepare a management plan for the stockpile sites detailing how contamination from precoating work is to be managed and cleaned after completion of works .
num .
where aggregate is supplied in stockpile by the principal the locations of the stockpile sites are as detailed in annexure numb .
where aggregate is supplied by the contractor temporary stockpile sites shall be prepared and maintained in good condition by the contractor .
num .
prior to the stockpiling of aggregate the contractor shall nominate to the superintendent the proposed location of the stockpile sites and provide a management plan for the sites .
hold point num site preparation num .
the contractor shall prepare aggregate stockpile sites such that they incorporate a firm smooth plane welldrained surface .
stockpile areas shall be of sufficient size to allow a numm clear margin around each stockpile .
site requirements num .
clearing of sites shall be in accordance with specification num clearing and compaction shall be in accordance with embankment foundation compaction principals method specification as detailed in specification num earthworks .
clearing and compaction specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name application of prime or seal num general num .
the application of a prime or seal shall include preparation of the surface and the supply and application of various treatments over the widths lengths and areas either as shown in the drawings andor as specified in annexure numa and numc .
num bitumen binders num general num .
a prime or seal using bitumen as the principal binder shall consist of one or more of the following treatments num prime coats num .
class num bitumen shall be mixed with medium curing cutting oil and adhesion agent in the proportions as detailed in annexure numc .
the blend and application rate of the binder shall be varied according to the base and the temperature at the time of application to ensure penetration of the base .
prime coats num primerseal coats num .
class num bitumen mixed with slow curing cutting oil andor medium curing cutting oil and adhesion agent in the proportions as detailed in annexure numc .
to ensure a stable aggregate mat the blend and application rate of the binder shall be varied for each sandcrusher dust primerseal according to the temperature at the time of application and the particle size distribution of the sandcrusher dust .
primerseals num seal and reseal coats num .
class num bitumen mixed with adhesion agent as detailed in annexure numc .
seals and reseals num .
cutting oil shall not be added to the binder unless approved by the superintendent .
cutting oil num .
where rubber binder is specified for a geotextile reinforced seal the binder shall incorporate num by mass of rubber granules class num bitumen and shall be blended with adhesion agent .
rubberised binder num bitumen emulsion binders num general num .
a prime or seal using bitumen emulsion as the principal binder shall consist of one or more of the following treatments num prime coats num .
bitumen emulsion prime coats used on concrete structures such as culverts or floodways prior to subsequent bituminous surfacing treatments shall be applied in accordance with annexure numc .
concrete specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num primerseal coats num .
doubledouble bitumen emulsion primerseal using the nominal sized crushed aggregates as specified in annexure numc .
binder application rates bar shall be as specified at annexure numc .
primerseals num .
bitumen emulsion primerseals shall not be subject to any vehicular traffic until the emulsion has completely broken and cured to form a stable primerseal leaving no water in the binder .
traffic ban num seal coats num .
either single coat or doubledouble bitumen emulsion seals using the nominal sized crushed aggregate as specified in annexure numc .
binder application rates bar shall be as specified in annexure numc .
seals num .
bitumen emulsion seals shall not be subject to any vehicular traffic until the emulsion has completely broken and cured to form a stable primerseal leaving no water in the binder .
traffic ban num num not used num plant and equipment num road tanker num .
road tankers shall comply with as num and the australian dangerous goods code .
road tankers shall have lagging and shall have calibrated thermometers located at the top middle and bottom thirds of the product tank .
the tanker shall be provided with heating tubes and pipework to allow circulation of the binder during heating .
road tankers shall have a permanent sampling cock that is safe and easy to use to obtain samples of the polymer modified binder .
num mechanical sprayer num .
binder shall be applied using a bitumen sprayer with a minimum capacity of num num litres complying with as num and the australian dangerous goods code .
the sprayer shall comply with the requirements of austroads document aptnum .
in addition to the above requirements the sprayer dipstick shall be calibrated in num litre increments and unless the sprayer is of the air pressure type the spray bar shall be fully circulating .
num .
the sprayer shall have been calibrated at a facility accredited by nata for the calibration of bitumen sprayers to the austroads test methods agptt num tnum tnum or tnum or tnum and tnum .
the tests shall have been performed within the past twelve num months and the sprayer shall have passed the pump output and transverse distribution tests for the maximum allowable width of the bar .
a nata endorsed calibration certificate shall be issued for the sprayer which clearly indicates the austroads methods used in the calibration and the passfail status of the sprayer to each of the austroads calibration test methods .
sprayer calibration specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
prior to the use of the sprayer on the works the contractor shall make available to the superintendent the calibration certificate for the sprayer .
the superintendent may require the sprayer to be made available at the main roads calibration facility at welshpool perth for inspection and testing prior to or during execution of the work .
hold point num .
the superintendent may request prior to the commencement of works or at any time during the works that the sprayer be tested for uniformity of spray bar output particularly transverse application in accordance with wa num .
the test will be conducted for the maximum spray bar width to be used in this contract .
the requirements for the spraybar output and distribution are shown below a .
the mean binder application rate of the width tested shall not exceed num of the binder application rate at numc specified for the works b .
every tile used in the test which was fully coated shall have a binder application rate within num of the mean binder application rate for the width tested c. not more than two consecutive tiles that have been fully coated shall have a binder application rate exceeding num of the mean binder application rate for the width tested .
num .
if the sprayer does not conform to the requirements shown above it shall not be used on the works .
subsequent tests to confirm conformity will be at the contractors cost .
any delays to site operations because of conducting these tests are not claimable as separate costs .
sprayer conformity num .
the contractor shall use copley ean num w end nozzles for use in spraying edges .
the copley eannum end nozzle shall not be used in spraying edges .
copley annum nozzles shall be fitted to the remainder of the spray bar .
nozzles shall not be used for more than two years of service and shall be used within num years of the date stamp on a nozzle .. spray nozzles num .
the sprayer shall be capable of passing over protective paper doing a running start without damaging or moving the paper .
num manufacture of rubber binder num .
the rubber binder shall be supplied from a bulk mixing facility .
the facility shall be capable of mixing the rubber blend to ensure that the rubber is thoroughly mixed into the bitumen before it is transferred to a road tanker or sprayer .
bulk supply num rollers num .
the size of multityred rollers to be used is specified in annexure numc and where not specified then the requirements of this clause are the minimum requirements .
where an numt roller is specified then a minimum of two numt rollers shall be used .
where an numt roller is specified it shall be used along with a combination roller with a vibrating rubber coated drum or a vibrating multi tyred roller .
multityred rollers for the application of the seal on geotextile fabric shall have a minimum mass of num tonnes .
rubber tyred rollers specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num road broom num .
the units shall be a mechanically or power driven roller broom capable of removing excess cover material andor other loose material from the pavement surface without damage to the existing primerseal or seal surface .
num .
the broom and its prime mover shall each be equipped with an amber flashing lamp visible from all directions in accordance with specification num occupational safety and health .
flashing lamp num drag broom num .
the units shall consist of fixed brushes fitted to a frame and shall be capable of distributing loose cover material laterally and longitudinally .
the drag broom shall not dislodge particles embedded in the binder or damage the surface in any way .
brooms shall be angled height adjustable and suspended under rubber tyred rollers .
num precoater num .
the precoater shall be capable of applying a uniform film of precoating agent to cover all of the surface area of the aggregate particles at a controlled and variable rate .
the precoater shall have sufficient output capacity to maintain an adequate supply to the bitumen sprayers .
num .
the precoater shall also be capable of screening dirtforeign matter both oversize and undersize materials from the aggregate during its operation .
screening num .
prior to the use of the precoater on the works the contractor shall notify the superintendent of such intention .
hold point num geotextile fabric applicator num .
the geotextile fabric shall be spread using a purpose built machine mounted fabric spreader .
an example is shown in austroads technical report ap tnum .
the fabric spreader shall keep the fabric taut during spreading such that when laid on the bond coat the width of the applied fabric is within nummm of the ordered width of the fabric .
num surface damage num .
in the event of any fuel or oil leaks or spillages onto the newly sealed surface or any other damage to the newly sealed surface the contractor shall reinstate the surface and or the underlying basecourse to its pre damage condition at no cost to the principal .
care of works num num not used num surface preparation num basecourse surface num .
the pavement surface shall be swept clean of all loose sand stones dust and other foreign matter before surfacing .
adherent patches of foreign matter shall be removed by using hand brooming and steel scrapers or similar methods .
specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
loose material shall be swept a sufficient distance off the pavement to permit execution of the bituminous binder .
num .
the contractor shall set out and mark the edge of the binder at a position to achieve the specified tolerances and to suit the method of work employed .
the interval of spotting of any line is given in annexure numc .
the contractor shall provide such additional markers as are necessary to achieve the specified tolerances .
line spotting num .
application of a light water spray shall precede the application of either a prime or primerseal .
the application of the light spray shall be consistent across the width of the proposed seal works .
light water spray num .
prior to the application of bituminous binder as an initial surfacing treatment the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the basecourse complies in all respects with the requirements of the specification including the surface finish as described in specification num pavements .
specified requirements for dryback shall comply at the time of application of a bituminous binder .
hold point num .
at the completion of the basecourse surface being swept and prior to the application of the bituminous binder the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the basecourse complies with the surface finish requirements as described in specification num pavements and that the surface is suitable to receive the bituminous binder .
the contractor shall request the release of this hold point in writing after the sweeping of the basecourse is completed and at least one num hour prior to the application of the bituminous binder .
hold point num bituminous surface num .
where the pavement surface is a primed basecourse a seal asphalt or microsurfacing the surface shall be swept clean of all loose sand stones dust and other foreign matter before surfacing .
adherent patches of foreign matter shall be removed by using hand brooming and steel scrapers or similar methods .
num .
loose material shall be swept a sufficient distance off the pavement to permit execution of the bitumen surfacing .
num .
a minimum of one num hour prior to application of the bituminous binder the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that any required sweeping andor necessary repairs of the underlying surface have been completed and that the surface is suitable to receive the seal .
hold point num .
where encountered in resealing works the contractor shall remove and dispose of existing raised pavement markers both permanent and temporary prior to resealing .
the pavement markers shall only be removed at the commencement of works for the day and shall be removed only from the section to be resealed on that day .
any area of the pavement damaged by the contractor shall be repaired by the contractor at no cost to the principal .
raised pavement markers specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num cold planed surface num .
where the pavement surface to be sealed has been produced by cold planning the surface shall be swept clean of all loose sand stones dust and other foreign matter before surfacing .
adherent patches of foreign matter shall be removed by using hand brooming and steel scrapers or similar methods num .
loose material shall be swept a sufficient distance off the pavement to permit execution of the bitumen surfacing .
num .
at the completion of the cold planning surface being swept and prior to the application of the bituminous binder the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the cold planed surface complies with the surface finish requirements as described in specification num cold planing and that the surface is suitable to receive the bituminous binder .
the contractor shall request the release of this hold point in writing after the sweeping of the cold planed surface is completed and at least one num hour prior to the application of the bituminous binder .
hold point num concrete surface num .
concrete surfaces shall be swept clean of all loose sand stones dust and other foreign matter before sealing .
adherent patches of foreign matter shall be removed by hand brooming or by using steel scrapers or similar methods .
num .
the surface shall be primed with a cationic emulsion grade cssnum or crsnum diluted with water in the ratio of one num part emulsion to one num part water .
the emulsion shall be compatible with the water used for dilution .
the rate of application of the dilute bitumen emulsion primer shall be an average rate of num lm applied in a uniform film over the entire surface of the bridge deck .
no binder shall be applied on the prime until the emulsion has broken and has evaporated .
prime num .
all traffic shall be kept off the concrete surface until application of the binder is complete and conforms to all requirements .
num aggregate preparation num precoating num .
aggregate precoated with a distillate precoating fluid shall be precoated at least num hours but not more than seven num days before its intended use .
aggregate precoated with a bitumen based precoating fluid shall be precoated a minimum of four num days but not more than twenty eight num days prior to its intended use .
the type of precoating fluid to be used is stated in table num .
timing num .
the rate of application of precoating fluid shall be sufficient to coat the entire surface area of all of the aggregate particles but shall not be less than the minimum rates of application of precoating fluid as stated in table num .
at the time of spreading the precoated aggregate shall not be covered with excess precoat fluid such that aggregate particles stick together or pick up on vehicle tyres or causes a delay in adhesion .
rate of application specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
care shall be taken to minimise aggregate losses and to ensure dust does not blow back onto precoated aggregate .
table num type of precoat fluid and application rate seal type type of precoat fluid primerseal distillate sealreseal distillate geotextile reinforced seal distillate emulsion seals none refer num nominal size aggregate mm distillate precoat fluid bitumen based precoat fluid minimum application rate litresm loose minimum application rate litresm loose num num num num num num num num num num num num num heated aggregate num .
the aggregate shall be clean num or nummm sealing aggregate as specified that has not been precoated .
where used in a seal other than a sami seal or bridge deck membrane the aggregate shall be from the same quarry as any aggregate applied in an adjacent seal with precoated aggregate .
heated aggregate shall not be used for a geotextile reinforced seal .
aggregate num .
the aggregate shall be heated dried and coated with class num or class num bitumen in a batch type asphalt plant .
the aggregate shall be heated to a dry condition and then mixed with num by mass of bitumen for an extended wet mixing time to ensure an even coating of the bitumen over all stones .
the temperature of the coated aggregate shall be numc to numc .
heating and mixing num .
the heated aggregate shall be transported to site covered with a heavy tarpaulin or covered tray .
num .
heated aggregate shall be applied to a sprayed binder immediately and rolled immediately .
specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num not used num provision for traffic num .
the contractor shall minimise delays and inconvenience to road users during the course of the work .
traffic shall not be allowed on the new work until sufficient rolling has taken place to prevent damaging the freshly applied bituminous mat .
num .
the contractor shall supply signs lights plus any other necessary equipment and erect and maintain same in good condition in accordance with specification num traffic .
num .
signs inscribed roadworks in progress for next km shall be erected at each end of unswept work where the length of the work intermittent or continuous exceeds num kilometre .
signing num .
signs shall remain in position until after the seal is swept with no loose stones remaining on the surface .
no item of plant will be permitted to operate outside the appropriate warning signs .
all signs shall be free standing .
num .
the contractor shall provide at least two persons on a full time basis as traffic controllers .
warning signs shall always be erected in conjunction with the use of traffic controllers .
each traffic controller shall be equipped with a portable twoway radio plus a spare and wear a high visibility vest .
traffic controllers num .
prior to implementing any proposed traffic control measures for the works particularly temporary speed restrictions the contractor shall notify the superintendent of such proposed measures .
hold point num not used num binder preparation num hot binders num .
bitumen cutback bitumen or num rubber binder and other constituents as detailed in annexure numc shall be mixed by circulation in the mechanical sprayer for not less than fifteen minutes immediately prior to application or such longer periods as may be necessary to ensure a uniform and homogeneous mixture .
mixing num .
adhesion agent shall be added to the sprayer on site dissolved in the hot binder and thoroughly mixed .
the binder shall be sprayed within twelve num hours of adding the adhesion agent to the binder .
where the binder has not been sprayed within twelve num hours further adhesion agent shall be added to the remaining binder .
adhesion agent shall be added to bitumen or cutback bitumen at a rate of num by volume of the binder .
adhesion agent num .
adhesion agent shall be added at least to the minimum level specified or ordered .
all other binder constituent proportions expressed as percentages shall be those specified or ordered num .
mix tolerance num .
the binder spraying temperature shall be as specified in annexure numc .
spraying temperature specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num bitumen emulsion num .
bitumen emulsion shall be mixed by circulation in the mechanical sprayer for not less than ten minutes or such longer period as may be necessary to ensure a uniform and homogeneous mixture .
mixing num .
where a pressurised sprayer is used circulation in the site storage or road tanker shall be permitted as a substitute for circulation in the sprayer .
such circulation shall take place immediately prior to the loading of the sprayer .
num application bitumen or cutback bitumen num general num .
the surface to be sealed shall be dry and no binder shall be applied during wet or rainy conditions or when adverse weather conditions may prevail at any time during such work .
when binder is applied and rain is forecast during the num hour period after application of the seal the contractor shall be responsible for any damage to or defects in the seal and action and cost to maintain or repair the seal .
no binder shall be applied whilst the pavement surface temperature is less than weather a .
numc for seals and reseals or minimum pavement temperature b .
numc for a geotextile reinforced seal when applied during daytime hours or numc when applied during nightworks .
when applied during nightworks the pavement temperature for the next day shall be a minimum of numc or c. numc for primes or primerseals .
num .
the contractor shall provide the superintendent with safe and convenient access to the sprayer at all times for checking the volume before and after spraying by means of the dipstick .
num .
the contractor shall demonstrate compliance with the bitumen property requirements for each batch of bitumen prior to the bitumen being used on the contract .
this requirement does not apply to rubberised binder .
audit testing undertaken by the principal shall not be used to demonstrate compliance .
hold point num application rate num .
the binder application rate bar for tender purposes shall be as detailed in annexure numc .
where adjustments to the binder application rates in excess of num percent of the rates detailed in annexure numc are ordered by the superintendent then changes to the contractors rates for sealing shall be made as follows specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name urn urt arn artl where urn new rate for prime primerseal or seal per mnum .
urt tendered rate for prime primerseal or seal as applicable per mnum arn new binder application rate litres per mnum .
art tendered binder application rate litres per mnum .
l rate per litre tendered for variation in the schedule of rates per litre .
adjustments made under this clause shall be made prior to any adjustments that are due to conditional acceptance .
num .
the actual bar at numc shall be calculated from the quantity of binder sprayed and the actual area covered as measured on the ground .
num .
on sections where the actual binder application rate differs from the ordered application rate and the work is deemed to be nonconforming refer to clause num .
num volume conversion num .
table num for prime coats and table num for primerseals seals and reseals give factors to be used when converting binder volumes or spray rates at temperatures other than numc to volumes or spray rates at numc or vice versa .
adjustment shall be made using the following formulae a .
volume or spray rate at numc equals the volume or spray rate at t c multiplied by the factor for t c b .
volume or spray rate at t c equals the volume or spray rate at numc divided by the factor for t c specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num conversion factors prime coats binder observed temp t c factor for t c observed temp t c factor for t c observed temp t c factor for t c num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num note factors for intermediate temperatures may be obtained by direct interpolation .
table num conversion factors primerseals seals reseals observed temp t c factor for t c observed temp t c factor for t c observed temp t c factor for t c num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num note factors for intermediate temperatures may be obtained by direct interpolation .
specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num spraying num .
binder shall not be applied until the contractor has sufficient spreader trucks to comply with numc at the location of the area to be sprayed .
in addition all rollers shall be at the location of the area to be sprayed at the time of spraying ..
hold point num .
the binder shall be bar circulated for at least three num minutes immediately prior to spraying .
num .
the spraying of the binder for each run of the sprayer shall start and finish on protective paper .
all tapers and fillets shall be sprayed after masking with protective paper .
the paper so used and any spilt bitumen shall be removed and disposed of in a suitable manner .
sprayer speed num .
the sprayer shall cross the protective paper at its correct spraying speed at the start of each run .
the sprayer shall maintain its correct spraying speed over the full length of each run and shall cross the finish paper at this speed .
num .
the volume of binder sprayed for each run shall be determined by dipping the tank after each run and recording the volume of binder in the tank to the nearest numl .
the sprayer must be dipped whilst parked on level ground .
sprayed volume num .
all outside edges of the seal parallel to the road centreline shall be sprayed with copley eannum w edge nozzles .
num .
when applying a seal over laid and rolled geotextile fabric where there are two or more spray runs the first spray run shall be overlapped by nummm of binder from the subsequent spray run .
grs num .
where the direct use of the mechanical sprayer is impracticable the binder may be applied by using a hand lance fed from the mechanical sprayer .
num .
the binder shall be sprayed onto areas as detailed in the drawings or as otherwise specified in annexure numa .
the sprayed binder edge shall conform to the following requirements spraying tolerances a. the sprayed edge shall not deviate from the specified edge by more than nummm b. the rate of deviation of the sprayed edge from the specified edge lines shall not exceed one in four hundred num num c. tapers to accommodate variations in specified width shall be at one in one num except at floodway exits which shall be at one in twenty num .
num .
cutting oil shall not be used in the bitumen for the first coat of a doubledouble seal .
double double seals num .
where a doubledouble seal is being applied the second coat of the seal shall overlap the larger aggregate of the first coat as detailed below specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name a. where spraying is not completed for the full width of the road at the same time a longitudinal overlap shall be constructed .
the overlap must be along the edge of a lane or the centreline of the road b. on a longitudinal overlap the second coat of the seal shall overlap the first larger aggregate size coat by between nummm and nummm c. on a transverse overlap the second coat of the seal shall overlap the first larger aggregate size coat by nummm .
num .
the contractor shall take all necessary precautions to prevent binder from adhering to any existing structure .
any damage or defacement shall be made good by the contractor at no cost to the principal immediately surfacing work on a section has been completed .
damage num application of primer coat prime coats num .
construction traffic shall not be allowed on newly sprayed areas until the prime has penetrated and the sprayed surface is no longer tacky num .
where construction traffic must be allowed on areas that remain tacky and on isolated slick spots the prime shall be dusted over with a dry sand or fine aggregate cover material and lightly rolled prior to trafficking num .
public traffic shall not be allowed on primed areas without the approval of the superintendent .
num .
the contractor shall repair at no cost to the principal any damage to the prime coat caused by construction or public traffic .
num .
all tacky or slick spots shall be blinded with dry sand or fine aggregate prior to the application of the next specified bituminous surface treatment .
num .
the prime coat shall be cured for a period of three num to seven num days prior to the application of a subsequent bituminous surfacing treatment .
dependent upon factors such as the blend to be used climatic conditions and the porosity of the basecourse a reduced curing time of not less than num hours may be approved by the superintendent .
num existing guideposts num .
where necessary existing guideposts shall be removed and stored safely by the contractor to allow bituminous surfacing operations to proceed .
guidepost removal num .
where not being replaced with new guideposts the contractor shall reinstate removed guideposts in their original locations at the completion of bituminous surfacing operations .
any guideposts damaged during their removal or reinstatement shall be replaced by the contractor at no cost to the principal .
reinstatement num application of geotextile fabric num .
a bond coat shall be applied to the prepared surface in accordance with num .
class num bitumen or a num rubber binder shall be used for the bond coat without the addition of cutting oil .
bond coat specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the geotextile fabric shall be spread on to the bond coat as soon as practical .
the fabric shall be kept as low as possible to the ground during spreading .
the edge of the fabric shall not deviate from the specified edge by more than nummm .
where the fabric is creased after placement the creases shall be broomed out or cut and respread .
both sides of the crease shall be cut and then butt joined .
spreading num .
longitudinal joins of the fabric should be overlapped by num to nummm with the overlapped join receiving additional binder at the rate of the bond coat for the first layer of fabric .
the fabric in the join area shall not be loose .
an area of loose fabric shall receive additional binder .
joins shall not occur in wheel path areas .
the overlapped fabric shall be nailed down every numm on the longitudinal join and on the transverse join five flat head nails shall be used to hold down the fabric including each corner .
joins num .
the longitudinal join shall not be located within a traffic lane .
joins shall be located along lane lines or centrelines .
num .
the fabric shall be rolled with a multi tyred roller immediately after the fabric has been spread .
rolling shall cover the entire area of fabric and continue until the bond coat has been absorbed into the fabric as indicated by a darkening in colour of the fabric .
where the bond coat bleeds to the surface of the fabric rolling shall cease .
construction vehicles must not stand on the fabric and public traffic shall not be allowed on the fabric .
rolling num .
bitumen or a num rubber binder for the seal coat shall be sprayed on to the fabric in accordance with num .
where the fabric is wet it shall be air dried before a seal coat is applied .
num application of cover material bitumen seals num aggregate primerseals and seals num .
general a .
the aggregate shall be dry containing no water at the time of application and shall be uniformly spread over the sprayed area by means of a suitable type of mechanical spreader .
the mechanical spreader shall be fitted with removable cutoff attachments to allow the aggregate spread width to match the required width on the pavement .
b .
the aggregate shall be placed to form a uniform stone mosaic of single particle thickness in almost continuous interlocked contact generally orientated with their least dimension vertical .
in order to meet this requirement it may be necessary to apply the aggregate initially at a rate slightly less than appears optimum so that some binder is visible between the stones .
specified aggregate application rates are nominal and should be adjusted to suite the aggregate used to give the correct stone mosaic .
c. the sprayed binder shall be totally covered with the exception of approved lapping strips with aggregate within num minutes of the application of the binder .
the length of spray runs shall be limited to comply with this requirement .
timing of application specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
additional aggregate a .
additional aggregate shall be applied to any bare or insufficiently covered areas as necessary to provide a uniform and complete cover .
where the area to be covered with additional aggregate is not of uniform width the additional aggregate shall be spread by hand .
b .
additional aggregate shall be applied before the completion of four complete coverages of rubber tyred rolling .
timing c. if there are surplus loose particles on any portion of the sealed area such portion shall be swept lightly to move the loose particles but not disturb the aggregate embedded in the binder .
num .
doubledouble seals a. the first coat of a doubledouble seal shall be applied using a larger sized aggregate than the aggregate used in the second coat b. the application rate of aggregate for the first coat shall result in more gaps between the aggregate particles than would occur if the same sized aggregate was applied in a single coat seal .
num .
principal supplied aggregate a .
where the actual aggregate spread rate is less than num times the ordered aggregate spread rate the cost of any additional aggregate used supplied by the principal calculated as below shall be deducted from payments due to the contractor .
spread rate cost of additional aggregate a r num num num num s s a o .
aggregate cost where actual area m covered at rate r rate in m stated in annexure numb so ordered aggregate spread rate in mm s a actual aggregate spread rate in mm b .
the cost of aggregate spread outside the specified area with due allowance for tolerances shall be deducted from money due to the contractor at the rate stated in annexure numb .
a sa specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num rolling and drag brooming num .
immediately after application of the cover material the surface shall be rolled with rubber tyred rollers to the minimum number of complete coverages as stated in annexure numc over the whole area .
where the roller size is not specified then num tonne rollers shall be used except for geotextile seals .
a complete coverage is one pass of a roller over the entire area ie .
the total length and width of a spray run being rolled .
for the first four complete coverages rollers shall be operated at speeds less than numkm per hour .
drag brooming shall be carried out after every second complete coverage of rolling except on a geotextile reinforced seal where only hand sweeping will be used to correct inconsistent spreading of aggregate .
rolling sequence num .
the superintendent may order additional rolling and drag brooming and such extra work shall be paid for at daywork rates .
num .
for doubledouble seals the rolling shall comply with the requirements of this section for each coat of the seal and any aggregate not incorporated in the first coat of the seal shall be removed in such a manner as to prevent removal of aggregate incorporated therein .
public traffic shall not be allowed on the first coat of a doubledouble seal .
any damage to the first coat shall be repaired by the contractor at no cost to the principal prior to spraying the binder for the second coat .
double double seals num surface sweeping num .
any loose cover material not incorporated in the seal after the completion of rolling shall be swept off the seal surface to beyond the outer edge of each shoulder without damage to seal shoulder or guideposts and shall then be dispersed such that no windrows of swept material remain .
num .
where the roadway to be sealed is kerbed the excess cover material may be swept hard against the kerb during interim sweeping operations but shall be picked up and removed during the final sweeping .
excess cover material num .
the initial sweeping shall take place prior to the completion of the days work .
a second sweeping shall be carried out at the commencement of the following days work .
for grs works initial sweeping shall not take place until after num hours of trafficking .
the contractor shall carry out subsequent sweepings as necessary for the following seven num days to ensure that no loose stones remain on the road surface .
all loose aggregate shall be swept clear of the sealed surface off the shoulder and past a line of the guide posts .
repeated sweeping num .
the contractor shall install symbolic loose stones signs and other temporary traffic management signs in accordance with specification num traffic .
the signs shall remain in place on each section of the works for the following seven num days after completion of sealing .
signing num sandcrusher dust primerseals num .
general specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name a .
the cover material shall be dry at the time of application and shall be uniformly spread by means of a suitable type of mechanical spreader .
the time lag between spraying and spreading shall be kept to a minimum and all sprayed areas with the exception of approved lapping strips shall be covered with material within ten num minutes of spraying the binder .
the length of spray runs shall be limited to ensure compliance with this requirement .
b .
sufficient loaded trucks shall be at the site to provide the full cover for the area to be sprayed at the time .
prior to the spreading of the cover material the load in a truck representative of those to be used for the work shall be levelled in the body for measurement purposes .
hold point num .
additional cover material a .
additional cover material shall be applied to any bare or insufficiently covered areas as necessary to provide a uniform and complete cover .
sufficient cover material shall be spread to fully absorb the binder applied and to ensure that there is no pickingup under traffic .
num .
cover material spread rate and drag brooming a .
for tender purposes the cover material spread rate shall be as stated in annexure numb .
the actual cover material spread rate shall be calculated from the volume of cover material spread and the actual area covered as measured on the ground in accordance with the requirements detailed in annexure numb .
b .
sufficient cover material sand or crusher dust must be spread and rolled into the binder to fully absorb the bituminous material applied .
to achieve this result it may be necessary to slightly overspread the aggregate and broom off any excess once a stable bitumen aggregate mat has been achieved .
num .
rolling a .
immediately after application of the cover material the surface shall be rolled with rubber tyred rollers for the minimum number of complete coverages stated in annexure numc over the whole area .
rollers shall not be operated at speeds in excess of numkm per hour for the first four complete coverages .
num .
sweeping a .
any loose cover material not incorporated in the primerseal after the completion of rolling shall be swept off the surface to beyond the outer edge of each shoulder without damage to the primerseal or shoulder and spread evenly down the batter slope .
b .
the contractor shall not install guideposts prior to the sweeping of loose cover material down the batter slope .
specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name c. the time lapse between the completion of rolling and final surface sweeping shall be determined by the superintendent .
however such time lapse shall not be greater than one week and may be as short as one day .
num application bitumen emulsions num general num .
the surface to be sealed shall be dry and no binder shall be applied during wet or rainy conditions or when adverse weather conditions may prevail at any time during such work .
when binder is applied and rain is forecast during the num hour period after application of the seal the contractor shall be responsible for any damage to or defects in the seal and action and cost to maintain or repair the seal .
weather num .
the contractor shall provide the superintendent with safe and convenient access to the sprayer at all times for checking the volume before and after spraying by means of the dipstick .
num .
prior to the binder being used on the contract the contractor shall demonstrate to the superintendent compliance with the emulsion binder property requirements for each batch of binder .
audit testing undertaken by the principal shall not be used to demonstrate compliance .
hold point num binder application num .
binder shall not be applied until the contractor has sufficient spreader trucks to comply with numa at the location of the area to be sprayed .
in addition all rollers shall be at the location of the area to be sprayed at the time of spraying .
hold point num .
binder shall be applied only when the pavement temperature is between numc and numc .
application of emulsion at a temperature above numc shall only be done when it can be shown by demonstration that the emulsion will not form a skin or break rapidly .
pavement temperature num .
the binder spraying temperature range shall be numc to numc for num emulsions numc to numc for num or num high bitumen content emulsions or greater than numc for polymer modified emulsions .
spraying temperature num .
the emulsion binder rates at numc for tender purposes shall be as specified at annexure numc .
num .
the spraying of the binder for each run of the sprayer shall start and finish on protective paper .
the sprayer shall start each run at least num m before the protective paper and shall cross the paper at its correct spraying speed .
the paper so used and any spilt binder shall be removed and disposed of in an approved manner .
all tapers and fillets shall be sprayed after masking with protective paper .
all outside edges shall be sprayed with copley eannum w edge nozzles .
.where the direct use of the mechanical sprayer is impracticable the binder may be applied using a hand lance fed from the mechanical sprayer .
specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the volume of binder sprayed for each run shall be determined by dipping the tank after each run and recording the volume of binder in the tank to the nearest numl .
the sprayer must be dipped whilst parked on level ground .
sprayed volume num .
the binder shall be sprayed onto areas as detailed in the drawings or as otherwise specified in annexure numa .
the sprayed binder edge shall conform to the following requirements spraying tolerances a. the sprayed edge shall not deviate from the specified edge by more than num mm b. the rate of deviation of the sprayed edge from the specified edge lines shall not exceed one in four hundred num num c. tapers to accommodate variations in specified width shall be at one in one num except at floodway exits which shall be at one in twenty num .
num .
the contractor shall take all necessary precautions to prevent binder from adhering to any existing structure .
any damage or defacement shall be made good immediately upon completion of sealing work at no cost to the principal .
num .
in doubledouble seals the binder for the second coat shall not be applied until the binder in the first coat has completely broken and cured to form a stable seal leaving no water in the binder .
double double seals num application of aggregate doubledouble seal num .
general a .
the sprayed binder shall be totally covered with aggregate within num minutes of the application of the binder .
the length of spray runs shall be limited to comply with this requirement .
timing of application num .
first coat larger aggregate a .
the first aggregate coat shall be uniformly spread by means of a suitable type of mechanical spreader .
the aggregate shall be applied commencing at the low edge of the pavement in successive runs parallel to that edge .
b .
this requirement may be waived at tapers depending upon the method of application of the binder for the taper .
c. the aggregate shall be placed to form a uniform stone mosaic of single particle thickness in almost continuous interlocked contact with the particles generally oriented with their least dimension vertical .
in order to meet this requirement it may be necessary to apply the aggregate initially at a rate slightly less than appears optimum so that some binder is visible between the stones .
additional aggregate shall be applied to any bare or insufficiently covered areas as necessary .
d. the additional aggregate shall be applied before the completion of four complete coverages of rubber tyred rolling .
specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name e. immediately after application of the cover material the surface shall be rolled with rubber tyred rollers to the minimum number of complete coverages as stated in annexure numc over the whole area .
for the first four complete coverages rollers shall be operated at speeds less than num km per hour .
f. all loose aggregate not incorporated in the mat at the completion of rolling and brooming shall be removed from the pavement prior to the application of the binder for the second coat but after the binder has completely broken and cured .
the loose aggregate shall be removed in such a manner as to prevent removal of aggregate incorporated in the first coat .
num .
second coat smaller aggregate a .
the second aggregate coat shall not be applied to the first coat until the binder of the first coat has completely broken and cured to form a stable seal leaving no water in the binder .
b .
the first coat of aggregate may require to be sprayed with water prior to the application of the binder for the second coat .
c. the second aggregate coat shall be spread and rolled as specified for the first coat .
this work shall be completed within num minutes of the application of the second binder coat .
time lapse between coats d. the new seal should not be swept or trafficked until the emulsion has completely broken leaving no water and the binder has had adequate curing to attain full strength ensuring stone retention after unrestricted trafficking .
num surface sweeping num .
any loose aggregate not incorporated in the seal mat after the completion of rolling and curing of the second aggregate coat shall be swept off the seal surface without damage to seal or shoulder and shall then be removed from the roadway .
where the roadway to be sealed is kerbed the excess aggregate may be swept hard against the kerb during interim sweeping operations but shall be picked up and removed during the final sweeping .
num .
where the roadway to be sealed is kerbed the excess cover material shall be picked up by suction broom without damage to the seal .
the excess cover material may be swept hard against the kerb during interim sweeping operation but shall be picked up and removed by a suction broom to an approved location .
excess cover num .
the initial sweeping shall take place prior to the completion of the days work .
a second sweeping shall be carried out at the commencement of the following days work .
the contractor shall carry out subsequent sweepings as necessary for the following num days to ensure that no loose stones remain on the road surface .
all loose aggregate shall be swept clear of the sealed surface .
specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall install symbolic loose stones signs and other temporary traffic management signs in accordance with specification num traffic .
the signs shall remain in place on each section of the works for the following num days after completion of sealing .
signing num num not used num nonconforming test results num .
where defects arising in a seal or reseal may be in any way either in part or in full attributable to bitumen for which test results are nonconforming then within num days of completion of the works on which that bitumen was used the superintendent may direct the contractor to take remedial action to repair or replace any defective sections of work .
any remedial action so directed will be at no cost to the principal .
num .
the superintendent may refrain from making payment to the contractor for the schedule of rates item for bitumen supply and delivery related to that delivery for num days after the work was completed plus any subsequent time thereafter if remedial work is outstanding .
num .
the superintendent may initiate testing of other samples retained but not previously tested .
num nonconformance in binder application num .
the actual binder application rate at numc on a spray run shall be deemed to be conforming to the ordered binder application rate if it falls within the tolerances given in table num for class num primes and primerseals and table num for seals and bitumen emulsion primerseals .
num .
where the actual binder application rate at numc on a spray run differs from the ordered rate the quality level shall be deemed to be either nonconformance or one of a range of conditional conformance levels depending on the difference between the actual binder application rate and the ordered binder application rate .
the tolerances applicable to conditional conformance are given in tabular form in tables num and num and a pay factor shall be applied for work at the corresponding conformance levels .
the pay factor applied will reflect the lower level of serviceability of conditionally conforming sprayed bituminous work .
application num .
where sprayed work is deemed nonconforming the contractor shall apply corrective action subject to the procedures contained in the quality system specification .
num .
no payment shall be made for binder sprayed outside the nummm margin specified in the clause num .
specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num pay factors for class num primes primerseals actual binder application rate bar lm numc quality level pay factor pf oar num or less nonconformance na oar num to oar num conditional conformance level num num oar num to oar num conformance num oar num to oar num conditional conformance level num num oar num to oar num conditional conformance level num num oar num to oar num conditional conformance level num num oar num or more nonconformance na oar ordered application rate numc table num pay factors for bituminous seals reseals actual binder application rate bar lm num converted quality level pay factor pf oar num or less nonconformance na oar num to oar num conditional conformance level num num oar num to oar num conformance num oar num to oar num conditional conformance level num num oar num to oar num conditional conformance level num num oar num or more nonconformance na oar ordered binder application rate at numc num crushed aggregate num .
conformance of the aggregate at its source shall be construed only as authorising the contractor to deliver the material .
contamination of the aggregate during cartage or failure to cart and stockpile the aggregate as specified shall render the material nonconforming .
the contractor shall not be paid for nonconforming material or its cartage .
num testing frequency num .
the minimum testing frequency to determine the conformance of product and work processes with specified characteristics shall be in accordance with specification num quality systems .
specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used as built and handover requirements num works records num .
the contractor shall accurately record the information required on record forms similar to those shown in annexure numd in respect of each application of binder .
the forms shall be supplied by the contractor and one copy of the completed form for each item of work shall be submitted to the superintendent at the completion of each days surfacing work .
num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa schedule of works seal reseal works item section nos from  slk to  slk length km width m side  lcr area m bar at numc lm cover material type cover size mm comments road name num num num etc .
etc .
road name num num num etc .
etc .
road name num num num etc .
etc .
note num slk denotes straight line kilometre distance values for from and to .
alternatively section limits may be described using chainages .
note num l c r denotes left centre or right .
leave side column blank if width value in previous column is entire seal width .
specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numb cover materials supplied by the principal numb.num aggregate dumpsite locations num .
details of aggregate supplied by the principal are shown in table numbnum .
table numbnum dumpsite details location slk offset m quantity available m size mm type numb.num rate of deduction num .
the rates for deduction for overspreading the principals aggregate are as shown in table numbnum .
table numbnum rates for deduction nominal size of aggregate mm rate for deduction m sanddust num num num num num specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numc numc.num responsibility for seal design table numcnum design responsibility seal type location design responsibility prime all works principal primerseal all works principal sealreseal all works principal bridge deck all works principal numc.num binder and aggregate application rates num .
the percentage of each binder constituent and binder application rates for tender purposes shall be as detailed in table numcnum .
table numcnum binder composition and application rates surface type binder composition by volume binder application rate bar numc lmnum class num bitumen medium curing cutting oil slow curing cutting oil prime num num num primerseal as per design single coat seal as per design doubledouble seal first coat second coat as per design as per design num num rates to be modified in accordance with num or num specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the type of cover material nominal size and spread rate for tender purposes shall be as detailed in table numcnum .
table numcnum aggregate type and spread rate surface type cover material and size mm aggregate spread rate mnummnum primerseal sealreseal single coat seal reseal scatter coat sealreseal double double first coat second coat rates to be modified in accordance with num or num note num where bitumen or bitumen cutback is delivered to site at a temperature higher than the upper limit of the recommended spraying temperature range the spraying of the product shall be delayed until such time as the temperature of the product has cooled to the recommended upper limit .
note num in certain circumstances the superintendent may allow the spraying of binder at temperatures above those listed below .
in such cases the binder application rate will be adjusted as directed by the superintendent .
under no circumstances shall the product be reheated if the temperature is already within the specified spraying range .
numc.num seals and cutback primerseals numc.num addition of medium curing cutting oil num .
where approved by the superintendent medium curing cutting oil shall be added to class num bitumen used for seals and reseals depending on pavement surface temperature at the time of sealing as shown in figure numcnum addition of medium curing cutting oil .
medium curing cutting oil shall be added to the binder for primerseals as shown in table numcnum .
specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name figure numcnum addition of medium curing cutting oil legend line a class num bitumen notenum minimum desirable pavement temperature for seals and reseals is numc .
note num if the anticipated pavement temperature is likely to rise decrease the medium curing cutting oil percentage obtained from the chart .
note num if the aggregate is clean and freshly precoated reduce the medium curing cutting oil proportion by num .
numc.num binder spray temperature num .
binder spraying temperatures for seals and primerseals using class num bitumen shall be in accordance with table numcnum .
table numcnum binder spraying temperature pavement temperature c binder composition bitumenmc cutter ideal spraying temperature range c num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name numc.num bitumen emulsion seals num .
binder application rates for bitumen emulsion seals shall be in accordance with table numcnum .
binder application rates for nummm doubledouble emulsion seals shall be in accordance with the design bar .
table numcnum binder application rates bitumen emulsion surface type binder application rate bar numc lm primerseal numst coat nummm num primerseal numnd coat nummm num numc.num rolling num .
rolling of the seal surface shall be to the minimum number of complete coverages shown in table numcnum .
a complete coverage is one pass of a roller over the entire area ie .
the total length and width of a spray run being rolled .
table numcnum rolling minimum mass of roller minimum no .
of complete coverages num or numt num numc.num geotextile reinforced seals grs num .
type of binder binder application rate aggregate size and aggregate spread rate for grs shall be in accordance with table numcnum .
table numcnum grs application details type of binder bar at numc lm aggregate size mm aggregate spread rate mnummnum doubledouble seal bond coat cnum bitumen or num rubber numst seal coat cnum bitumen or num rubber numnd seal coat cnum bitumen or num rubber specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name numc.num line spotting num .
primes primerseals seals and reseal sections are spotted at the following intervals table numcnum line spotting interval road feature spotting interval m straight sections num curved sections num specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numd record forms the following records are attached numd.num bituminous surfacing contractors daily surfacing record numd.num bituminous surfacing contractors sprayer loading record specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name numd.num bituminous surfacing contractors daily surfacing record date base material pavement surface cover aggregate bitumen total qty of type type num num emulsion bitumen used contract no type type size dump source tie in points from to condition condition dusty precoated damp adhesion agent litres at numc distance side of road sprayed area road temperature binder components ordered application rates spray temperature binder quantity used cover aggregate used actual application rates of ordered application rates binder component quantities used at num c spray no .
from to left right full width length width area component no.num component no.num component no.num additive adhesion agent binder at num c cover aggregate dip before spraying dip after spraying quantity sprayed hot quantity sprayed at numc binder hot binder at num c cover aggregate binder at num c cover aggregate component no .
num component no .
num component no .
num additive m m m m m c l m mm c l l l l m l m l m mm l l l kg num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num totals description of component no .
num remarks component no .
num component no .
num signature contractors representative tick appropriate box superintendent specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name numd.num bituminous surfacing contractors sprayer loading record date grade of bitumen road spray load no type of blend spray run numbers contract no a. loading into empty sprayer b. loading into sprayer containing primer num pavement temp ______ c design blend ___ __ __ num pavement temp ______ __ c design blend ___ __ ___ __ ____ _ num application rate hot ______ lmnum spray temp hot ___ _ c num application rate hot ______ __ lmnum spray temp hot __ __ c num volume required in sprayer ______ l ____ _ c num volume required in sprayer ______ __ l ____ __ c ______ l numc ______ __ l numc num components to be added numc num components to be added numc component num _____ l or ______ l _____ c component num _____ __ l or ______ __ l _____ __ c component num _____ l or ______ l _____ c component num _____ __ l or ______ __ l _____ __ c component num _____ l or ______ l _____ c component num _____ __ l or ______ __ l _____ __ c adhesion agent _____ l num primer remaining in sprayer actual components added _____ __ l ____ __ c _____ __ l numc a b num actual primer composition ___ _ ___ _ ___ _ component num ___ _ l ___ _ c component num ____ _ l ___ _ c num components remaining in sprayer specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name component num ___ _ l ___ _ c component num ____ _ l ___ _ c component num _____ __ l component num _____ __ l component num ___ _ l ___ _ c component num ____ _ l ___ _ c component num _____ __ l adhesion agent ___ _ l adhesion agent ____ _ l num components to be added numc actual blend _____ ____ __ __ actual blend ____ _ ____ _ ____ _ component num _____ __ l or ______ ___ l _____ __ c component num _____ __ l or ______ ___ l _____ __ c signatures component num adhesion agents _____ __ _____ __ l l or ______ ___ l _____ __ c contractors rep description of components num ______________________________________________________________ _ num ______________________________________________________________ num ______________________________________________________________ _ superintendent specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is pavements and surfacing manager .
num .
general editing when one or more of the sealing applications specified in clause num is not required for a contract all the relevant sectionsclauses dealing with the sealing application must be deleted .
all section clause numbers shall be retained and marked as not used .
the following table is a guide treatment not required sections to be marked as not used prime coat on basecourse num num num annexure numc part table numcnum and numcnum primerseal with cutback bitumen numa and numb num num num annexure numc part table numcnum numcnum and numcnum emulsion seals including primersealing numb num num num annexure numc part table numcnum part table numcnum and table numcnum bitumen seals and reseals numc num num num retain if applying a prime grs or cutback primerseal annexure numc part table numcnum numcnum and numcnum geotextile reinforced seals num numd num specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name treatment not required sections to be marked as not used num num retain if applying a prime cutback primerseal or seal num annexure numc table numcnum num .
bituminous surfacing intent clause num has been inserted to define the intended outcomes of applying a bituminous surfacing treatment .
this specification includes a number of different types of treatment as indicated within clause num .
the critical intention will vary slightly from treatment to treatment .
the requirement for a bituminous treatment to be durable is constant irrespective of the type though the quantum will be different between a primerseal and a reseal for example .
the three bullet points in this clause are the essential outcomes of the application of a bituminous surfacing treatment .
if these outcomes are not met then the treatment is not achieving the desired intention and further scrutiny should be applied to determine the cause for this failure .
this might include such factors as design preparation application andor operational practices .
num .
geotextile reinforced seals insert details for a geotextile seal in table numcnum .
refer to austroads report aptnum and main roads guideline num for guidance on the use and design of geotextile seals .
num .
aggregate num .
principal supplied aggregate num .
if screening of principalsupplied aggregate is required include clause num as a contract specific requirement .
num .
insert any other requirements concerning principalsupplied aggregate as necessary in clause num as a further contract specific requirement e.g .
.care of dumpsites num .
provide aggregate spread rates .
base on test results where known calculated using the formula spread rate mm numaverage least dimension as num the provided rate should be adjusted in the field to give the correct stone mosaic .
specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name typical values are aggregate size aggregate application rate sand or dust up to num mm nummm num to num mm see note nummm num to num mm nummm num to num mm nummm num to num mm nummm to num mm note nummm aggregate is neither intended nor expected to be spread as a single layer .
num .
provide rate of deduction to allow for the cost of wastage in m for over spreading aggregate .
a typical value might be of the order of numm and would represent the production cost of the aggregate .
num .
nominate in table num the type of precoat fluid to be used .
distillate precoat fluid is used for most hot bitumen or cutback bitumen sealing or primersealing .
a bitumen based precoat fluid may be used where a higher level of initial adhesion is required such as geotextile seals .
num .
contractor supplied aggregate in the conditions of tender currently schedule l include a. an item to cover the contractors response to clause num re source of aggregate and b. an item to cover the contractors response to clause num re adhesion agent cross referenced in the note to table num and c. an item to cover the contractors response to clause num re aggregate screen sizes .
num .
responsibility for seal design amend table numcnum to show whether the principal or contractor is responsible for the design of sprayed seals and what types of seals .
num .
bitumen emulsion application refer clause num num .
where a doubledouble emulsion primerseal is used for a new pavement the typical treatment is first coat nummm crushed aggregate usually perth granite bar num litresm numc second coat nummm crushed aggregate usually perth granite bar num litresm numc specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
doubledouble emulsion seals using nummm and nummm sized aggregates should be applied using a num emulsion crsnum .
crsnum num bitumen content bitumen emulsion is far more liquid and less viscous than the num emulsion and will flow on the road at emulsion application rates in excess of num lmnum .
this makes it problematic for spraying the first coat of a nummm emulsion seal when binder run off will occur .
the num emulsion allows an emulsion application rate of up to about num lmnum before run off may occur .
the direct application of crsnum on to a basecourse without a prime is not recommended as the increased viscosity of the num emulsion can impair the coating ability on the surface potentially leaving pinholes that facilitate moisture ingress into the basecourse .
num .
rubber seals num .
where a rubberised seal is used as a stress alleviating membrane sam a stress alleviating membrane interlayer sami or for waterproofing membrane on a bridge deck it is specified in specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing .
num .
num rubber binder can be used in a grs in lieu of class num bitumen where the grs is subject to large numbers of heavy vehicles .
the use of num rubber binder in a grs is specified in this document .
num .
rolling with steel wheel rollers num .
there is no reference to the use of steel wheel rollers in the standard specification .
the use of steel rollers on sealreseal works is not recommended particularly on softer aggregates such as granite due to the possibility of overrolling and crushing the aggregate .
steel wheel rollers travel slower than multi tyred rollers and delay the rolling process .
num .
notes re annexures num .
annexure numa schedule of works use only if required e.g .
minor works sealingresealing contract and insert details on a roadbyroad basis .
this schedule is not normally required in major works but could be adapted to suit if necessary .
when annexure numa is not used the text of clause num and the title of annexure numa should be replaced with not used while the table in annexure numa should also be deleted .
num .
annexure numb cover materials principal supply insert relevant details of principalsupplied aggregate .
insert contract specific requirements into the text of the specification as noted in item num of these notes .
num .
annexure numc application details cutters should not be specified for inclusion in the binder blend of the first coat of a doubledouble seal therefore the binder specified in table numcnum is num bitumen .
num .
minor works contracts num .
working hours clause num where sealing works are organised as a separate minor works contract a clause for working hours should be added in contract specific requirements if not specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name already covered elsewhere e.g .
in the conditions of contract .
the hours stated here are typical vary to suit the conditions particularly in heavily trafficked areas .
num .
clearing clause num add this clause if required .
contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num .
aggregate supplied by the principal for use in the works shall be screened prior to being used as cover aggregate .
num .
all rejected material and byproducts of the screening operations shall remain the property of the principal and shall be stockpiled within each dumpsite as directed by the superintendent .
num .
all screened aggregate shall meet the particle size distribution when tested in accordance with wa num .
num screening requirements num .
aggregate supplied by the principal for use in the works shall be screened prior to being used as cover aggregate .
num .
all rejected material and byproducts of the screening operations shall remain the property of the principal and shall be stockpiled within each dumpsite as directed by the superintendent .
num .
all screened aggregate shall meet the particle size distribution when tested in accordance with wa num .
num cover material dump sites num .
the contractor shall be required to remove star picket fencing from the perimeter of dumpsites of principal supplied aggregate in order to gain access .
fences shall be carefully dismantled and fencing materials stacked at the dumpsites without damage .
the fences will be reerected by the principal at the completion of the works .
the contractor shall be liable for any damage to fencing or dumpsite signs caused by the contractors operations .
num .
cover material dumpsites shall be left in a tidy condition .
residual stockpiled aggregate shall be reheaped into a single uniformly shaped stockpile for each sized aggregate .
specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num working hours and days num .
the contractor may work up to num hours per fortnight with a maximum of num hours on any day between the hours of num am and num pm .
in addition the contractor shall complete each days spraying by num pm at the latest unless otherwise authorised by the superintendent .
the contractor shall notify the superintendent of the delivery times and dates for each dump site for the aggregate and work start times and working days for the sealing work prior to commencement of work on site .
the superintendent may approve variation to the start and finish times andor working days .
num .
the contractor may work outside the nominated working hours for the following activities a .
repairs to plant .
b. travelling to and from worksite by personnel .
c. travelling of plant and personnel from one worksite to another .
d. receipt and reheating of bitumen at worksite .
e. screening of principals aggregate if specified .
specification num bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title bituminous surfacing revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num asphalt wearing course copyright main roads western australia specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num num num requirement for dilution of emulsion moved to num .
bpc num various dup changed to shared path correction of use of term paver mix or mixture changed to asphalt num remove reference to laterite oga num num no job mix required for nummm laterite dga num remove reference to laterite oga num num part of num and all of num moved to num num added open graded asphalt requirements num new clause on reporting of results num clarified source of trucks num change in format and new clauses on use of paving tape num new sentence on paver requirements num requirements for a material transfer vehicle mtv num new limits for weather conditions when paving num reworded to remove he num remove reference to laterite oga table num drawing num corrected to num num new clause on reporting of density results table num.bnum remove limits for laterite oga annexure numc table specifying requirement for mtv and a table for echelon paving guidance notes guidance on use of mtv guidance notes deleted notes on use of laterite oga revision register corrected num for cl .
num to marshall density bpc num num title of asnzs num amended num corrected clause number mandated use of anume for open graded num added laterite open graded asphalt num num deleted mix num amended bitumen to binder num num added open graded mix num new clause on determining binder content of specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num laterite oga by mass num deleted intermediate course and inserted dense graded num amended title of maximum density and particle coating tests num added open graded asphalt table num.bnum added nummm laterite open graded asphalt guidance notes amended notes num num and num specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num products and materials num num bituminous binders num num bitumen emulsion num num aggregate num num num not used num num mineral filler num num adhesion agent num num pigment num num num not used num mix design num num specified dense graded asphalt mix designs num num specified open graded asphalt mix design num num num not used num manufacture and transport num num mixing plant num num manufacture of asphalt num num storage and handling num num use of organic wax compound num num testing num num nonconformance num num transport num num num not used num placing of asphalt num num general num num surface preparation num num equipment num num tack coat num num not used num num weather conditions num num joints num num longitudinal joints num specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num transverse joints num num terminal joints num num asphalt construction drawings num num num not used num num compaction num num density requirements num num surface requirements num num opening finished works to traffic num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num schedule of works num annexure numb num special details num annexure numc num specific contract requirements num specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num asphalt wearing course general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and application of dense graded and open graded hotmixed or warm mixed asphalt for pavement wearing courses except for stone mastic asphalt which is addressed in specification num stone mastic asphalt .
asphalt used in an asphalt pavement is addressed in specification num asphalt intermediate course .
num .
details of the location and extent of asphalt work are either summarised at annexure numa or are indicated on the drawings .
details num .
the works shall include surface preparation supply of materials production hauling placing and compaction of asphalt to the areas as shown in the drawings or as otherwise directed by the superintendent including correction of existing pavement surfaces .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods and other test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num bituminous emulsions for the construction maintenance of pavements as num building limes as num geotechnical site investigations as num hot mix asphalt asnzs num sample preparation compaction of asphalt test specimens using a gyratory compactor asnzs num moisture content of asphalt asnzs num degree of particle coating asnzs num determination of the resilient modulus of asphalt indirect tensile method main roads test methods wa num particle size distribution of aggregates wa num aggregate moisture content convection oven method specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name wa num aggregate moisture content microwave oven method wa num crushing test value wa num colour of aggregate wa num surface profile three metre straightedge wa num surface profile arrb profiler wa num colour saturation of laterite asphalt wa num sampling and storage of asphalt wa num preparation of asphalt for testing wa num bitumen content particle size distribution of asphalt stabilised soil centrifuge method wa num stability flow of asphalt marshall method wa num maximum density of asphalt rice method wa num bulk density and void content of asphalt wa num bulk density and void content of asphalt vacuum sealing method roads maritime services nsw test methods t num moisture content of bituminous mixes mass loss method main roads specifications specification num quality systems specification num stone mastic asphalt specification num asphalt intermediate course specification num materials for bituminous treatments num definitions num. asphalt course comprises one or more layers of a single asphalt type .
terminology num. asphalt layer comprises a single paving run of uniform asphalt .
num. asphalt wearing courses is that part of the pavement upon which the traffic travels including any dense graded asphalt course immediately below a course of open graded asphalt .
num. asphalt pavement is a pavement the predominate structural strength of which is provided by asphalt layers .
num. reclaimed asphalt pavement rap is the material reclaimed from an asphalt wearing or intermediate course by cold planning and reprocessed by crushing andor screening for recycling into new asphalt .
specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used products and materials num bituminous binders num .
binder used in the production of dense graded asphalt shall be as shown on drawings .
where not shown the binder specified at clause num for the relevant asphalt mix shall be used .
dense graded asphalt num .
binder used in the production of open graded asphalt shall be anume polymer modified binder .
open graded asphalt num .
all binders shall conform to the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
num .
prior to the use of bitumen or polymer modified bitumen the contractor shall demonstrate compliance with the properties of the binder for each batch used on the contract .
audit testing undertaken by the principal shall not be used to demonstrate compliance .
hold point num bitumen emulsion num .
bitumen emulsion to be used as the tack coat during the preparation of the surface prior to the laying of open or dense graded asphalt shall be cationic slow setting emulsion grade cssnum or cationic rapid setting emulsion grade crsnum both conforming to as num mixed num by volume with water .
num aggregate num .
crushed aggregate including its source rock and screened or crushed laterite aggregate shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
coarse and fine aggregate used in the manufacture of asphalt shall only consist of crushed rock material .
num num not used num mineral filler num .
mineral filler shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
mineral filler num adhesion agent num .
the adhesion agent shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
adhesion agent num pigment num .
red iron oxide pigment shall be incorporated into dense graded laterite mixes .
the contractor shall use an appropriate type quantity and process for the incorporation of red iron oxide pigment to meet the requirements of clause num num .
specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
red iron oxide pigment shall not be used in asphalt where laterite aggregate is not included .
num num not used mix design num specified dense graded asphalt mix designs num design parameters num .
all dense graded asphalt under this contract shall be assessed in accordance with the standard procedures laid down for the marshall method of design as shown in table num and in the case of job mixes also in accordance with the gyratory air voids requirements specified in clause num .
table num design parameters stability flow of asphalt marshall method wa num maximum density of asphalt rice method wa num bulk density void content of asphalt wa num num .
the design shall produce an asphalt which satisfies the limiting values of the various marshall properties listed in table num.bnum .
these values shall be used as the basis of mix assessment .
limiting values num .
in addition to achieving all the specified property values all asphalt shall have an adequate workability and shall be suitably resistant to segregation during handling and placing .
workability num .
laterite asphalt to be used for bus lanes or shoulders shall be a conforming nummm nominal size dense graded asphalt .
laterite asphalt for use on shared paths should be a nominal mix design specified by the asphalt supplier of dense graded laterite asphalt nummm nominal size .
laterite mixes num conforming mix design for dense graded asphalt num .
the conforming mixes described in this clause are for mixes produced using granite or laterite aggregates from the perth region .
application num .
details of dense graded asphalt mixes which have been found to achieve the marshall values listed in table num.bnum are given in table num.bnum .
the supply of dense graded asphalt in accordance with these design details shall be the basis of a conforming tender .
where aggregate other than granite or laterite from the perth region is used for the supply of dense graded asphalt in accordance with these design details the basis of the tender shall be considered to be a job mix .
supply specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the nummm dense graded laterite mixes shall be based on the use of crushed laterite aggregates .
the mixes shall include a maximum of num of granite aggregates by mass of the total aggregates in the mix with no less than num by mass of nominal sized nummm granite aggregate in the total aggregate .
sand shall not be used in the laterite mixes .
laterite mixes shall also contain a red iron oxide pigment as specified in clause num .
nummm laterite mix num job mix design for dense graded asphalt num .
the job mix design used in the works must have been approved by the principal prior to the closing date for tenders .
approved job mix design num .
except where laterite mix is specified the job mix design shall be based on the use of crushed rock as the coarse and fine aggregates and the inclusion of num by mass of the total aggregate of hydrated lime .
job mixes for the perth metropolitan area shall be produced using granite rock .
job mixes for areas outside of perth where it may be impractical to use hydrated lime shall use an adhesion agent additive with the binder as specified in clause num .
design parameters num .
laterite aggregate job mixes shall be based on the use of conforming laterite aggregates and the inclusion of num hydrated lime by mass of the total aggregate .
job mixes for areas outside of perth where it may be impractical to use hydrated lime shall use an adhesion agent additive with the binder as specified in clause num .
up to num of granite aggregate may be used in a shared path mix or open graded mix .
granite aggregate shall be used in a nummm dense graded laterite job mix as specified in clause num .
laterite mixes shall also contain a red iron oxide pigment as specified in clause num .
laterite mixes num .
to obtain the principals approval for a job mix design the following details shall be submitted to the materials engineering branch of main roads a. a detailed description of all the materials to be used in the manufacture of the dense graded asphalt .
these descriptions shall include a geological description of all the aggregates to be used .
test reports showing the conformance of the aggregates to be used in the job mix design listed for all properties in specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
materials description b. the binder content expressed as in table num.bnum .
the bitumen content shall be based on a design mid point with a maximum and minimum value within a tolerance of num from the mid point .
binder c. a particle size distribution in a format as shown in table num.bnum .
the particle size distribution shall be based on a design mid point with the coarse and fine limits within the production tolerances shown in table num .
particle size specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num production tolerances particle size distribution as sieve size mm tolerances on percentage by mass passing num num num num num note num and num num num and num num num and num num num num num num note for nummm sized mix the tolerance can be num num. d. test results for the proposed job mix which confirm marshall properties conforming with table num.bnum over the range of particle sizes and binder contents in the proposed job mix .
five mixes shall be prepared and tested with the mix proportions as listed below fine psd high binder the fine psd shall be prepared by adding the positive production tolerance values shown in table num on to the design mid point psd .
the binder content shall be the design mid point binder content plus num binder .
fine psd low binder the fine psd shall be prepared by adding the positive production tolerance values shown in table num on to the design midpoint psd .
the binder content shall be the design midpoint binder content minus num binder .
coarse psd low binder the coarse psd shall be prepared by adding the negative production tolerance values shown in table num on to the design mid point psd .
the binder content shall be the design mid point binder content minus num binder .
coarse psd high binder the coarse psd shall be prepared by adding the negative production tolerance values shown in table num on to the design mid point psd .
the binder content shall be the design mid point binder content plus num binder .
mid point psd three mid point conditions shall be tested with binder contents at the design mid point and the design mid point binder content plus and minus num binder .
laboratory mixes produced to replicate the five mixes shall not vary from the psd or bitumen content at the mid point coarse and fine boundaries by more than the limits shown below .
test results specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name i num for nummm sieve ii num for nummm sieve iii num for bitumen content e. test results for gyratory compaction air voids and resilient modulus conforming with clause num .
num .
all tests shall be performed in laboratories accredited with national association of testing authorities of australia nata to perform these tests except for asnum and the results shall be presented on nata endorsed reports .
num approval of a job mix design num .
the principal will only approve job mix designs that conform to the following requirements mix requirements a .
the results of testing the five mixes defined in clause numd indicate that any permissible combination of the various mix proportions will result in a dense graded asphalt having marshall properties satisfying the limits specified in table num.bnum .
b .
the mix shall produce a satisfactory workable material in the works .
c. the mid point grading and bitumen content of the mix shall be defined as the design mix .
when specimens are prepared in accordance with asnzs num the air voids after num cycles of compaction shall be no less than num when determined in accordance with wa num .
gyratory compaction d. the mix shall be tested in accordance with as num to determine the resilient modulus .
the resilient modulus shall be determined at an air void content of num num .
modulus num .
use of the job mix shall be for only those ranges in the mix proportions and the types and sources of materials nominated with the job mix design .
the contractor shall not undertake any changes to either the mix proportions or the character or source of material without repetition of the full series of test mixes described above .
use of job mix num use of job mix design num .
the contractor shall provide proof to the superintendent that the asphalt job mix design has been approved by the principal before any asphalt manufactured in accordance with that job mix design is placed in the works .
hold point specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num specified open graded asphalt mix design num marshall design parameters num .
all open graded asphalt under this contract shall be assessed in accordance with the standard procedures laid down for the marshall method of design as shown in table num .
the bulk density of laboratory prepared and field cored specimens shall be determined in accordance with wa num .
table num design parameters description test method stability flow of asphalt marshall method wa num maximum density of asphalt rice method wa num bulk density void content of asphalt wa num num .
the design shall produce a material which satisfies the limiting values of the various marshall properties listed in table num.bnum .
num .
in addition to achieving all the specified property values all asphalt shall have an adequate workability and shall be suitably resistant to segregation during handling and placing .
workability num conforming mix design for open graded asphalt num .
the conforming mix design described in this clause is for a mix produced using granite aggregates from the perth region .
application num .
open graded asphalt shall consist of a mixture of coarse and fine aggregates hydrated lime mineral filler and anume binder .
the coarse and fine aggregates and filler where used shall be measured and then mixed in such proportions as to satisfy the particle size distribution given in table num.bnum .
constituents num num not used manufacture and transport num mixing plant num .
asphalt shall be manufactured in a central mixing plant by either batch mixing continuous mixing or drum mixing .
all mixing plant and equipment and associated facilities shall conform to the requirements of as num and shall be such as to prevent segregation of the asphalt at all stages .
plant num .
a sampling cock shall be installed in the inlet pipe between the road tanker and binder storage tanks .
an additional sampling cock shall be installed for sampling at the time of asphalt production between the binder tank and the mixing chamber to facilitate the sampling of any binder being used for asphalt production .
binder sampling cocks specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
for the verification of weights or proportions and character of materials and determination of temperatures used in the preparation of the asphalt the superintendent shall have access at any time to all parts of the plant subject to safety considerations .
num manufacture of asphalt num .
the quantities of coarse and fine aggregates mineral filler pigment adhesion agent and binder shall be accurately and positively controlled so as to produce the asphalt specified for use in the works .
rap shall not be included in the production of any asphalt wearing course .
control num .
the mixing process shall be such as to produce a uniform distribution of aggregate sizes and a uniform coating of binder on a minimum of num of aggregate particles when tested in accordance with asnzs num .
mixing num .
the particle size distribution and the percentage of bitumen shall be within the limits as specified in table num.bnum for dense graded asphalt and table num.bnum for open graded asphalt or in accordance with an authorised job mix when tested in accordance with wa num .
particle size distribution num .
the air voids vma stability and flow shall be in accordance with tables num.bnum for dense graded asphalt and table num.bnum for open graded asphalt when tested in accordance with wa num and num .
marshall properties num .
the moisture content of the asphalt at the completion of the mixing process shall not be greater than num by mass when measured in accordance with asnzs num or tnum .
moisture content num .
in a batch mixer the volume of material shall be limited to an amount allowing the paddle tips to be seen when passing through the top vertical position during mixing .
volume of material num .
the temperature of the mixed asphalt shall be measured and recorded at the discharge point of the pugmill or mixing drum .
the temperature of the asphalt shall not exceed numc for dense graded asphalt manufactured with class num or num bitumen and numc for dense graded asphalt manufactured with pmb or numc for open graded asphalt unless otherwise directed by the superintendent .
temperature at discharge point num storage and handling num .
binders shall be heated and stored to meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments and the aapa advisory note num .
at no time shall binder be heated to a temperature greater than numc .
storage temperature num use of organic wax compound num .
sasobit may be used in the production of open or dense graded asphalt in the following applications .
use of sasobit specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name type a production of asphalt at normal temperatures where asphalt is being transported for long distances and temperature loss may occur during transport or transfer at the paving site .
this application is not applicable to asphalt manufactured using a polymer modified binder or open graded asphalt .
type b production of asphalt at normal temperatures where asphalt is being paved in cold weather and the asphalt is transported only for short distances .
this may include asphalt manufactured using a polymer modified binder and open graded asphalt .
type c production of asphalt at a lower temperature warm mix .
this may include the use of a polymer modified binder but not open graded asphalt .
num .
sasobit shall be used at a dosage rate of num by mass of the binder and added to the binder in accordance with the following dosage and mixing for small jobs in batch type plants where the total mass of asphalt manufactured in one day is num tonnes or less sasobit can be added as pellets directly to the pugmill .
where sasobit is to be used on a continuing basis of two consecutive days or more liquid or pelletised sasobit shall be added to hot binder and stirred in the tank or mixing container prior to its use or liquid sasobit can be dosed in line .
num .
the mixing process shall be such as to produce a uniform distribution of aggregate sizes and a uniform coating of binder on num of aggregate particles when tested in accordance with asnzs num .
the mixing and drying processes shall be sufficient to ensure that moisture in asphalt is not greater than specified .
mixing num .
where sasobit is used in the production of hot mixed asphalt the temperature of the mixed asphalt at the discharge point of the asphalt manufacturing plant shall not exceed numc for open or dense graded asphalt .
where produced as warm mix asphalt the mixed asphalt at the discharge point of the asphalt manufacturing plant shall not be less than numc for dense graded asphalt .
production temperature num testing num .
the asphalt producer shall provide and maintain at a suitable location at the site of the mixing plant for the duration of the contract a suitably equipped air conditioned testing laboratory accredited by the national association of testing authorities of australia nata to perform the following tests testing laboratory wa num num or num num num num num num num asnzs num or tnum asnzs num and num where applicable num .
the laboratory shall be equipped with all testing equipment necessary to perform these tests .
the asphalt producer shall operate and maintain the equipment in good condition in accordance with nata requirements .
testing equipment num .
asphalt shall be tested for the properties and at the testing frequency shown in specification num quality systems .
tests to be undertaken include testing requirements specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name routine testing full test psd bitumen content wa num maximum density of asphalt rice method wa num bulk density void content of asphalt wa num and num stability and flow of asphalt marshall method wa num routine testing partial test psd bitumen content wa num maximum density of asphalt rice method wa num periodic testing moisture content asnzs num or tnum degree of particle coating asnzs num num .
asphalt shall be sampled in accordance with wa num with samples tested immediately they are taken .
the number of tests undertaken shall be evenly spread across the entire period of production for each asphalt mix being tested within a shift .
sample testing frequency num .
the first sample of asphalt in a shift shall be taken from the first num tonnes of asphalt manufactured in the shift for each type of mix being manufactured .
first sample num .
if the result of a test sample does not conform to any specified requirements another sample of asphalt shall be taken immediately and tested immediately for a full test .
num .
results of testing shall be reported on a nata endorsed test report within num hours of a sample being taken .
the testing laboratory shall send all results directly to amongst others the contractor the superintendent and a nominated representative at the main roads materials engineering branch .
reporting num nonconformance num .
a hold point will apply when any mix test result indicating a nonconformance occurs .
this hold point shall also apply to a mix produced prior to the nonconforming test result but which has not been placed .
hold point num transport num .
the asphalt shall be transported from the asphalt plant to the works in metal bodied trucks or trailers previously cleaned of all foreign materials .
in long distance haul situations the asphalt should be transported in insulated vehicles sufficient to ensure arrival of the asphalt on site in a conforming condition .
vehicle type specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the temperature of the asphalt in each truck load and each trailer load shall be measured using a calibrated digital probe thermometer before the truck leaves the site of the asphalt manufacturing plant .
the thermometer shall have a digital display readable to numc and have a measurement of uncertainty of not more than numc .
infrared thermometers shall not be used to measure temperature .
the temperature shall comply with the requirements of clause num .
temperature in truck num .
the temperature of the asphalt shall be recorded on a printout showing date time and asphalt temperature for each truck load and each trailer load of mix dispatched .
the printout shall be provided with the load delivery docket .
temperature record num .
each load shall be covered with suitable material of sufficient size to prevent loss of heat from the mixture .
heat loss num .
the asphalt shall be delivered at a uniform rate within the capacity of the placing and compacting plant .
delivery rate num num not used placing of asphalt num general num .
prior to commencing asphalting the contractor shall submit to the superintendent the proposed number and widths of asphalt runs and the proposed joint layout .
hold point num .
asphalt shall not be placed if the truck delivery docket does not include a printout of the date time and temperature of asphalt when the truck was dispatched .
num .
asphalt shall be delivered to the work site at temperatures as follows delivery temperatures hot mixed dense graded asphalt with bitumen numc to numc .
hot mixed dense graded asphalt with polymer modified binder numc to numc .
warm mixed dense graded asphalt with sasobit numc to numc hot mixed open graded asphalt numc to numc .
num .
if a delay occurs of more than num minutes between successive truck deliveries to the paver the paver shall be moved clear of the laid asphalt and a proper transverse joint formed .
delays num .
prior to commencing each days operations and also after any delay exceeding half an hour during the day the screed shall be preheated for at least num minutes in order to eliminate drag marks and imperfections in the finished mat .
screed to be preheated num .
all kerbs gullies grates and other structures shall be protected at all times from damage or defacement by asphalt placement works and the site shall be left in a clean and tidy condition .
damage specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num surface preparation num .
prior to the placement of asphalt the contractor following shall carry out preparation work as detailed in the following clauses .
num .
the contractor shall sweep all road surfaces on which asphalt is to be placed under this contract to a clean condition with no appreciable amounts of loose materials or any other foreign matter remaining .
loose surface material against kerbing shall be removed by handwork if necessary .
the surface to be paved shall be dry .
sweeping num .
where the surface to be covered is asphalt all depressions more than nummm deep shall be filled with a nominal num mm or nummm dense graded asphalt and shall be screeded or raked and then compacted to similar density as the remainder of the surface to be paved .
surface correction num .
the surface of a shared path shall have a uniform texture with a tightly bonded surface and be primed .
the texture of this surface should key the asphalt to the surface and resist any tendency for slippage failures .
num .
where paving tape is shown in asphalt drawings the tape shall be denso paving tape nummm wide or bitac ds multilaminate tape nummm wide .
the tape shall be applied to a surface that is clean dry and all loose material has been removed beyond the width of the tape to be applied .
joins of the tape shall be overlapped and any air bubbles or creases in the tape shall be cut and flattened .
paving tape num equipment num .
the asphalt must be placed by a selfpropelled paver equipped with the ability to be operated with automatic thickness control and automatic joint matching facility .
the paver must be equipped with a ski or laser control system and crossfall controller to maintain levels and also suitable sensing equipment to provide longitudinal joint matching .
it shall further be equipped with a vibrating or tamping screed capable of achieving num of final compaction .
requirements num .
where the use of a material transfer vehicle mtv is specified at annexure numc the mtv shall be a selfpropelled machine capable of receiving asphalt from delivery trucks storing the asphalt heating asphalt in storage and transferring the asphalt to the paver without any contact with the paver .
the mtv must have a minimum storage capacity of num tonnes and the paver must be fitted with a bin in its hopper to transfer asphalt directly to the feed conveyor of the paver .
material transfer vehicle num tack coat num .
a tack coat shall be applied to the prepared surface at the rate of num lm of the dilute emulsion or as directed by the superintendent .
the tack coat shall be sprayed in a uniform film over the entire road surface .
composition num .
no asphalt shall be placed on the tack coat until the emulsion has broken and the water has substantially evaporated .
specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the superintendent may direct the pavement area ahead of the paver to be resprayed and may specify the time to be allowed between the spraying of tack coat and the placing of asphalt .
however this area shall not exceed the requirements for half a days placing of asphalt .
respraying num .
the tack coat shall be applied with care to reduce the possibility of concrete kerbs driveways and footpaths being sprayed with bitumen .
any such contamination shall be removed by the contractor at no cost to the principal .
contamination num not used num weather conditions num .
asphalt placement shall not commence or continue upon a surface which is not clean and dry and only when the pavement temperature meets the requirements shown in table num and rain is not imminent .
pavement temperature table num pavement temperatures for placement mix type binder in mix minimum pavement temperature when wind speed num kmhr minimum pavement temperature when wind speed num kmhr oga anume numc numc oga anume with sasobit numc numc dga cnum bitumen numc numc dga cnum bitumen with sasobit numc numc dga polymer modified binder numc numc dga polymer modified binder with sasobit numc numc num .
the superintendent may if the weather or surface conditions are considered to be unsuitable instruct the contractor to cease laying operations .
any materials laid after this instruction is given will not be paid for and are to be removed at no cost to the principal .
num joints num .
the number and extent of joints in asphalt layers shall be kept to a minimum and the paving pattern shall be designed accordingly in advance of the work paving pattern num .
the main paving runs shall be laid first and any smaller or irregular adjacent areas later so that they can be matched to the main run .
num .
each joint shall be neat thoroughly compacted and have a surface finish equal in quality to that of the surrounding asphalt layer .
surface finish specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
where the edge of the previously laid work has become distorted it shall be cut back a sufficient distance to provide the true cross section .
edges num longitudinal joints num .
longitudinal joints shall be continuous and parallel to the pavement centreline .
joints in successive layers shall be offset by at least nummm .
joints shall be located away from traffic wheel tracks .
where possible joints in wearing courses shall be located beneath traffic line marking .
the end of the previous run shall be lightly tack coated before the paving of the adjacent run proceeds .
position num .
temporary longitudinal ramps shall be provided for any asphalt course that has not been completed to the full carriageway width and is subjected to traffic .
these ramps shall be cut back before the adjacent lane is laid .
temporary ramps num transverse joints num .
transverse joints shall be at right angles to the direction of paving .
they should be staggered by at least one num metre between successive layers and between adjacent runs .
num .
the end of the previous run shall be lightly tack coated before the paving of the next run proceeds .
tack coat num .
temporary transverse ramps shall be provided where traffic is to use the newly laid work prior to a run being completed .
these ramps shall be cut back before the next run is laid .
temporary ramps num terminal joints num .
terminal joints between the new and existing surfaces shall be formed by ramping with a nominal nummm dense graded asphalt mix .
the ramp shall extend over a sufficient distance to provide a slope of at least num .
num asphalt construction drawings num .
unless otherwise specified details for transverse joints longitudinal joints and profiles shall be in accordance with the asphalt construction drawings available on the main roads website as listed in table num .
specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num list of asphalt construction drawings drawing number title num pavement series typical details full depth asphalt transverse joints num pavement series typical details granular transverse joints num pavement series typical details full depth asphalt longitudinal joints and profile num wearing course series typical details ogadga transverse joints num wearing course series typical details dga transverse joints num wearing course series typical details sma transverse joints num wearing course series typical details longitudinal joints num num not used num compaction num .
selfpropelled steel wheel rollers and pneumatic tyred rollers meeting the requirements of as num shall be used .
vibratory pneumatic tyred rollers may be used .
all rollers shall be fitted with reticulation to water wheels or tyres to prevent pick up of asphalt and be fitted with scrapers to clean the wheels or tyres .
only steel wheeled rollers shall be used for the compaction of open graded asphalt .
equipment num .
unless otherwise directed by the superintendent rolling shall commence immediately after placing and compacting with the vibrating or tamping screed .
the rolling shall start longitudinally at the sides and proceed towards the centre of the pavement overlapping on successive passes by at least nummm .
successive passes of the roller shall be of slightly different lengths .
num .
roller speed shall be uniform .
stops and starts shall be controlled so that displacement shoving of the asphalt mix does not occur when changing direction .
any shoving occurring as a result of changing direction or from any other cause shall be corrected at once by the use of rakes and of fresh asphalt when required .
roller stopstarts num .
to prevent adhesion of asphalt to the roller all wheels shall be kept properly moistened but excess of water shall be avoided .
diesel or other petroleum based fluids shall not be applied to pneumatic tyres during the rolling process .
moistened wheels num .
vibratory compaction shall be discontinued in areas where it is considered such vibrations could cause damage to adjacent buildings or structures .
under these conditions initial compaction of the asphalt shall be achieved using the selfpropelled static steel wheeled rollers of appropriate mass to meet the compaction requirements in clause num .
vibratory compaction specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall ensure the protection of services and property from deterioration or damage due to the works .
protection num .
rollers shall be kept in continuous operation as much as practicable and in such a manner that all parts of the pavement receive substantially equal compaction .
in the event of a delay in the laying operation rolling is to be carried out as close as practicable to the paving machine .
rollers shall not be parked on work carried out the same day .
continuous operations num .
a sufficient number of rollers shall be available on site commensurate with the rate of supply of asphalt and the output of the paving machine .
number of rollers num .
open graded asphalt shall be compacted by selfpropelled vibrating steel wheel rollers each of mass not less than eight num tonnes capable of varying the amplitude andor frequency of vibration .
oga rollers num .
all joints must be filled and edges adjacent to kerbing and such other hand work as may be necessary must be rolled with a suitable pedestrian type roller .
joints num .
finish rolling shall be carried out while the material is still warm enough for the removal of tyre marks .
steel wheeled rollers shall be used .
finish rolling num .
at places not accessible to the roller thorough compaction must be ensured by means of hot tampers and at all joints with structures the surface mixture must be effectively sealed .
hot tampers num density requirements num .
the characteristic percent marshall density compaction for any lot shall be deemed to be conforming if it attains a value of num or greater except for shared path dense graded asphalt that shall attain a value of num or greater .
payment for conforming work shall be at the scheduled rate .
marshall density num .
density shall be calculated on the basis of the results of tests of core samples of asphalt sampled from an asphalt layer after laying and compaction in accordance with wa num .
the density of the samples shall be determined in accordance with wa num for dense graded asphalt or wa num for open graded asphalt and expressed as a percentage of the mean marshall density of all asphalt results from the same production shift in accordance with wa num and wa num for dense graded asphalt or wa num and wa num for open graded asphalt .
num .
core samples shall be taken within num hours of placement of a lot of asphalt .
results of testing shall be reported on a nata endorsed test report within num hours of the core samples being taken .
the testing laboratory shall send all density results directly to amongst others the contractor the superintendent and a nominated representative at the main roads materials engineering branch .
testing and reporting of results specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
where the characteristic percent marshall density is less than the specified density the quality level shall be deemed to be either non conformance or conditional conformance depending on the difference between the characteristic percent marshall density and the specified density .
the tolerances applicable to conditional conformance are given in table num .
a pay factor as shown in table num shall be applied for work at the appropriate conformance level in accordance with these tolerances .
the pay factor shall reflect the lower level of serviceability of conditionally conforming asphalt .
pay factors num .
conditional acceptance is not applicable if a .
shared path dense graded asphalt will be considered to either conform where the characteristic percent marshall density rc is greater than or equal to num or be nonconforming where the rc is less than num .
shared path mix b .
where the contract does not include a separate scheduled rate for the placement of asphalt the asphalt will be considered to either conform where the characteristic percent marshall density rc is greater than or equal to num or be nonconforming where the rc is less than num .
scheduled rates not included table num pay factors characteristic percent marshall density rc quality level pay factor num or greater conformance num less than num and greater than or equal to num conditional conformance num rc num less than num nonconformance na num .
where any lot of asphalt work is deemed nonconforming the contractor shall apply remedial action in accordance with the procedures contained in specification num quality systems and the lot shall be removed and replaced with fresh asphalt and retested .
removal shall be carried out so as not to damage the underlying layers or any road furniture such as gully gratings .
any such damage shall be repaired at no cost to the principal .
non conformance num surface requirements num .
the surface of the compacted asphalt shall be smooth and true to the specified crown and grades be of uniform appearance free of dragged areas cracks open textured patches and roller or paver marks .
any section of asphalt that is loose or broken mixed with dirt or other impurities or is in any way defective shall be removed and replaced .
specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
when using the num metre straight edge in accordance with wa num the shape of the compacted asphalt shall be deemed to be conforming when the maximum deviation from a numm straight edge placed in any position on the surface of a layer does not exceed the limits specified in table num .
a numm straight edge shall be provided with each paver .
shape numm straightedge num .
when using the arrb tr walking profiler in accordance with wa num the shape of the compacted asphalt shall be deemed to be conforming when the maximum deviation measured in any direction and within any numm long section of the surface does not exceed the limits specified in table num .
shape arrb profiler table num surface shape direction of measurement maximum deviation maximum rate of change of deviation longitudinal num mm num mm per num mm transverse num mm num mm per num mm num .
for construction works the upper surface of the compacted asphalt shall be within nummm of the final design levels .
for construction work the thickness of the compacted asphalt layers shall be within nummm of the specified thickness .
on resurfacing works where the underlying levels vary the minimum thickness of compacted asphalt shall be within nummm of the specified thickness .
the thickness of a lot of asphalt shall be determined from the mean thickness of core samples taken for compaction testing .
thickness shall be measured in accordance with wa num .
level and thickness num .
the plan location of the outer edge of the asphalt shall be within num mm of its true location and the rate of change of the edge from its true plan position shall not exceed num in num .
position num .
laterite asphalt mixes including shared path mix when placed and compacted shall have a colour saturation meeting the requirements of this clause .
when tested in accordance with wa num a lot of dense graded laterite mix or portion of a lot nominated by the superintendent shall have a value for chroma c not less than num .
testing of a lot or portion thereof may be initiated by the superintendent at any time after placement of the asphalt .
where the colour of a lot does not comply the contractor shall pay for the cost of testing the lot .
in response to a nonconformance the contractor shall review its selection and use of a red iron oxide pigment to colour the asphalt before further asphalt is placed .
nonconforming asphalt shall be removed and replaced with conforming mix at no cost to the principal .
colour num .
the contractor shall test for compliance with the specified lines levels thickness and surface finish immediately after initial compaction .
any variations shall be corrected by removing or adding materials as may be necessary .
rolling shall then be continued as specified .
after final rolling out the smoothness of the course shall be checked again .
compliance specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
where work is deemed nonconforming the contractor shall apply remedial action in accordance with the procedures contained in specification num quality system and the lot shall be removed and replaced with fresh asphalt and retested .
non conformance num opening finished works to traffic num .
prior to opening the finished asphalt surface to traffic the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the final road surface is completed in accordance with the specification and that the works are properly delineated and safe for public use .
hold point num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa schedule of works section length m width m area m depth mm asphalt type denseopen intersection mix nom agg .
size mm from to insert appropriate details of all asphalt treatments for main roads policy refer guidance note num .
supplement with drawings diagrams etc .
where necessary specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numb special details table num.bnum marshall properties dense graded asphalt num blow compaction values used as the basis of mix assessment parameter min max marshall stability numkn marshall flow nummm nummm air voids wa num nominal nummm laterite num num nominal nummm perth and southern areas of the state num num nominal nummm northern and eastern areas of the state num num nominal nummm num num nominal nummm intersection mix num num voids in mineral aggregate nominal nummm laterite num nominal nummm num nominal nummm num nominal nummm intersection mix num specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num.bnum conforming mixes for perth area dense graded asphalt particle size distribution and bitumen content australian standard as num sieve mm percentage passing nominal nummm granite nominal nummm granite nominal nummm laterite medians and shoulders nominal nummm laterite bus lanes nominal nummm granite intersection mix num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num binder content by percentage mass of whole mixture num num class num bitumen num num class num bitumen minimum num class num bitumen note num minimum num anume note num num num class num bitumen hydrated lime by percentage mass of total aggregate num num num num num note num the bitumen content shall be adjusted to produce air voids and vma complying with the limits shown in table num.bnum but shall not be lower than the minimum bitumen content .
specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num.bnum marshall properties open graded asphalt num blow compaction values used as the basis of mix assessment parameter min max marshall stability numkn marshall flow nummm nummm air voids wa num num num table num.bnum open graded asphalt mix details particle size distribution passing by mass as sieve size mm nummm granite open graded asphalt num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num binder content anume num num by percentage mass of total mix hydrated lime by percentage mass of total aggregate num specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numc specific contract requirements num .
material transfer vehicle a material transfer vehicle is required to be used for the following layers .
location yes no num .
echelon paving echelon paving is required to be used for the following areas .
location yes no specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is bituminous products consultant .
num .
guidance on the use of wearing course asphalt num main roads document number num guide for surfacing type selection provides guidance on the use of various types of asphalt surfacings in different scenarios and speed zones .
num .
nummm dense graded laterite asphalt refer clause num num laterite asphalt shall be used for bus lanes cycle lanes medians or road shoulders where delineation is required .
laterite asphalt shall not be used for general traffic lanes .
num .
nummm open graded asphalt num for new construction or reconstruction works granite open graded asphalt shall be used for both the trafficked lanes and the break down lane or shoulder .
red coloured granite open graded asphalt shall not be used for any application .
num .
use of a material transfer vehicle num the requirement to use a mtv has to be specified at annexure numc .
mtvs facilitate continuous paving by having a truck come in contact with the mtv to empty its load whilst asphalt is transferred into the paver by conveyor .
removing contact between a truck and paver overcomes bumps from the stopstart of the paver and reduces the likelihood of mix segregation near the end of a truckload .
the outcome is more uniform temperature of the asphalt which will result in improved and more uniform compaction improved ride and less incidence of segregated areas of asphalt .
mtvs are not suited to all asphalting applications as shown below .
where a mtv must be used includes on a project where there will be high daily production outputs of asphalt eg .
widening of tonkin and leach highways near perth airport gateway wa project where there are long paving runs eg kwinana fwy widening roe to armadale and armadale to russell specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name where improved ride quality is required eg .
great eastern hwy from graham farmer fwy to tonkin hwy city east alliance where asphalt is to be placed in adverse weather conditions such as low temperatures or strong winds eg winter paving when paving thin layers of asphalt containing a polymer modified binder .
mtvs may not be suited for the following scenarios on a project where there will be small daily production outputs of asphalt eg .
small minor improvement works where there are confined spaces small areas of widening such as intersection channelisation including short turn pockets .
num .
minor works contracts num where this document is used in a minor works contract with wearing course asphalt as the sole or primary work required authors should ensure that the following specifications are also included in the tender documentation a. specification num general requirements b. specification num pavement markings if required note current minor works tender documentation contains its own quality traffic and osh specifications .
num contract specific requirements include any details provided or required by the principal such as i .
setting out information ii .
working hours and days if not already included in the tender document iii .
surface preparation e.g .
normally sweeping only but may include localised surface correction requirements iv .
record forms to include any required details of proof and origin of asphalt supply etc .
insert appropriate annexures and reference to annexures to suit in conjunction with these additional provisions .
specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num asphalt wearing course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title asphalt wearing course revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num segmental paving copyright main roads western australia specification num segmental paving num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num num replaced reference to asnum with spec num pmp num num type a replaced by type gp num deleted reference to as num clauses added the following clauses have been added num num and num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num segmental paving num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num paving units num num bedding sand num num water num num cement num num joint filling sand num num expansion joint num num num not used num construction num num preparation of subgrade num num cutting num num laying num num laying pattern num num compaction num num joint filling num num drainage num num finish num num nonconformance num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num specification num segmental paving num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num segmental paving general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and laying of segmental paving unit paving at the locations shown on the drawings .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num portland and blended cements main roads specifications specification num pavements num num not used products and materials num paving units num .
paving units and tactile indicator tiles shall be supplied to the dimensions and colours as shown on the drawings .
the paving units shall be guaranteed colour fast with little or no tendency for efflorescence .
paving units shall have bevelled or round edges on both horizontal and vertical faces .
the plan width of all bevelled and rounded surfaces shall not exceed num mm .
all technical performance characteristics eg .
compressive and transverse strengths shall be supplied with the tender .
paver requirements num .
tactile indicator tiles are to be manufactured in accordance with as num and as num num bedding sand num .
bedding sand shall be evenly graded sand free of organics and deleterious materials .
the sand shall have num passing a nummm sieve and shall have a maximum of num passing a num sieve .
stockpiled sand shall be kept at a constant moisture content in the range num num by mass .
num water num .
the water shall be clean and compatible with the component materials .
specification num segmental paving num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num cement num .
all cement for mortar shall comply with the requirements of type gp as specified in as num .
num joint filling sand num .
joint filling sand shall consist of predominately fine grained sand .
the sand shall be white or pale grey colour .
the sand shall have a minimum of num passing a nummm sieve and shall have a maximum of num passing a num sieve .
stockpiled joint filling sand shall be kept clean and dry prior to use .
num expansion joint num .
where expansion joints are required expansion joints shall consist of nummm polystyrene strips or other approved material for the full depth of the paving units .
num num not used construction num preparation of subgrade num .
where the existing subgrade subbase or basecourse has been disturbed it shall be reshaped to true and even falls to suit the design levels .
the surface shall be compacted as necessary to comply with the requirements of specification num for density and shape .
reshaping num cutting num .
the border of all paving panels which require cutting shall be set out free of wavers and the ends of the planting beds shall be scribed with a flowing symmetrical curve .
borders num .
a constant width from kerbs shall be maintained as shown on the drawings .
paving units forming curves shall be radially cut such that the units are taper cut on both sides to provide tight joints around all curves on header courses and the main body of the paving .
taper cuts num laying num .
bedding sand nummm thick shall be screeded slightly ahead of the laying of pavers and maintained in a loose condition and protected from compaction .
bedding sand num .
pavers shall be placed on the screeded bedding sand by hand .
fullsize pavers shall be laid first .
all unrestrained header edge courses shall be bedded in a num sandcement mortar .
closure units shall be cut with a saw and fitted last .
there shall be no mortar infill .
placement num laying pattern num .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings the laying pattern shall be num herringbone with a single or double header course .
herringbone specification num segmental paving num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num compaction num .
sheets of plywood of minimum thickness of nummm shall be laid on the paved surface to prevent the compactor making direct contact with the paving units .
two passes shall be made with a high frequency low amplitude plate compactor .
any paving units damaged during compaction shall be immediately replaced .
use of plywood num joint filling num .
after initial compaction joint filling sand shall be spread over the laid pavers and swept into the joints .
a further two passes shall be made with the plate compactor and the process repeated until the joints are completely full .
all surplus sand shall be removed .
num drainage num .
positive crossfalls shall be created to provide drainage .
where possible drainage water shall be directed to planting beds if any or to kerbs where there are no planting beds .
crossfalls num finish num .
all paving units shall be laid true to line and shall not deviate more than num mm under a numm straight edge .
tolerance num nonconformance num .
any sections of laid paving not meeting the requirements of this specification shall be replaced at no extra cost to the principal .
replacement num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num segmental paving num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is pavement and surfacing manager .
specification num segmental paving num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num segmental paving num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title segmental paving revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num enrichment seals copyright main roads western australia specification num enrichment seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num num out dated or documents not required removed psm num num moved to num num changed to type crsnum emulsion num deleted num updated num inserted timing of final spray annexure deleted annexure numc whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num enrichment seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num bitumen emulsion num num cover material num num water num num bulk storage sites num num emulsion disposal sites num num num not used num equipment num num bitumen sprayer num num mechanical condition num num num not used num provision for traffic num num general num num opening of road to traffic num num failure to comply num num num not used num application num num general num num surface preparation num num dilution num num application num num works records num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num schedule of works num annexure numb num specification num enrichment seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name cover material supplied by principal num annexure numc num work records num specification num enrichment seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num enrichment seals general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and spray of diluted rapid setting cationic emulsion enrichment seals to the locations and lengths shown in the locality plan and schedule of works given in annexure numa .
schedule of works num .
the works shall include but shall not be restricted to a. supply transportation and storage of bitumen emulsion b. supply and blending of dilution water c. preparation of pavement surface where required d. application of diluted emulsion to the pavement surface e. application of cover aggregate where required f. cleanup of the site .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num bituminous emulsions for the construction and maintenance of pavements as num geotechnical site investigations as num residual bitumen for pavements as num methods of testing bitumen and related road making products other standards and publications austroads specification for mechanical sprayers of bituminous materials austroads provisional sprayed seal design method revision num aptnum specification num enrichment seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name austroads bitumen sealing safety guide num main roads test methods mrwa num sprayed binder application rate carpet tile method mrwa num sampling procedures for bitumen and oils main roads specifications specification num traffic num num not used products and materials num bitumen emulsion num .
the bitumen emulsion shall be type crsnum conforming to all requirements of as num except as specified hereafter .
num .
the bitumen emulsion shall have a consistency less than num degrees engler at numc .
consistency num .
the bitumen emulsion shall have a setting time of not less than num minute and not more than num minutes .
setting time num cover material num .
cover material used for blinding the bitumen emulsion shall be clean sand or a crushed rock material .
the material shall have a nominal maximum size of not greater than nummm and be free of dust clay or organic matter .
contractor supply num .
where cover material is made available by the principal details of the materials are provided at annexure numb .
principal supply num water num .
the contractor shall ensure that the water to be used for dilution of the bitumen emulsion is compatible with the bitumen emulsion .
compatibility num bulk storage sites num .
at least num days prior to the establishment or use of any selected site for the storage of bulk bitumen emulsion the contractor shall notify the superintendent of such intention .
the contractor shall not proceed with site establishment without prior authorisation to proceed from the superintendent .
hold point num .
the contractor shall clean up and reinstate all storage sites upon vacating each site .
specification num enrichment seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num emulsion disposal sites num .
prior to their use the contractor shall nominate proposed sites to the superintendent for the discharge andor disposal of either diluted or undiluted bitumen emulsion .
hold point num .
any area so used without the superintendents authorisation shall be made good immediately and no payment will be made for the cleaning or repair works .
num num not used equipment num bitumen sprayer num .
the bitumen emulsion shall be applied using a bulk bitumen sprayer complying with the relevant sections of the specification for mechanical sprayers of bituminous materials issued by austroads .
in addition the spray bar shall be of the fully circulating type .
sprayer type num .
the sprayer shall have been tested for uniformity of transverse distribution and calibrated for overall application rates .
the tests shall have been performed within num months prior to use of the sprayer in the works up to spray rates at least num higher than specified herein .
testing num .
the certificate and charts applying to the testing of the sprayer shall be made available to the superintendent prior to use of the sprayer at the site .
hold point num .
the contractor shall have available copley ea main roads edge nozzles or approved equivalent for use in spraying inner or outer edges .
the remainder of the spray bar shall be fitted with copley annum or annum formerly snum nozzles or approved equivalents .
num mechanical condition num .
all plant and equipment used in the works shall be in a sound mechanical and roadworthy condition and free from fuel oil and coolant leaks which may damage the bitumen surface .
all equipment shall be refuelled off the sealed surface to avoid the risk of spillages .
in the event of any such leaks or spillages onto the bitumen surface the contractor shall correct the damage to the satisfaction of the superintendent at no cost to the principal .
num num not used provision for traffic num general num .
the contractor shall supply erect maintain and remove all signs and other traffic control devices and personnel necessary for the safe conduct of traffic through the worksite and for the protection of the works and workers all in accordance with specification num traffic .
traffic management specification num enrichment seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
at least two persons shall be employed on a full time basis as traffic controllers .
warning signs shall always be erected in conjunction with the use of traffic controllers .
each traffic controller shall be equipped with a portable twoway radio plus a spare and wear high visibility clothing .
traffic controllers num .
proposals to impose temporary speed restrictions must be notified to the superintendent prior to their implementation .
hold point num .
the contractor shall minimise traffic delays and ensure that all operations are carried out with minimum inconvenience to the travelling public .
num .
signs and devices shall be regularly cleaned and maintained to ensure that they are clearly visible to traffic at all times .
sign maintenance num opening of road to traffic num .
traffic shall not be allowed on the new work until the emulsion has broken and fully cured and the sprayed surface is able to withstand the action of traffic without pickingup of material .
where required or where ordered by the superintendent ponding and excess binder shall be covered in accordance with clause num .
curing of emulsion num .
the contractor shall be responsible for the cleaning of any vehicles resulting from noncompliance with this clause .
damage to vehicles num .
all spraying is to be completed no later than num pm .
this is to ensure that there is sufficient time after spraying and before sunset for the emulsion to penetrate the pavement and break before traffic is permitted on the newly sprayed works .
timing of final spray num failure to comply num .
if within a reasonable time of receiving a request from the superintendent to carry out the above requirements the contractor fails to comply with these requirements the superintendent may take whatever steps he considers necessary to properly provide for the safety andor convenience of traffic and the cleaning of any vehicles including the hiring of plant and the employment of labour and the cost of all such provision shall be charged to the contractor or shall be deducted from any payment due to the contractor .
num num not used application num general num .
the bitumen emulsion shall be applied to the existing bitumen surface prepared as required in accordance with the details provided in the schedule of works at annexure numa .
specification num enrichment seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num surface preparation num .
the contractor shall carry out preparation of the existing bitumen surface by sweeping off all loose material on the existing surface prior to spraying .
cleaning num dilution num .
the bitumen emulsion shall be diluted with water in the ratio num bitumen emulsion water .
the contractor shall supply the water for dilution .
dilution ratio num .
where dilution is carried out in a bulk tanker the tanker load shall be circulated for num minutes after dilution and immediately prior to filling the sprayer .
a further num minutes circulation shall be carried out in the sprayer immediately before spraying the emulsion .
circulation num .
where the dilution is carried out in the sprayer each sprayer load shall be circulated for num minutes after dilution and immediately before spraying the emulsion .
num application num .
application shall take place only when the pavement temperature is between numc and numc .
binder shall not be applied if there is excessive wind or if rain is imminent .
weather num .
no setting out marks will be provided but the contractor shall uniformly cover the pavement at the rates specified or ordered .
the provisional application rates are detailed in annexure numa .
any changes to these application rates will be provided by the superintendent on the day of spraying .
spray rate num .
application rates shall be within num litresm of those ordered .
any section under sprayed by more than num litresm shall be resprayed in order to achieve the specified application rate .
where the total application rate is more than num litresm greater than the ordered application rate cover material as specified in clause num will be applied if so directed by the superintendent .
spray tolerance num .
half width spraying will be required on all two lane roads .
the maximum length of an individual spray run shall be num metres .
the superintendent may direct that a lesser maximum length shall apply due to road alignment and traffic constraints .
spraying length num .
cover material as specified in clause num shall be spread over any areas of excess or ponding of binder sufficient to blind the bitumen and prevent pickup of material by traffic .
blinding num .
trial strips not exceeding num metres in length may be necessary to verify the application rates .
extra overlapping at the road centre and the closing of alternative nozzles in wheel tracks may be required .
trial strips num works records num .
the contractor shall accurately record the information required on forms similar to those shown at annexure numc .
forms specification num enrichment seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
completed forms shall be submitted to the superintendent for each days work at the end of the day .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num enrichment seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa schedule of works section length m width m area m binder application rate litresm volume of undiluted emulsion from to litres insert appropriate details of all required enrichments .
supplement with drawings diagrams etc where necessary specification num enrichment seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numb cover material supplied by principal cover material used for blinding bitumen emulsion in case of over spraying shall be made available to the contractor free of charge at the location s shown below location cover material type specification num enrichment seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numc work records num .
bituminous surfacing contractors daily record num .
bituminous surfacing contractors spraying loading record specification num enrichment seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name main roads western australia bituminous surfacing contractors record date base material pavement surface cover aggregate bitumen total qty of type type num num emulsion bitumen used contract no type type size dump source tie in points from to condition condition dusty precoated damp adhesion agent litres at numc distance side of road sprayed area road temperature binder components ordered application rates spray temperature binder quantity used cover aggregate used actual application rates of ordered application rates binder component quantities used at num c spray no .
from to right full width length width area p no.num p no.num no.num adhesion agent binder at num c aggregate p spraying p spraying sprayed hot y sprayed at numc binder hot binder at num c aggregate binder at num c aggregate component no .
num component no .
num component no .
num additive m m m m m c l m mm c l l l l m l m l m mm l l l kg num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num specification num enrichment seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name totals description of component no .
num remarks component no .
num component no .
num signature contractors representative tick appropriate box superintendent main roads western australia bituminous surfacing contractors spraying loading record date __________________ grade of bitumen __________________ road _____________________________ spray load no _______________ type of blend _____________________ spray run numbers ______________ contract no _________________ a. loading into empty sprayer b. loading into sprayer containing primer num pavement temp ______ c design blend ___ __ __ num pavement temp _______ c design blend ____ ____ _____ num application rate hot ______ lm num spray temp hot ___ c num application rate hot ________ lm num spray temp hot ____ c num volume required in sprayer ______ l _____ c num volume required in sprayer _______ l ______ c ______ l numc ________ l numc num components to be added numc num components to be added numc component num _____ l or ______ l _____ c component num _______ l or ________ l _______ c component num _____ l or ______ l _____ c component num _______ l or ________ l _______ c component num _____ l or ______ l _____ c component num _______ l or ________ l _______ c adhesion agent _____ l num primer remaining in sprayer actual components added _______ l ______ c _______ l numc a b num actual primer composition ____ ____ ____ component num ____ l ____ c component num _____ l ____ c num components remaining in sprayer component num ____ l ____ c component num _____ l ____ c component num _______ l component num _______ l component num ____ l ____ c component num _____ l ____ c component num _______ l adhesion agent ____ l adhesion agent _____ l num components to be added numc actual blend _____ ____ ____ actual blend _____ _____ _____ component num _______ l or _________ l _______ c component num _______ l or _________ l _______ c specification num enrichment seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name signatures component num adhesion agents _______ _______ l l or _________ l _______ c contractors rep description of components num ______________________________________________________________ num ______________________________________________________________ num _______________________________________________________________ superintendent specification num enrichment seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is pavements and surfacing manager .
specification num enrichment seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num enrichment seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title enrichment seals revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num microsurfacing copyright main roads western australia specification num microsurfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatting sco num various changes made throughout the document whole of document psm num num update austroads test method references to current psm num table num update austroads test method references to current psm num num rewrite shape clause psm num num new clause for sampling not previously in document psm num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num microsurfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num products and materials num num aggregate num num mineral filler num num slurry binder num num tack coat binder num num water num num additives num num num not used num mix design num num mix design num num mix design approval num num microsurfacing production num num production tolerances num num num not used num plant num num provision of plant num num paving unit calibration num num num not used num operations num num preparation of existing surface num num weather limitations num num rutfilling and correction num num spreading num num provision for traffic num num sampling num num num not used num acceptance num num conformance records num num nonconformance num num conditional acceptance num specification num microsurfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num schedule of works num specification num microsurfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num microsurfacing general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and application of microsurfacing bituminous slurry .
the works shall include surface preparation plus the design of the microsurfacing and sampling and testing in accordance with the specification .
num .
where applicable a separate schedule of works is included at annexure numa which provides details of specific microsurfacing treatments .
schedule of works num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num pendulum friction test pafv as num bitumen emulsions for construction and maintenance of pavements as num determination of the sand equivalent of a soil using a power operated shaker as num building limes as num residual bitumen for pavements as num hotmixed asphalt as num bitumen content and aggregate grading reflux method as num portland and blended cements austroads test methods agpttnum sampling of bituminous slurry agpttnum consistency of bituminous slurry agpttnum determination of set and cure for bituminous slurry cohesion test agpttnum determination of abrasion loss of bituminous slurry wet track abrasion test specification num microsurfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name main roads test methods mrwa num sampling procedures for aggregates mrwa num particle size distribution of aggregate mrwa num los angeles abrasion value mrwa num pavement skid resistance british pendulum method mrwa num texture depth mrwa num surface profile num metre straight edge mrwa num bitumen content and particle size distribution of asphalt centrifuge method main roads specifications specification num quality systems specification num traffic num definitions num .
microsurfacing is a bituminous slurry containing polymer which is capable of being spread in variably thick layers for rutfilling and correction courses and for wearing course application where good surface texture is required to be maintained throughout the service life .
the terms slurry bituminous slurry or mix shall have the same meaning except where the context of any particular passage indicates otherwise .
num num not used products and materials num aggregate num .
the aggregate shall consist of crushed rock or crushed gravel but may include portions of natural sand .
supply num .
the aggregate shall be clean hard angular durable stone free from clay and other aggregations of fine material soil organic material and other deleterious material .
num .
the aggregate shall comply with the requirements in table num aggregate properties .
physical properties specification num microsurfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num aggregate properties property limit test method los angeles abrasion value num maximum wa num sand equivalent num minimum as num pendulum friction test pafv num minimum as num num .
the contractor shall nominate the source of all aggregates together with nata endorsed test reports that provide evidence that the material satisfies requirements in table num .
sampling of aggregates for testing purposes shall be carried out in accordance with wa num .
materials source assessments shall be provided with each new mix design submitted for approval .
num .
the combined aggregate and mineral filler shall meet the particle size distribution limit requirements set out in table num psd limits for combined aggregate and mineral filler for the size of mix specified when tested in accordance with wa num .
particle size distribution table num psd limits for combined aggregate and mineral filler percent passing by mass sieve size size num size num size num size num size num nummm num num num num num nummm num num num num num nummm num num num num num nummm num num num num num nummm num num num num num nummm num num num num num nummm num num num num num nummm num num num num num nummm num num num num num nummm num num num num num specification num microsurfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num mineral filler num .
mineral filler shall consist of an approved material such as portland cement conforming to as num hydrated lime conforming to as num or fly ash with a minimum of num passing a nummm sieve .
num .
the mineral filler shall be dry free from lumps clay organic material and any other deleterious material and shall in all other respects comply with the requirements of as num .
num .
the quantity of mineral filler added to the bituminous slurry during manufacture and placement shall not vary by more than num from the mineral filler content prescribed in the mix design .
num slurry binder num .
the binder shall be an appropriate grade of polymer modified bitumen emulsion which provides a microsurfacing bituminous slurry conforming with this specification .
the contractor shall nominate the type of emulsion and supply the superintendent with sufficient information to be able to verify that the binder supplied is the same as that nominated in the mix design .
num .
bitumen used in emulsion manufacture shall comply with the requirements of as num .
num tack coat binder num .
where specified tack coat shall be a bitumen emulsion conforming to the requirements of as num .
num water num .
water added to the bituminous slurry shall be compatible with the component materials such that the performance requirements specified are met .
num additives num .
the range of additive levels to be used shall be stated in the mix design .
where the use of additives is stated in the mix design supportive test data shall be provided which shows that the wear loss and excess binder content of the mix design remains within the specification for mixes containing additives at both extremes of the design range .
num num not used mix design num mix design num .
the contractor shall develop a mix design for the microsurfacing in accordance to the requirements of the specification and submit the nominated mix design to the superintendent for approval .
supply of documents specification num microsurfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the mix design shall satisfy the properties given in table num mix properties and shall also be easy to lay and finish to provide a stable durable treatment which satisfies the skid resistance and texture depth requirements .
num .
in submitting the mix design the contractor shall state the nominal size of the design mix the aggregate source the combined aggregate mineral filler particle size distribution as a single grading not a range the bituminous emulsion content of the mix design the residual binder content of the emulsion and the intended proportion of each component material .
num mix design approval num .
the mix design approved by the superintendent shall be termed the approved mix design .
definition num .
the combined aggregate mineral filler particle size distribution single grading not a range and the binder content of the approved mix design will be termed the approved particle size distribution and the approved binder content respectively .
definition num .
the sourcing of materials for or production of the microsurfacing product shall not commence until the superintendent has approved the nominated mix design .
approval table num mix properties property test method limit abrasion loss wet track abrasion agpttnum num day numgmnum maximum set and cure time cohesion test agpttnum num minutes numkn.m minimum num minutes numkn.m minimum num microsurfacing production num .
prior to the commencement of the production of the microsurfacing product in accordance with the approved mix design the contractor shall submit test certificates and records that certify to the superintendent that hold point a. the properties of all materials comply with the specification b. the source of the aggregate shall comply with the specification specification num microsurfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num production tolerances num .
microsurfacing shall be manufactured to the approved mix design within the maximum permitted variations specified in table num maximum permitted variation from approved mix design .
tolerances table num maximum permitted variation from approved mix design maximum permitted variation from approved particle size distribution passing by mass sieve size size num size num size num size num size num nummm nil nil nil nil nil nummm nil nil nil nil num nummm nil nil nil num num nummm nil num num num num nummm num num num num num nummm num num num num num nummm num num num num num nummm num num num num num nummm num num num num num nummm num num num num num maximum permitted variation from approved binder content num and num num num not used plant num provision of plant num .
all plant and equipment used in the performance of this work shall be provided and maintained in good working condition by the contractor .
the plant and equipment to be used shall be nominated by the contractor num days before the commencement of work and shall not be changed without reference to the superintendent .
in particular the following equipment requirements shall be met specification num microsurfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name a .
paving unit i .
the slurry shall be mixed by a self propelled machine able to accurately proportion and deliver the mineral aggregate filler bitumen emulsion water and any other additives to a mixer and discharge the thoroughly mixed slurry on a continuous basis .
the machine shall have sufficient storage capacity to be capable of delivering a minimum of num tonnes of slurry before replenishment of the components .
individual calibration controls for the proportioning of each component shall be provided .
the slurry shall be spread uniformly by means of a mechanical type spreader box attached to or forming part of the mixing unit .
b. ancillary equipment i. ancillary equipment necessary for the performance of the work such as rotary road brooms rollers signs lamps barricades hand squeegees shovels and hand brooms shall be provided by the contractor and shall meet all statutory requirements .
num paving unit calibration num .
each paving unit to be used in performance of the work shall be calibrated with the component materials of the approved mix design prior to the commencement of application of the slurry .
previous calibration documentation covering the same approved mix design may be acceptable provided the calibration was carried out within the previous num months period .
the documentation shall include an individual calibration for each component material at various settings that can be related to the paving units metering devices .
calibration num .
no paving unit shall undertake work under the contract until the calibration has been completed and accepted by the superintendent .
hold point num num not used operations num preparation of existing surface num set out num .
the contractor shall place marks at intervals not exceeding num metres on the line to be followed by the paving .
if the line is defined by a kerb or edge the marking will not be necessary .
num .
edges or joints shall be parallel to kerbs and shoulders and run off of the slurry from the operation shall be prevented from occurring .
lines at intersections will be kept straight to provide a good appearance .
if necessary masking shall be used to provide straight lines .
num cleaning num .
prior to any application of slurry the pavement shall be swept to ensure that the surface is free from loose material stones dirt dust and foreign matter .
cleaning specification num microsurfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
spreading the slurry shall not commence until the pavement has been prepared in accordance with the specification and approved by the superintendent .
hold point num protection of services and road fixtures num .
the contractor shall take all necessary precautions to prevent the slurry or other material used on the work from entering or adhering to gratings hydrants valve boxes manhole covers bridge or culvert decks or other road fixtures .
after the slurry has been spread the contractor shall remove any such material entering or adhering to gratings manholes and other road fixtures .
num surface defects num .
the contractor shall repair surface defects including crack patching pothole repairs and repairs to failed pavement as detailed in annexure numa schedule of works or as directed by the superintendent prior to the spreading of slurry .
repairs num tack coat num .
a tack coat is not required unless the surface to be covered is extremely oxidised and ravelled or comprises concrete or brick .
a tack coat of bitumen emulsion shall be applied at a rate of num to num lm of residual binder at numc .
such work shall only be carried out when specified in annexure numa schedule of works .
tack coat num water fog coat num .
the surface may be prewet by fogging ahead of the spreader box .
water used for prewetting the surface shall be applied so that the entire surface is damp with no apparent flowing water ahead of the spreader box .
the application rate of the fog water shall be adjusted to suit temperature surface texture humidity and dryness of the surface being covered .
num weather limitations num .
the slurry shall not be applied if either the pavement or air temperature is below numc and falling .
however slurry may be applied when both the pavement and air temperatures are above numc and rising .
spreading shall not proceed during rain or when rain appears imminent .
weather num rutfilling and correction num .
where wheel ruts are num mm or more in depth a rut filling or correction course shall be carried out using a spreader box capable of laying slurry across the varying cross sectional depth such that it fills the rut and is stable .
rut filling specification num microsurfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num spreading num process num .
the mixing time shall be sufficient to produce a complete and uniform coating of the aggregate and the resulting mixture shall be conveyed into the moving spreader box at a rate sufficient to always maintain an ample supply across the full width of the strike off screed .
the slurry shall be at the final laying consistency when deposited in the spreading box .
minor amounts of water may be added for the purpose of overcoming temporary build up of slurry in the corners of the spreader box .
the strike off shall be adjusted to provide an application rate which will completely fill the surface voids and provide a nominal application rate of slurry as scheduled .
num surface finish num .
the surface of the slurry shall be smooth and true to the specified crown and grades .
any section of slurry that is loose or broken mixed with dirt or other impurities or is any way defective shall be removed and replaced .
num .
after trafficking for one month the slurry wearing course shall have average skid resistance and texture depths not less than those specified in table num surface finish requirements for wearing courses in the wheel paths based on the average of a minimum of num tests per lot .
surface criteria table num surface finish requirements for wearing courses property limit test method skid resistance wa num size num num minimum sizes num num num and num num minimum texture depth wa num size num not applicable sizes num and num num mm minimum size num and num num mm minimum num shape num .
when tested in accordance with wanum the maximum deviation using a num metre straight edge shall not exceed nummm for the finished surface or the final wearing course .
shape num joints num .
the longitudinal joints of the wearing course shall be placed at either the edge or the centre of a traffic lane .
if necessary the edge and joints shall be lightly screeded with a hand squeegee to achieve a smooth uniform appearance and to remove excess build up of material .
specification num microsurfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num traffic time num .
the slurry shall be capable of carrying slow moving traffic less than numkmh within one hour of application without undue damage occurring such as rutting or ravelling .
when the time before the slurry is capable of carrying moving traffic exceeds sixty minutes work shall cease unless otherwise directed by the superintendent .
traffic time num rolling num .
where rolling of the slurry is specified it shall be undertaken when the mix has cured sufficiently to prevent pickup on the roller tyres .
num provision for traffic num .
the contractor shall minimise delays and inconvenience to road users during the course of the work .
traffic shall not be allowed on the new work until the microsurfacing is stable and able to withstand traffic without damage or pick up and if applicable sufficient rolling has taken place to prevent damaging the freshly applied bituminous mat .
num .
roadworks signs shall remain in position until after the surfacing is complete and stable .
num sampling num .
samples shall be taken in accordance with the procedures set out in aagpttnum sampling of bituminous slurry .
num .
the sampling and testing frequency shall be in accordance with the requirements of specification num quality systems .
num num not used acceptance num conformance records num .
unless otherwise approved by the superintendent all tests shall be performed in laboratories registered with the national association of testing authorities nata to perform the specified tests and the results shall be presented on nata endorsed reports .
num .
the contractor shall submit test results and conformance records to the superintendent within five working days of the associated lot being laid except for texture depth conformance records .
conformance records num .
the contractor shall submit texture depth conformance records to the superintendent within five working days of testing .
testing for texture depth shall be carried out one month after the slurry is opened to traffic .
specification num microsurfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num nonconformance num .
any lot of slurry that fails to achieve conformance with any property specified or which incorporates materials that fail to achieve conformance with any property specified shall constitute a nonconformance in accordance with specification num quality systems .
non conformance num .
the lot of nonconforming slurry shall be replaced or corrected unless conditionally acceptable subject to a reduction in price as specified .
replacement num .
the cost of all replacement or correction works including any restoration work to the underlying or adjacent pavement surface or structure shall be borne by the contractor .
slurry removed from the works shall be replaced by slurry conforming to the specification .
num conditional acceptance num .
conditional acceptance is not applicable where the nonconformance applies to the following properties a. skid resistance b. texture depth c. mix properties specified in table num num .
the reduction in price shall be based on the number of defects in the lot in accordance with table num .
reduction in value lots with more than num defects shall not be accepted .
lots with less than num defects shall be accepted with no reduction in price .
conditional acceptance penalties table num reduction in value number of defects in a lot num num num num num reduction in price num num num num replace or correct num .
the number of defects in a lot shall be calculated from the number of variations of test results from the specified properties in accordance with table num number of defects of all samples taken and tested to represent the lot except where the contract or the contractors approved quality procedures specifies more than one sample be taken to determine a particular property .
where this is the case the number of defects for that property shall be based on the variation of the mean of the test results from the specification .
specification num microsurfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num number of defects property measurement variation increment number of variations from specification number of defects slurry binder properties num measurement num measurements num num num not acceptable aggregate properties excluding particle size distribution num measurement num measurements num num num not acceptable slurry particle size distribution passing num to num mm sieves per sieve size passing .num mm sieve num num note num or num increments num increments num num or num increments num increments num increments num num not acceptable num num not acceptable slurry binder content num num increment num increments num increments note num num not acceptable surface shape nummm num increments num increments num not acceptable skid resistance num skid resistance value srv unit num increment num increments num increments num num not acceptable texture depth nummm num increment num increments num increments num num not acceptable note variation of the test results from the approved mix design particle size distribution mid point and binder content mid point after allowance for the permitted variations in clause num table num .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num microsurfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa schedule of works works item section nos from  slk to  slk length km width m side  lcr area m comments road name num num num num etc .
road name num num num num etc .
road name num num num num etc .
note num slk denotes straight line kilometre distance values for from and to .
alternatively section limits may be described using chainages .
note num l c r denotes left centre or right .
leave side column blank if width value in previous column is entire seal width .
specification num microsurfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is pavements and surfacing manager .
num .
specification framework this specification is based on the model specification published by austroads num .
this publication is accompanied by a guidelines document which should be referred to assist in mix selection and practice .
num .
standard method of measurement smm measurement and payment is based on the volume in mnum of dry mineral aggregate used in completing the works .
estimates of the quantities required for use in a schedule of rates may be based on an assumed thickness of slurry over the nominated area .
this will depend on the nature of the works but for typical resurfacing works will be of the order of num times the nominal mix size .
specification num microsurfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num microsurfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title microsurfacing revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num cold planing copyright main roads western australia specification num cold planing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatting sco num fig num figure num updated to show correct depth of cut psm num num test method wa num added psm num num new clause on plant requirements num new clause on cold planning operation num requirements for surface finish added num added stimsonite marker psm num num adjusted type of bituthene num num amended aggregate size from nummm to nummm whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num cold planing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num raised pavement markers num num bituminous repair materials num num num not used num cold planing operations num num general num num plant and equipment num num cold planing operation num num surface finish num num surface features num num raised pavement markers num num rain num num disposal of planed material num num surface repairs num num temporary ramps num num daily works records num num conformance num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num schedule of works num specification num cold planing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num cold planing general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the removal of bituminous surfacing typically asphalt by cold planing .
details of the work are as shown on the drawings .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below main roads test methods wa num texture depth main roads specifications specification num bituminous surfacing specification num asphalt wearing course specification num pavement marking num num not used products and materials num raised pavement markers num .
the temporary raised pavement markers shall be either swarovski mini star art .num or road marking supplies standup temporary raised pavement marker stimsonite temporary chipseal or their equivalent in accordance with specification num pavement marking .
num bituminous repair materials num .
where required under the provisions of clause num bituminous and associated materials used in repair work shall comply with specification num bituminous surfacing and specification num asphalt wearing course .
specification num cold planing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used cold planing operations num general num .
cold planing shall be to the dimensions as specified in accordance with the details included at annexure numa the drawings or as otherwise may be directed or varied by the superintendent .
num .
the longitudinal grade shall follow the general grade of existing kerbs or gutters andor other specified controlling factors at the location .
profile control shall preferably be performed automatically .
num .
transverse levels will generally be established by the specification of depth of cut carried out whilst advancing at the prevailing longitudinal grade .
the depth of cut and transverse crossfall shall be adjusted as required during planing .
num .
each days planing shall be completed transversely across the full pavement width .
each days section of work shall be completed prior to commencement of work in another section .
num .
profiling machines shall not be turned on the existing road surface if this process encroaches onto lanes carrying traffic .
num plant and equipment num profiling machine num .
the work shall be carried out by a pavement profiling machine which has been specifically designed for such work .
the profilers shall be equipped with automatic profile control including the ability to vary the depth of cut and transverse crossfall during cold planing operations .
water shall be sprayed during the profiling operation to reduce dust .
profiling machine num .
the profilers shall be fitted with a milling drum for the type of work specified in table num .
the drum shall be maintained in good working condition to produce a consistent surface finish .
maintenance should occur after each work shift .
drum specification num cold planing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num type of drum type of drum tool spacing on drum type of work fine maximum num mm type num where a sami or grs seal is to be applied to the cold planed surface bridge deck resurfacing fine maximum num mm type num milling to retexture a road surface removal of surface defects such as shoving standard num mm type num asphalt without an underlying seal other applications not requiring a fine drum num road broom num .
mechanical andor suction road brooms used for sweeping operations shall be fitted with an operational and efficient method of dust suppression by the use of water .
such dust suppression must be used at all times during sweeping operations carried out by road brooms .
num cold planing operation num .
the profiling machine shall be operated at a controlled forward speed appropriate for the works .
num .
the use of water during profiling and brooming of the surface shall be limited to the suppression of dust .
where a profiling machine or broom is moving slowly such as the start and end of runs excess water shall not be applied to the surface .
wet surface num surface finish num .
the planed surface shall be uniform in texture appearance and general finish including perimeter areas .
for type num works the surface texture determined in accordance with wa num after sweeping shall meet the requirements of table num .
in addition for type num works the depth of grooves at any point on the planed surface after sweeping shall be no more than nummm as defined in figure num .
the requirements for type num works are only applicable to cold planning of asphalt .
where the surface finish is non conforming the cold planning process shall be reviewed by the contractor including adjustment of equipment before further work continues .
specification num cold planing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num surface texture type num works location within cold planed surface texture depth sand patch diameter where numcc of sand is used average num mm num mm any location num mm num mm figure num groove depth type num works num .
the contractor shall ensure that the perimeters of the planed areas are suitable for asphalt resurfacing .
generally the final cut edge of the existing pavement surface shall be straight and free of all loose material .
num .
stopping and starting of the cold planning machine shall not damage the surface .
num .
irregularities not securely bonded to the underlying layer remaining after cold planing shall be removed by mechanical means or by handwork .
the planed surface shall be swept free of all dust loose material and foreign matter whether or not resulting from planing operations .
num .
the average depth of cut shall be within nummm of the depth specified .
depth tolerance num .
where the depth of cut penetrates consecutive asphalt layers the final cut edge of each layer shall be stepped back to allow for a construction overlap of num mm on wearing courses .
where the depth of cut is deeper the final cut edge of each layer shall be stepped back to allow for a construction overlap of num mm .
num surface features num bridge decks approach slabs num .
profiling of asphalt surfacing on bridge decks and approach slabs shall be carried out with extreme caution .
damage to the underlying waterproof membrane or to the concrete deck itself shall be repaired in accordance with clause num .
specification num cold planing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
where applicable special requirements regarding the profiling of bridge decks and approach slabs are given in annexure numa .
such provisions may include a reduced depth of profiling .
num .
prior to the commencement of profiling on bridge decks or approach slabs the contractor shall confirm the depth of profiling with the superintendent and shall seek confirmation of any other special precautions to be taken .
hold point num bridge expansion joints num .
the pavement profiler shall not profile closer than nummm to the nearest edge of any bridge expansion joints .
removal of the nummm section immediately adjacent to the expansion joint shall be by handwork .
num .
bridge expansion joints shall be covered or protected such that planed material does not enter the expansion joints .
num gullies and manholes num .
the depth of cut adjacent to and around road furniture items such as gully pits and manhole covers and similar shall be as detailed in annexure numa or as otherwise specified by the superintendent .
some of this work may require to be carried out as handwork .
num .
gully grates shall be covered or protected such that planed material does not enter the gully pits .
num kerbing num .
planing shall be to the edge of the concrete kerbing or edge of the trafficked lanes if no kerbing exists .
num raised pavement markers num .
the contractor shall be responsible for the removal and disposal of raised pavement markers both permanent and temporary prior to surface treatment .
the pavement markers shall only be removed at the commencement of works for each day and shall be removed only from the section to be cold planed that day .
num .
the contractor shall also be responsible for the supply and installation of temporary raised pavement markers on all areas cold planed prior to the area being opened to traffic .
the temporary raised pavement markers shall be a. singlesided white b. placed on all lane and edge lines at numm intervals num rain num .
the superintendent may direct that work not be commenced on a section if significant rain is forecast to fall prior to applying the next surface treatment .
specification num cold planing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num disposal of planed material num .
all planed material removed from the existing road surface shall be disposed of to the contractors spoil sites .
num surface repairs num general num .
the contractor shall be responsible for repairing and sealing the surface of any road pavement or bridge deck exposed by planing operations .
damaged areas shall be corrected prior to bituminous surfacing andor asphalt surfacing or opening to traffic .
num .
damage caused by disregard or ignorance of the specified planing depth or width or to any other specified requirements or to any directions given by the superintendent shall be repaired at no cost to the principal .
damage by contractor num bridge decks approach slabs num .
waterproof membrane where damage to the bridge deck or approach slab is confined to the waterproof membrane immediately above the concrete surface the membrane shall be replaced .
repairs shall generally comprise waterproof membrane a. removal of all loose material b. application of a suitable bituminous tack coat over the damaged area c. laying of a suitable waterproof membrane such as bituthene num or an equivalent product approved by the superintendent .
if the damage is extensive in area alternative waterproofing methods such as the application of a rubberised seal in accordance with specification num bituminous surfacing may be appropriate .
num .
concrete decking if damage to the bridge deck or approach slab extends into the concrete surface the concrete damage shall be repaired prior to any other repairs being attempted .
repairs to concrete decking shall generally comprise concrete decking a. removal of debris and loose material b. dampen the exposed repair area and fill with an approved concrete mix and thoroughly compact using a hand tamper .
the surface level of the repair shall be within nummm of the surrounding cold planed surface c. callow the concrete to cure and achieve sufficient strength before proceeding with repair of the waterproof membrane .
num .
prior to commencing any repairs to the concrete bridge decking or approach slabs the contractor shall immediately notify the superintendent if damage has occurred to the steel reinforcement of the bridge deck or approach slab and shall provide details of the method of disposition to the superintendent .
hold point specification num cold planing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num pavement damage depth less than nummm num .
any area of road pavement exposed by cold planing operations shall be sealed and if necessary corrected prior to subsequent work or opening to traffic .
num .
pavement surface damage up to a depth of nummm shall be repaired as follows a. remove all loose material by hand or mechanical brooming b. spray cationic rapid setting emulsion evenly at a rate of approximately num to num litres per square metre c. apply cover aggregate nominal nummm size evenly over the sprayed area d. following the break of the emulsion sweep and remove any excess cover aggregate .
num pavement damage depth exceeding nummm num .
pavement surface damaged to a depth of nummm or greater shall be repaired as follows a. remove all loose material by hand or mechanical brooming to ensure a solid base and sides b. lightly tack coat the base and sides of the hole with bitumen emulsion c. fill the repair area with approved asphalt and thoroughly compact using a hand tamper or vibrating plant compactor .
the surface level of the repair shall be within nummm of the surrounding cold planed surface d. where necessary blind with nominal nummm aggregate to avoid pick up by traffic .
num temporary ramps num .
temporary ramps shall be constructed in trafficked lanes at all gullies manholes valves bridge expansion joints and transverse differences in level prior to the section being opened to traffic .
ramps will not be required when these features are within a designated shoulder or breakdown area .
num .
the temporary ramps shall be constructed using approved asphalt or coldmix at a slope of num from the edge of the structure to the planed surface and adequately compacted .
num daily works records num .
the contractor shall supply daily dockets for all planing work showing the following details a .
contract no .
b .
job location c. date of work specification num cold planing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name d. area planed num conformance num .
the contractor shall rectify all nonconforming work by appropriate methods acceptable to the superintendent at no cost to the principal .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num cold planing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa schedule of works road type of works section lanes description nominal depth of planing mm comments special precautions etc .
road pavement adjacent to road furniture bridge .
deck appr .
slabs specification num cold planing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is pavements and surfacing manager .
num .
scope clause num substitute the following for the last sentence if required details of the work are provided in annexure numa .
if the contract is a minor works contract see item num below the works details are usually provided in a schedule of works annexure numa .
if the work is part of a major works contract the works details may be more conveniently shown on the drawings or annexure numa but should not be shown on both .
num .
minor works contracts num if the contract works are standalone minor works i.e .
not part of a major works contract add the following clauses in the general section remove border num general requirements num .
all general requirements concerning setting out protection of services entry to land accommodation etc shall be in accordance with specification num general requirements .
num traffic control num .
traffic control for the work shall be in accordance with specification num traffic .
num also add the following documents to the cross reference list remove border specification num general requirements specification num traffic specification num cold planing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num ensure that the tender documentation includes suitably edited versions of specification num and specification num .
num .
daily works records clause num num the completion of daily works records may be more suited to a minor works contract .
if not required for major works contracts delete text and mark clause as not used .
num .
annexure numa schedule of works num deiete if not required that is where works details are shown on drawings .
num note any special requirements where profiling on bridge decks and approach slabs eg reduced depth or width of profiling .
num in minor works the comments column can be used to indicate any provisions required with respect to programming or planning the works .
note particular special requirements can always be emphasised by inclusion in the section contract specific requirements .
specification num cold planing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num .
for minor works contracts refer item num in the guidance notes .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num cold planing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title cold planing revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
clause deletes shows as not used .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
project managers review completed .
specification guidance notes deleted .
table of contents updated .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing copyright main roads western australia specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date num deleted exclusion of rubber binder bpc numa added primed basecourse seal and asphalt numd added new treatment enhanced aggregate retention seal num deleted aptnum wa num agpttnum various wa test methods num added apgnum aptnum agpttnum agpttnum main roads num num amended where relevant to be consistent with as num definitions .
added enhanced aggregate retention seal .
new definition for high stress seal num moved from num to num num deleted clause on precoating num extra text on submission of ald results num moved to num num next wording consistent with specification num num num added bridge deck ernnum and guideline on bridge deck sealing num deleted as num as incorrect table num sam hss and sami design information deleted as now in ernnum .
included rates for bridge decks .
num amended to be consistent with specification num num clause deleted on mercury thermometer table num precoating rates same as specification num num hold point removed and clause reworded num management plan required for stockpile sites num hold point includes management plan num precoating moved to num num moved to num num moved to num num new clause consistent with specification num num updated references num new text on calibration requirements table num new table on nozzle set up table num new table on nozzles to be used num num num num num amended wording num old clause on sealed shoulders deleted num new requirements for rollers num extra text on aim of using drag broom specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num new text on primed basecourse requirements num hold point reworded num requirement for repairing holes num now includes concrete surfaces num new clause num new clause on precoating including heated aggregate num requires signs to be weighted down num new words relocated from num num new wording plus table num on spray temperatures num .num new clause on spraying viscosity num new requirement on weather num new or amended text numa text deleted and moved to numc numb hold point deleted num new clause on double seals consistent with specification num num adopted coverages in accordance with specification num .
table num now nominates roller size num stones to be sept clear of guide posts num moved to num num new clause on testing num new clause on records table numcnum new to align with specification num table numcnum reorganised layout and seal types numc.num line spotting same as specification num guidance note num references added guidance note num included nummm and nummm aggregate guidance note num new on aggregate sizes guidance note num new on responsibility for seal design guidance note num notes on selection of roller sizes whole document reformatted sco num specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num products and materials num num polymer modified binder num num bitumen emulsion num num protective paper num num not used num num medium curing cutting oil num num slow curing cutting oil num num precoating agent num num adhesion agent num num num not used num num aggregates num num num not used num design of sprayed seals num num general num num design methods num num design by principal num num design by contractor num transport and handling of binder num num transport and sampling num num not used num preparatory operations num num binder storage and disposal facilities num num aggregate dump sites num application of seal num num general num num num not used num num plant and equipment num num num not used num num surface preparation num num aggregate preparation num specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num not used num num provision for traffic num num not used num num preparation of polymer modified binder num num application of binder num num application of cover material num num num not used num num nonconforming test results num num nonconformance in binder application num num crushed aggregate num num testing frequency num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num works records num num num not used num annexure numa num schedule of works num annexure numb num cover materials principal supply num annexure numc num numc.num responsibility for seal design num specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and application of the following types of sprayed polymer modified bituminous treatments types of treatment a .
strain alleviating membrane sam b .
strain alleviating membrane interlayer sami c. high stress seal hss d. waterproof bridge deck membranes including prime num .
the sprayed polymer modified bituminous treatment must provide a durable surface that intent a. bonds to the underlying surface whether a primed basecourse or concrete surface a seal or asphalt b. provides a safe wearing surface for traffic and c. waterproofs the pavement or bridge deck .
num .
where applicable a separate schedule of works is included at annexure numa which provides details of specific surfacing treatments .
schedule of works num references num .
australian standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num methods for sampling and testing aggregates average least dimension direct measurement nominal size num mm and greater as num road tank vehicles for dangerous goods part num tankers for bitumenbased products other standards and publications apgnum austroads bitumen sealing safety guide aptnum performance requirements for bitumen sprayers agpttnum method of sampling polymer modified binders polymers and crumb rubber specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name agpttnum calibration of bitumen sprayers general introduction and list of methods agpttnum volumetric calibration of bitumen pumps agpttnum transverse distribution by fixed pit facility agpttnum transverse distribution by field mat agpttnum transverse distribution by portable trough agpttnum road speed calibration engineering road note no num design of sprayed seals main roads num guidelines for the application of waterproof membranes to bridge decks wa government dangerous goods safety road and rail transport of nonexplosives regulations num main roads test methods wa num sampling procedures for aggregates wa num particle size distribution of aggregate wa num average least dimension wa num pavement skid resistance british pendulum method wa num texture depth wa num ball embedment wa num sprayed binder application rate carpet tile method main roads specifications specification num quality systems specification num traffic specification num occupational safety and health specification num clearing specification num earthworks specification num bituminous surfacing specification num materials for bituminous treatments num definitions num .
the term polymer modified binder is a binder consisting of polymeric materials dispersed in bitumen with enhanced binder performance for particular applications .
pmb num .
the terms polymer modified binder and polymer modified bitumen and binder have the same meaning except where the context of any particular passage indicates otherwise .
terms specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the term batch shall mean any quantity of material all of which has been produced at the same time by the same process and which is subject only to random variation and can therefore be accepted as being of homogeneous quality .
batch num .
the terms seal sprayed seal and reseal have the same meaning except where the context of any particular passage indicates otherwise .
sealreseal num .
a high stress seal hss is a bituminous seal or reseal treatment that is subject to heavier than normal traffic loading due to braking accelerating and turning vehicles .
hss can also include a seal applied at a low binder application rate requiring an snumr binder to achieve improved aggregate adhesion .
high stress seal num num not used products and materials num polymer modified binder num .
the polymer modified binder shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
num .
prior to the use of polymer modified binder the contractor shall demonstrate compliance with the properties of the polymer modified binder for each batch used on the contract .
hold point num bitumen emulsion num .
the bitumen emulsion shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
num protective paper num .
protective paper shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
num not used num medium curing cutting oil num .
the cutting oil shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
num slow curing cutting oil num .
the cutting oil shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num precoating agent num .
aggregate shall be precoated with a bitumen based precoating fluid meeting the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
where the weather is hot and the aggregate is clean and dry the superintendent may approve the use of a distillate precoating fluid .
num adhesion agent num .
the adhesion agent shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
approved adhesion agents num num not used num aggregates num .
crushed aggregate including its source rock shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
num .
where principal supplied aggregate cover material is made available to the contractor the contractor shall use all such aggregate cover material before using contractor supplied aggregate cover material .
details of principal supplied aggregate are given in annexure numb .
principal supplied aggregate num .
the source of aggregate supplied by the contractor shall be nominated with the tender .
num .
the contractor shall make all necessary arrangements with the nominated supplier concerning load size rate for supply timing of the delivery payment and documentation .
num .
prior to the onsite delivery of crushed aggregate the contractor shall provide test results to the superintendent showing that the aggregate conforms to specified requirements .
results for the average least dimension ald of each stockpile shall be provided before the aggregate is applied .
the superintendent is to be advised of a change in stockpile source and the ald of that aggregate before it is applied .
hold point num .
the contractor shall organise all cover material supplied under this contract into clearly identifiable stockpiles either at source or on site in order that they may be tested as required by the quality plan .
stockpiles num .
the maximum size of a lot shall be no more than one days production or no more than approximately nummnum whichever is the lesser .
lot size num .
any contamination of aggregate after acceptance by the superintendent shall be corrected at no cost to the principal .
contamination num num not used specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name design of sprayed seals num general num .
unless otherwise specified in table numcnum the sprayed seal shall be designed by the principal .
where table numcnum specifies design by the contractor then the contractor shall be responsible for and shall carry out the design for binder application rate and aggregate spread rate for each type of treatment specified except for a bridge deck waterproof membrane .
design responsibility num design methods design method num .
the design of sprayed seals shall include selection of binder class and design of binder and aggregate application rates unless otherwise specified .
num .
selection of binder class except for a bridge deck waterproof membrane shall be in accordance with engineering road note no .
num .
selection of binder class for a bridge deck waterproof membrane shall be in accordance with main roads guidelines for the application of waterproof membranes to bridge decks document num .
binder class num .
design of binder application rates and aggregate spread rates except for a bridge deck waterproof membrane shall be in accordance with engineering road note no .
num .
rates for a bridge deck waterproof membrane are shown in table num .
application rates num .
testing for average least dimension ald shall be carried out in accordance with as num or wa num .
sampling for testing of ald shall be in accordance with wa num .
test methods num .
testing for surface texture shall be in accordance with wa num .
testing for ball embedment the test shall be in accordance with wa num .
table num application rates for bridge deck waterproof membrane binder class binder application rate at numc aggregate size and application rate snumr num lmnum nummm at num mnummnum snume num lmnum nummm at num mnummnum num design by principal num .
where binder application rates and other aspects of the sprayed seal have been provided by the principal the superintendent will as necessary issue to the contractor any variations to such design .
num .
such amended details may include but not necessarily be limited to design variables a .
average least dimension ald of the aggregate b .
aggregate precoating rate specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name c. binder application rate bar d. binder type and composition e. aggregate spread rate f. rolling and sweeping requirements num design by contractor num general num .
where the contractor is responsible for the design of the sprayed seal the design shall be in accordance with the procedures described in num .
design practices num preliminary design num .
the contractor shall carry out a preliminary design based on the following as applicable a .
the type of treatment and nominal aggregate size specified by the principal .
b .
measurement of the average least dimension of the aggregate proposed for use or if not available an estimate based on past test results from the same aggregate source or an estimate based on typical results for aggregate of the size proposed for use .
c. measurement of the surface texture andor ball embedment of the surface upon which the treatment is to be applied .
d. traffic volume and composition data provided by the principal on request .
e. a visual assessment of the condition of the surface on which the seal is to be applied and the defects present .
f. historic data provided by the principal on request on similar treatments in similar circumstances where available .
g. climatic data relevant to the site .
num final design num .
the contractor shall carry out a final design based on the measurement of the average least dimension of the aggregate supplied under this contract and for other factors listed in num .
num .
prior to the application of any sprayed seal the contractor shall provide the superintendent with evidence of the application of appropriate design methods as outlined in num .
hold point num .
during application of a seal the contractor may vary the design to allow for changes to any of the design factors site conditions or observed performance .
details of the design variations shall be documented and submitted to the superintendent within num days of implementation of the variations .
specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name transport and handling of binder num transport and sampling num general num .
the handling transport and heating of polymer modified binder shall comply with the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
num .
the contractor shall make all necessary arrangements with its supplier concerning load sizes rates of supply loading temperatures payment of opening fees where applicable and all documentation .
num .
in order to avoid the danger of mixing incompatible bituminous products in any cartage vehicles provided by the contractor for the purpose of transporting polymer modified binder the contractor shall ensure that the binder suppliers loading procedures are understood and the binder loading docket is fully completed by the contractors driver prior to loading including the signing of any certification concerning the nature of the previous load carried by the cartage vehicle .
dangerous mixes num sampling of binder at delivery num .
prior to application or blending with any cutters or adhesion agent the contractor shall sample a minimum of one num load in every five num or part thereof .
two samples shall be taken from each load to be sampled immediately following one another in accordance with austroads agpttnum such that each is similar and represents the polymer modified binder in the load .
num .
each of the sample containers in which the samples are taken from a load shall be labelled to identify the supplier the suppliers batch number the date of sampling the road and the slks of the section on which the polymer modified binder is applied so that traceability between samples and corresponding road sections is maintained .
num .
the contractor shall provide the superintendent with one of each set of samples at no cost to the principal .
num .
in addition to samples provided to the superintendent by the contractor the superintendent may take audit samples at any stage during production storage delivery or application process .
num .
the frequency and timing of sampling will be at the superintendents discretion .
the contractor shall provide the superintendent with ready access for sampling at all times within the hours of work of the contractor or its subcontractors .
specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the cost of material taken cleaning of the sampling facility and any delays to road tankers or site operations as a result of the sampling shall be considered to have been included in the schedule of rates item for binder application .
sampling may be carried out by the contractor on behalf of the superintendent but a representative of the superintendent shall be present at the time of the sampling .
num not used preparatory operations num binder storage and disposal facilities num binder storage sites num .
the contractor shall select suitable sites for bulk storage of binder and notify the superintendent in writing at least five num days prior to establishing the sites .
hold point num .
the contractor shall ensure that site layout and safe handling procedures conform to requirements detailed in austroads bitumen sealing safety guide apgnum .
num .
the contractor shall provide and maintain adequate equipment to receive store heat circulate handle and protect bulk binder from the time of receipt to prevent misuse damage deterioration or loss .
equipment num .
binder heating and storage tanks shall be fitted with dipsticks for volume measurement and suitable thermometers for temperature reading of the bitumen .
num .
suitable equipment shall be supplied by the contractor to facilitate removal of liquid used to flush pumps and lines to approved disposal sites .
num .
storage tanks for slow curing cutting oil and medium curing cutting oil shall be fitted with dipsticks or flow meters for volume measurement and suitable thermometers for monitoring temperature control .
num .
the accuracy of volume and temperature measurement facilities shall be sufficient to ensure that the binder constituents adhesion agent excepted and proportions expressed as percentages are those ordered num .
required accuracy num disposal sites num .
the contractor shall dispose of bituminous products or other disposable items such as protective paper at an authorised waste disposal site .
num .
any area so used without the approval of the superintendent shall be made good immediately at no cost to the principal .
specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num aggregate dump sites num general num .
the aggregate stockpile sites shall be constructed and maintained in a tidy condition and the contractors operations shall not contaminate aggregate in the stockpiles .
surplus aggregate shall be removed from temporary stockpiles and the aggregate stockpile sites shall be fully cleaned and rehabilitated .
the contractor shall prepare a management plan for the stockpile sites detailing how contamination from precoating work is to be managed and cleaned after completion of work .
num .
where aggregate is supplied in stockpiles by the principal the locations of the stockpile sites are as detailed in annexure numb .
where aggregate is supplied by the contractor temporary stockpile sites shall be prepared and maintained in good condition by the contractor .
num .
prior to the stockpiling of aggregate the contractor shall nominate to the superintendent the proposed location of the stockpile sites and provide a management plan for the sites .
hold point num site preparation num .
the contractor shall prepare aggregate stockpile sites such that they incorporate a firm smooth level welldrained surface .
stockpile areas shall be of sufficient size to allow a numm clear margin around each stockpile .
site requirements num .
clearing of sites shall be in accordance with specification num clearing and compaction shall be in accordance with embankment foundation compaction principals method specification as detailed in specification num earthworks .
clearing and compaction application of seal num general num .
the application of a seal shall include preparation of the surface and the supply and application of various treatments over the widths lengths and areas either as shown in the drawings andor as specified in annexure numa and numc .
num num not used num plant and equipment num road tanker num .
road tankers shall comply with as num and the australian dangerous goods code .
road tankers shall have lagging and shall have calibrated thermometers located at the top middle and bottom thirds of the product tank .
the tanker shall be provided with heating tubes and pipework to allow circulation of the binder during heating .
road tankers shall have a permanent sampling cock that is safe and easy to use to obtain samples of the polymer modified binder .
specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num mechanical sprayer num .
binder shall be applied using a bitumen sprayer with a minimum capacity of num num litres complying with as num and the australian dangerous goods code .
the sprayer shall comply with the requirements of austroads document aptnum .
in addition to the above requirements the sprayer dipstick shall be calibrated in num litre increments and unless the sprayer is of the air pressure type the spray bar shall be fully circulating .
num .
the sprayer shall have been calibrated at a facility accredited by nata for the calibration of bitumen sprayers to the austroads test methods agptt num tnum tnum or tnum or tnum and tnum .
the tests shall have been performed within the past twelve num months and the sprayer shall have passed the pump output and transverse distribution tests for the maximum allowable width of the bar .
a sprayer shall have been tested to method agptt num for each type of nozzle to be used by the sprayer .
the sprayer shall be tested at the nozzle output and width of the bar up to the maximum as shown in table num .
a nata endorsed calibration certificate shall be issued for the sprayer which clearly indicates the austroads methods used in the calibration and the passfail status of the sprayer to each of the austroads calibration test methods .
sprayer calibration table num nozzle setup austroads nozzle type previous nozzle naming output of nozzle lmin .
maximum width of spraybar m an num anum num na an num bnum num num an num bnum num num num .
prior to the use of the sprayer on the works the contractor shall make available to the superintendent the calibration certificate for the sprayer .
the superintendent may require the sprayer to be made available at the main roads calibration facility at welshpool perth for inspection and testing prior to or during execution of the work .
hold point num .
the superintendent may request prior to the commencement of works or at any time during the works that the sprayer be tested for uniformity of spray bar output particularly transverse application in accordance with wa num .
the test will be conducted for the maximum spray bar width to be used under this contract .
the requirements for the spraybar output and distribution are shown below a .
the mean binder application rate of the width tested shall not exceed num of the binder application rate at numc specified for the works b .
every tile used in the test which was fully coated shall have a binder application rate within num of the mean binder application rate for the width tested specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name c. not more than two consecutive tiles that have been fully coated shall have a binder application rate exceeding num of the mean binder application rate for the width tested .
num .
if the sprayer does not conform to the requirements shown above it shall not be used on the works .
subsequent tests to confirm conformity will be at the contractors cost .
any delays to site operations because of conducting these tests are not claimable as separate costs .
sprayer conformity num .
the contractor shall use copley eannum w end nozzles for use in spraying edges with all binders .
copley intermediate nozzles shall be fitted to the remainder of the spray bar as shown in table num .
nozzles shall not be used for more than two years of service and shall be used within num years of the date stamp on a nozzle .
spray nozzles table num nozzle types binder class snume snume snume snumr single coat seal including those with a scatter coat an num or an num an num or an num an num an num bridge deck waterproof membrane an num an num or an num single coat seal with bar num lmnum snumr only an num or an num double double seal an num or an num an num or an num an num num .
the sprayer shall be capable of passing over protective paper doing a running start without damaging or moving the paper .
where curtains are fitted to the spraybar they shall be fitted with sufficient height off the ground such that buildup of binder does not interfere with the paper .
num rollers num .
the size of multityred rollers to be used is specified in table num and where not specified then the requirements of this clause are the minimum requirements .
where an numt roller is specified then a minimum of two numt rollers shall be used .
where an numt roller is specified it shall be used along with a combination roller with a vibrating rubber coated drum or a vibrating multi tyred roller .
the wheels shall have smooth pneumatic tyres inflated to pressures of at least numkpa .
rubber tyred rollers num road broom num .
the units shall be a mechanically or power driven roller broom capable of removing excess cover material andor other loose material from the pavement surface without damage to the existing primerseal or seal surface .
specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the broom or its prime mover shall be equipped with an amber flashing lamp visible from all directions in accordance with specification num occupational safety and health .
flashing lamp num drag broom num .
the units shall consist of fixed brushes fitted to a frame and shall be capable of distributing loose cover material laterally and longitudinally to fill empty void spaces .
the drag broom shall not dislodge particles embedded in the binder or damage the surface in any way .
brooms shall be angled height adjustable and suspended under rubber tyred rollers .
num precoater num .
the precoater shall be capable of applying a uniform film of precoating agent to cover all of the surface area of the aggregate particles at a controlled and variable rate .
the precoater shall have sufficient output capacity to maintain an adequate supply to the spraying operations .
num .
the precoater shall also be capable of screening dirtforeign matter both oversize and undersize materials from the aggregate during its operation .
screening num .
prior to the use of the precoater on the works the contractor shall notify the superintendent of such intention .
hold point num surface damage num .
in the event of any fuel or oil leaks or spillages onto the newly sealed surface the contractor shall reinstate the surface to its predamage condition at no cost to the principal .
care of works num num not used num surface preparation num existing bituminous surface num .
where the pavement to be sealed is a seal microsurfacing asphalt or a primed basecourse the surface shall be swept clean of all loose sand stones dust and other foreign matter before the new surfacing is applied .
adherent patches of foreign matter shall be removed by using hand brooming and steel scrapers or similar methods .
for a primed basecourse the surface shall be dark in colour uniformity with primer on the entire surface area .
where the colour of the basecourse is showing on more than num of the surface area the modified binder shall not be applied .
num .
loose material shall be swept a sufficient distance off the pavement to permit execution of the bituminous surfacing .
num .
on a primed basecourse the contractor shall set out and mark the edge of the binder at a position to achieve the specified tolerances and to suit the method of work employed .
the interval of spotting of any line is given in annexure numc .
the contractor shall provide such additional markers as are necessary to achieve the specified tolerances .
line spotting specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
prior to the application of bituminous binder the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that any required sweeping andor necessary repairs to the existing surface have been carried out and that the surface is suitable to receive the sprayed seal .
hold point num .
where encountered the contractor shall remove and dispose off site existing raised pavement markers both permanent and temporary prior to spraying .
the pavement markers shall only be removed at the commencement of works for the day and shall be removed only from the section to be resealed on that day .
any depression left by the removal of a raised pavement marker shall be repaired with coldmix to a level flush with the existing seal .
raised pavement markers num bridge decks or other concrete surfaces num .
bridge deck or concrete surfaces shall be swept clean of all loose sand stones dust and other foreign matter before sealing .
adherent patches of foreign matter shall be removed by hand brooming or by using steel scrapers or similar methods .
num .
the surface shall be primed with a cationic slow setting emulsion grade cssnum or crsnum diluted with water in the ratio of one num part emulsion to one num part water .
the emulsion shall be compatible with the water used for dilution .
the rate of application of the dilute bitumen emulsion primer shall be numlm .
no polymer modified binder shall be applied on the prime until the emulsion has broken and all water has evaporated .
emulsion grade num .
all traffic shall be kept off the bridge deck or concrete structure until application of the binder is complete and conforms to the specification .
num cold planed surface num .
where the pavement surface to be sealed has been produced by cold planning the surface shall be swept clean of all loose sand stones dust and other foreign matter before surfacing .
adherent patches of foreign matter shall be removed by using hand brooming and steel scrapers or similar methods num .
loose material shall be swept a sufficient distance off the pavement to permit execution of the bitumen surfacing .
num .
at the completion of the cold planning surface being swept and prior to the application of the bituminous binder the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the cold planed surface complies with the surface finish requirements as described in specification num cold planing and that the surface is suitable to receive the bituminous binder .
the contractor shall request the release of this hold point in writing after the sweeping of the cold planed surface is completed and at least one num hour prior to the application of the bituminous binder .
hold point specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num aggregate preparation num precoating num .
all aggregate precoated with a bitumen based precoating agent shall be precoated a minimum of four num days but not more than twenty eight num days prior to its intended use .
aggregate must not be left uncovered for more than num days .
where approved aggregate precoated with a distillate precoating agent shall be precoated at least num hours but not more than seven num days prior to its intended use .
timing num .
the rate of application of precoating agent for clean surface dry aggregate shall be as stated in table num .
the rate shall be varied to provide a complete light uniform effective cover to all aggregate particles at the time of spreading in accordance with the type and condition of the aggregate .
at the time of spreading the precoated aggregate shall not be covered with excess precoat such that it sticks together or picks up on vehicle tyres or causes a delay in adhesion to the polymer modified binder .
rate of application num .
care shall be taken to minimise aggregate losses and to ensure dust does not blow back onto precoated aggregate .
table num application rate for precoating nominal size aggregate mm application rate litresm loose bitumen based agent application rate litresm loose distillate only num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num heated aggregate num .
the aggregate shall be clean num or nummm sealing aggregate that has not been precoated .
where used in a seal other than a sami seal or bridge deck membrane the aggregate shall be from the same quarry as any aggregate applied in an adjacent seal with precoated aggregate .
heated aggregate shall not be used for a geotextile reinforced seal .
aggregate num .
the aggregate shall be heated dried and coated with class num or num bitumen in a batch type asphalt plant .
the aggregate shall be heated to a dry condition and then mixed with num by mass of bitumen for an extended wet mixing time to ensure an even coating of the bitumen over all stones .
the temperature of the coated aggregate shall be numc to numc at discharge from the plant .
heating and mixing specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the heated aggregate shall be transported to site covered with a heavy tarpaulin or covered tray .
num .
heated aggregate shall be applied to a sprayed binder immediately and rolled immediately .
num not used num provision for traffic num .
the contractor shall minimise delays and inconvenience to road users during the course of the work .
traffic shall not be allowed on the new work until sufficient rolling has taken place to prevent damage to the freshly applied bituminous mat .
num .
the contractor shall supply signs lights plus any other necessary equipment and erect and maintain same in good condition in accordance with specification num traffic .
num .
signs inscribed roadworks in progress for next km shall be erected at each end of unswept work where the length of the work intermittent or continuous exceeds num kilometre .
signing num .
signs shall remain in position until after the seal has been swept with no loose stones remaining on the surface .
no item of plant will be permitted to operate outside the appropriate warning signs .
all signs shall be free standing and weighted to hold the signs down .
num .
the contractor shall provide at least two persons on a full time basis as traffic controllers .
warning signs shall always be erected in conjunction with the use of traffic controllers .
each traffic controller shall be equipped with a portable twoway radio plus a spare and wear a high visibility vest .
traffic controllers num .
prior to implementing traffic control measures for the works particularly temporary speed restrictions the contractor shall notify the superintendent of such proposed measures .
hold point num not used num preparation of polymer modified binder num general num .
polymer modified binder and other constituents shall be mixed by circulation in the mechanical sprayer for not less than fifteen minutes immediately prior to application or such longer periods as may be necessary to ensure a uniform and homogeneous mixture .
mixing num .
adhesion agent as specified in clause num shall be dissolved in the hot binder and thoroughly mixed prior to the binder being sprayed on the road .
the binder shall be sprayed within twelve num hours of adding the adhesion agent to the binder .
where the binder has not been sprayed within twelve num hours further adhesion agent shall be added to the remaining binder .
adhesion agent shall be added at a rate of num by volume of the binder .
adhesion agent specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
adhesion agent shall be added at least to the minimum level specified or ordered .
all other binder constituent proportions expressed as percentages shall be those specified or ordered num .
mix tolerance num .
the binder spraying temperature shall be as specified in table num unless otherwise specified by the binder manufacturer .
the manufacturers instructions shall take precedence over table num .
where cutting oil is added refer to the manufacturers instructions for spraying temperature .
spraying temperature table num spraying temperature binder type temperature c snume snume snume num to num snumr num to num num spraying viscosity sami and bridge decks num .
medium curing cutting oil shall not be added to snume or snumr binders where they are being used in a sami seal or waterproof bridge deck membrane .
the sprayer shall apply these seal types in accordance with clause num .
mix tolerance num spraying viscosity sam and high stress seals num .
to achieve the initial wetting of aggregate modification of the binder viscosity is required .
depending upon the anticipated pavement temperature medium curing cutting oil shall be added to the binder .
mix tolerance a .
for a singlesingle seal add medium curing cutting oil in accordance with table num and accompanying notes b .
for a doubledouble seal where both coats are applied on the same day using snume and snume binders do not add cutter to the binder used in the first coat .
for the second coat add medium curing cutting oil in accordance with table num and accompanying notes c. for a double double seal where both coats are applied on the same day using snumr binder add only num medium curing cutting oil to the binder used for the first coat .
for the second coat add medium curing cutting oil in accordance with table num and accompanying notes .
specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num percentage of cutting oil to be added pavement temperature c traffic vehiclelaneday based on aadt class of polymer modified binder snume and snume snumr note e num to num less than num num or more num num num num to num num to num less than num num or more num num num to num num num to num less than num num or more num num num num to num num to num less than num num or more num to num num to num min num above num all num min num notes to table num a. cutter amount is percentage by volume of total binder .
b .
assessment of pavement temperature shall take into account the presence of shaded areas .
areas with a significant portion of shading shall be treated separately to adjacent areas that are not shaded .
ambient weather conditions in the days and week following must be considered in deciding on adding cutting oil .
c. where manufacturers instructions vary from table num the manufacturers instructions shall be followed .
d. where the proportion of heavy vehicles is greater than num of the total traffic reduce the cutter content by num. e. where annum nozzles are being used for a single coat seal with a bar of num lmnum no cutter is required above a pavement temperature of num c and the cutter content below num c is reduced by num c. specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num application of binder num general num .
the surface to be sealed shall be dry and no binder shall be applied during wet or rainy conditions or when adverse weather conditions may prevail at any time during such work .
when binder is applied and rain is forecast during the num hour period after application of the seal the contractor shall be responsible for any damage to or defects in the seal and action and cost to maintain or repair the seal .
no binder shall be applied whilst the pavement surface temperature is less than numc .
weather minimum pavement temperature num .
the contractor shall provide the superintendent with safe and convenient access to the sprayer at all times for checking the volume before and after spraying by means of the dipstick .
num application rate num .
the binder application rate bar for tender purposes shall be as detailed in annexure numc .
where adjustments to the binder application rates in excess of num percent of the rates detailed in annexure numc are directed by the superintendent then changes to the contractors rates for sealing shall be made as follows urn urc aro arcl where urn new rate for polymer modified binder treatment per mnum urc contracted rate for polymer modified binder treatment as applicable per mnum aro ordered binder application rate litres per mnum arc contracted binder application rate in annexure litres per mnum l rate per litre for variation in the schedule of rates per litre adjustments made under this clause shall be made prior to any adjustments that are due to conditional acceptance .
num .
the actual bar at numc shall be calculated from the quantity of binder sprayed and the actual area covered as measured on the ground .
num .
on sections where the actual binder application rate differs from the ordered application rate and the work is deemed to be nonconforming refer to clause num non conformance in binder application .
num volume conversion num .
table num gives factors to be used when converting binder volumes or spray rates at temperatures other than numc to volumes or spray rates at numc or vice versa .
adjustment shall be made using the following formulae specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name a .
volume or spray rate at numc equals the volume or spray rate at t c multiplied by the factor for t c b .
volume or spray rate at t c equals the volume or spray rate at numc divided by the factor for t c table num conversion factors observed temp t c factor for t c observed temp t c factor for t c observed temp t c factor for t c num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num note factors for intermediate temperatures in table num may be obtained by direct interpolation .
num spraying num .
snumr binder shall be sprayed at a width no more than numm regardless of nozzle type being used .
other binder types being sprayed with an num nozzles shall be sprayed at a width no more than numm .
for binders sprayed with an num nozzles the maximum width is as specified in the calibration certificate for the sprayer .
num .
binder shall not be applied until the contractor has sufficient spreader trucks to comply with numc at the location of the area to be sprayed .
in addition all rollers shall be at the location of the area to be sprayed at the time of spraying .
hold point num .
the binder shall be bar circulated for a minimum of three num minutes immediately prior to spraying .
specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the spraying of the binder for each run of the sprayer shall start and finish on protective paper .
all tapers and fillets shall be sprayed after masking with protective paper .
the paper so used and any spilt binder shall be removed and disposed of in a suitable manner .
protective paper num .
the sprayer shall cross the protective paper at its correct spraying speed at the start of each run .
the sprayer shall maintain its correct spraying speed over the full length of each run and shall cross the finish paper at this speed .
sprayer speed num .
all outside edges of the seal parallel to the road centreline shall be sprayed using copley eannum w end nozzles .
end spray nozzles num .
where the direct use of the mechanical sprayer is impracticable the binder may be applied by using a hand lance fed from the mechanical sprayer .
caution should be taken with this operation due to the higher viscosity of the polymer modified binder .
num .
the binder shall be sprayed onto areas as detailed in the drawings or as otherwise specified between two lines as defined by the line markers and the surfacing widths given in annexure numa .
the sprayed binder edge shall conform to the following requirements spraying tolerances a. the sprayed edge shall not deviate from the specified edge by more than nummm b. the rate of deviation of the sprayed edge from the specified edge lines shall not exceed one in four hundred num num c. tapers to accommodate variations in specified width shall be at one in one num except at floodway exits where the tapers shall be at one in twenty num .
num .
the contractor shall take all necessary precautions to prevent binder from adhering to any existing structure .
any damage or defacement shall be made good by the contractor at no cost to the principal immediately surfacing work on a section has been completed .
damage num existing guideposts num .
where necessary existing guideposts shall be removed and stored safely by the contractor to allow bituminous surfacing operations to proceed .
guidepost removal num .
the contractor shall reinstate removed guideposts to their original locations at the completion of bituminous surfacing operations .
any guideposts damaged during their removal or reinstatement shall be replaced by the contractor at no cost to the principal .
guidepost reinstatement num application of cover material num application num .
general specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name a .
the aggregate shall be dry containing no water at the time of application and shall be uniformly spread over the sprayed area by use of a suitable mechanical spreader .
the mechanical spreader shall be fitted with removable cutoff attachments to allow the aggregate spread width to match the required width on the pavement .
b .
the aggregate shall be placed to form a uniform stone mosaic of single particle thickness in almost continuous interlocked contact generally orientated with their least dimension vertical .
specified aggregate application rates given in table numcnum are nominal and should be adjusted to suite the aggregate used to give the correct stone mosaic .
where the aggregate is supplied by the principal approval shall be obtained from the superintendent for any change in the ordered rate .
c. the sprayed binder shall be totally covered with the exception of approved lapping strips with aggregate within num minutes of the application of the binder .
the length of spray runs shall be limited to comply with this requirement .
timing of application num .
additional aggregate a .
additional aggregate shall be applied to any bare or insufficiently covered areas as necessary to provide a uniform and complete cover .
where the area to be covered with additional aggregate is not of uniform width the additional aggregate shall be spread by hand .
b .
additional aggregate shall be applied before the completion of four passes of rubber tyred rolling .
timing c. if there are surplus loose particles on any portion of the sealed area such portion shall be swept lightly to remove the loose particles but not disturb the aggregate embedded in the binder .
num .
doubledouble seals a. the first coat of a doubledouble seal shall be applied using a larger sized aggregate than the aggregate used in the second coat b. the application rate of aggregate for the first coat shall result in more gaps between the aggregate particles than would occur if the same sized aggregate was applied in a single coat seal .
num .
principal supplied aggregate a .
where the actual aggregate spread rate is less than num times the ordered or approved aggregate spread rate the cost of any additional aggregate used supplied by the principal calculated as below shall be deducted from payments due to the contractor .
spread rate cost of additional aggregate aggregate cost a r num num num num s s a o . specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name where actual area m covered at rate rate in m stated in annexure numb ordered aggregate spread rate in mm actual aggregate spread rate in mm b .
the cost of aggregate spread outside the specified area with due allowance for tolerances shall be deducted from money due to the contractor at the rate stated in annexure numb .
num rolling and drag brooming num .
immediately after application of the cover material the surface shall be rolled to the number of complete coverages as stated in table num over the whole area .
where the roller size is not specified then num tonne rollers shall be used .
a complete coverage is one pass of a roller over the entire area ie .
the total length and width of a spray run being rolled .
for the first four complete coverages rollers shall be operated at speeds less than numkm per hour .
drag brooming shall be carried out after every second pass of rolling .
rolling sequence table num roller size and coverages minimum mass of multityred rollers minimum number of complete coverages num tonne num num tonne num num .
the superintendent may order additional rolling and drag brooming and such additional work shall be paid at daywork rates .
num .
for double double seals the rolling shall comply with the requirements of this clause for each coat of the seal .
any aggregate not incorporated in the first coat of the seal shall be removed in such a manner as to prevent removal of aggregate embedded in the first coat .
any damage to the first coat shall be repaired by the contractor at no cost to the principal prior to spraying the binder for the second coat .
double double seals num surface sweeping num .
any loose cover material not incorporated in the seal after the completion of rolling shall be swept off the sealed surface to beyond the outer edge of each shoulder without damage to the seal shoulder or guideposts and shall then be dispersed such that no windrows of swept material remain .
num .
where the roadway to be sealed is kerbed the excess cover material may be swept hard against the kerb during interim sweeping operations but shall be picked up and removed during the final sweeping .
excess cover material a sa r so sa specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the initial sweeping shall be carried out prior to the completion of the days work .
a second sweeping shall be carried out at the commencement of the following days work .
the contractor shall carry out subsequent sweepings as necessary for the following seven num days to ensure that no loose stones remain on the road surface .
all loose aggregate shall be swept clear of the sealed surface off the shoulder and past the line of the guide posts .
repeated sweeping num .
the contractor shall install loose stone signs and other temporary traffic management signs in accordance with specification num traffic .
the signs shall remain in place on each section of the works for the following seven num days after completion of sealing .
signing num num not used num nonconforming test results num .
if defects occur in the surfacing in any way either in part or in full attributable to binder for which test results are nonconforming then within num days of completion of the works on which that binder was used the superintendent may direct the contractor to take remedial action to repair or replace any defective sections of work .
any remedial action so directed will be at no cost to the principal .
num .
the superintendent may consider not making payment to the contractor for the schedule of rates item for binder supply and delivery related to that delivery for num days after the work has been completed plus any subsequent time thereafter if remedial work is outstanding .
num .
the superintendent may initiate testing of other samples retained but not previously tested .
num nonconformance in binder application num .
the actual binder application rate at numc on a spray run shall be deemed to be conforming to the ordered binder application rate if it falls within the tolerances given in table num for polymer modified bituminous surfacings .
num .
where the actual binder application rate at numc on a spray run differs from the ordered rate the quality level shall be deemed to be either a nonconformance or one of a range of conditional conformance levels depending on the difference between the actual binder application rate and the ordered binder application rate .
the tolerances applicable to conditional conformance are given in table num and a pay factor shall be applied for work at the corresponding conformance levels .
the pay factor applied will reflect the lower level of serviceability of conditionally conforming sprayed bituminous work .
application num .
where sprayed work is deemed nonconforming the contractor shall apply corrective action subject to the procedures contained in the quality system specification .
num .
no payment shall be made for binder sprayed outside the nummm margin specified in clause num .
specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num pay factors for polymer modified bituminous surfacings actual binder application rate bar lm num converted quality level pay factor pf oar num or less nonconformance na oar num to oar num conditional conformance level num num oar num to oar num conformance num oar num to oar num conditional conformance level num num oar num to oar num conditional conformance level num num oar num or more nonconformance na oar ordered binder application rate at numc num crushed aggregate num .
conformance of the aggregate at its source shall be construed only as authorising the contractor to deliver the material .
contamination of the aggregate during cartage or failure to cart and stockpile the aggregate as specified shall render the material nonconforming .
the contractor shall not be paid for nonconforming material or its cartage .
num testing frequency num .
the minimum testing frequency to determine the conformance of product and work processes with specified characteristics shall be in accordance with specification num quality systems .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num works records num .
the contractor shall accurately record the information required on record forms similar to those shown in annexure numc in respect of each application of binder .
the forms shall be supplied by the contractor and one copy of the completed form for each item of work shall be submitted to the superintendent at the completion of each days surfacing work .
num num not used specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa schedule of works works item section nos from  slk to  slk length km width m side  lcr area m type of treatment comments road name num num num etc .
etc .
road name num num num etc .
etc .
road name num num num etc .
etc .
note num slk denotes straight line kilometre distance values for from and to .
alternatively section limits may be described using chainages .
note num l c r denotes left centre or right .
leave side column blank if width value in previous column is entire seal width .
specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numb cover materials principal supply num .
aggregate dumpsite locations num details of aggregate supplied by the principal are shown in table numbnum .
table numbnum dumpsite details location slk offset m quantity available m size mm type num .
rate of deduction num the rates for deduction for overspreading the principals aggregate are as shown in table numbnum .
table numbnum rates for deduction nominal size of aggregate mm rate for deduction m num num num num specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numc numc.num responsibility for seal design table numcnum design responsibility seal type location design responsibility strain alleviating membrane all works principal strain alleviating membrane interlayer all works principal high stress seal all works principal numc.num binder and aggregate application rates the aggregate size spread rate class of binder and binder application rates for tender purposes shall be as detailed in table numcnum .
final binder application rate and aggregate spread rate to be designed in accordance with num .
table numcnum binder aggregate and application rates treatment type aggregate size mm aggregate spread rate mm binder class binder application rate bar at numc lm single coat seal single coat seal with scatter coat double double seal first coat second coat specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name numc.num line spotting num .
seal and reseal sections are spotted at the following intervals table numcnum line spotting interval road feature spotting interval m straight sections num curved sections num numc.num record forms a bituminous surfacing contractors spraying loading record b bituminous surfacing contractors daily record specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name numc.num bituminous surfacing contractors daily surfacing record date base material pavement surface cover aggregate bitumen total qty of contract no type type type type num num emulsion bitumen used tie in points condition size dump source from to condition dusty precoated damp adhesion agent litres at numc distance side of road sprayed area road temperature binder components ordered application rates spray temperature binder quantity used cover aggregate used actual application rates of ordered application rates binder component quantities used at num c spray no .
from to left right full width length width area component no.num component no.num component no.num additive adhesion agent binder at num c cover aggregate dip before spraying dip after spraying quantity sprayed hot quantity sprayed at numc binder hot binder at num c cover aggregate binder at num c cover aggregate component no .
num component no .
num component no .
num additive m m m m m c l m mm c l l l l m l m l m mm l l l kg num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num totals description of component no .
num remarks component no .
num component no .
num contractors representative tick appropriate box superintendent signature signature specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name numc.num bituminous surfacing contractors sprayer loading record date _________ grade of bitumen ____________________ road _______________________________ spray load no ________________ type of blend _______________________ spray run numbers ________________ contract no __________________ a. loading into empty sprayer b. loading into sprayer containing primer num pavement temp ______ c design blend ___ __ __ num pavement temp ________ c design blend _____ _____ _____ num application rate hot ______ lmnum spray temp hot ____ c num application rate hot ________ lmnum spray temp hot ____ c num volume required in sprayer ______ l _____ c num volume required in sprayer ________ l ______ c ______ l numc ________ l numc num components to be added numc num components to be added numc component num _____ l or ______ l _____ c component num _______ l or ________ l _______ c component num _____ l or ______ l _____ c component num _______ l or ________ l _______ c component num _____ l or ______ l _____ c component num _______ l or ________ l _______ c adhesion agent _____ l num primer remaining in sprayer actual components added _______ l ______ c _______ l numc a b num actual primer composition ____ ____ ____ component num ____ l ____ c component num ____ l ____ c num components remaining in sprayer component num ____ l ____ c component num ____ l ____ c component num _______ l component num _______ l component num ____ l ____ c component num ____ l ____ c component num _______ l adhesion agent ____ l adhesion agent ____ l num components to be added numc actual blend _____ ____ ____ actual blend ____ _____ _____ component num _______ l or _________ l _______ c component num _______ l or _________ l _______ c signatures component num adhesion agents _______ _______ l l or _________ l _______ c contractors rep description of components num ______________________________________________________________ _ num ______________________________________________________________ num ______________________________________________________________ _ superintendent specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is bituminous products consultant .
num .
general editing when one or more of the types specified in clause num is not required for a contract all the relevant parts of this specification must be deleted .
treatment not required .
sections to be deleted or marked as not used strain alleviating membrane sam num and amend num strain alleviating membrane interlayer sami num and amend num high stress seal num and amend num waterproof bridge deck membrane num num num amend num num .
bituminous surfacing intent clause num has been inserted to define the intended outcomes of applying a bituminous surfacing treatment .
this specification includes a number of different types of treatment as indicated within clause num .
the critical intention will vary slightly from treatment to treatment .
the requirement for a bituminous treatment to be durable is constant irrespective of the type .
specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name the three bullet points in this clause are the essential outcomes of the application of a bituminous surfacing treatment .
if these outcomes are not met then the treatment is not achieving the desired intention and further scrutiny should be applied to determine the cause for this failure .
this might include such factors as design preparation application andor operational practices .
num .
aggregate num principal supplied aggregate clause num num if screening of principalsupplied aggregate is required include clause num in contract specific requirements .
num insert any other requirements concerning principalsupplied aggregate as necessary in contract specific requirements e.g .
care of dumpsites clause num .
num provide aggregate spread rates .
based on test results where known calculated using the formula spread rate mm numaverage least dimension ald adjusted to increase the amount of aggregate per m for sam and sami treatments by num i.e .
spread rate numald .
the provided rate should be adjusted in the field to give the correct stone mosaic .
typical values are nummm num to num mm nummm num to num mm nummm num to num mm nummm num to num mm nummm num to num mm num provide rate of deduction to allow for the cost of wastage in m for overspreading aggregate .
a typical value might be of the order of numm and would represent the production cost of the aggregate .
num contractor supplied aggregate in schedule l of the conditions of tender include an item to cover the contractors response to clause num resource of aggregate .
num aggregate size num for bridge deck waterproofing membranes use nummm aggregate with a snumr binder or nummm aggregate with a snume binder .
num for a stress alleviating membrane sam seal the nominal aggregate size will typically vary between nummm to nummm .
num for a stress alleviating membrane interlayer sami seal the nominal size of aggregate shall be nummm .
specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num for an enhanced aggregate retention seal the nominal size is that which would have been used for a seal using class num bitumen .
num for a double double seal the stone size in the second coat is of the order of about half the size of the stone in the first coat where the larger sized stone is applied first .
typical applications are nummm which can be nummm if nummm aggregate supply is difficult however the control of spreading the nummm stone has to be managed .
a nummm double double seal is not recommended unless experienced main roads supervision is on site .
larger combinations of nummm nummm or nummm would be used as an extreme treatment to regain surface texture .
the nummm sized aggregate is difficult to procure and a contractor needs a good lead time to procure the stone .
an option is for a region to get its materials manager to liaise with quarries on availability .
the use of nummm sized aggregate should not happen without discussion with the materials engineering branch first as this is a very large sized stone that will result in a hungry surface texture which will be uncomfortable for some road users .
neither nummm or nummm aggregate is to be used for single coat seals as the stones will become large missiles if dislodged by high speed traffic .
num .
responsibility for seal design amend table numcnum to show whether the principal or contractor is responsible for the design of sprayed seals .
num .
rolling num steel wheeled rollers there is no reference to the use of steel wheel rollers in the standard specification .
the use of steel rollers on sealreseal works is not recommended particularly on softer aggregates such as granite due to the possibility of overrolling and crushing the aggregate .
num roller size table num requires that the size of rollers be specified by deleting one of two rows showing roller size .
for sprayed seals that will remain as so for their service life it is important to achieve the best embedment and alignment of the sealing aggregate at the time of application .
for seals or reseals with a service life to be beyond num years heavier rollers with a minimum mass of num tonnes must be used .
for seals that may not be trafficked such as sami seals under asphalt or bridge deck waterproofing membranes to be covered with asphalt smaller sized roller s of at least num tonne mass are acceptable .
the use of the num tonne rollers can be acceptable also for initial seals primerseals etc .
with a trafficked lifetime of no more than num years .
num .
notes re annexures num annexure numa schedule of works use only if required e.g .
minor works sealingresealing contract and insert details on a roadbyroad basis including the type of treatment as shown in table numcnum or numcnum .
this schedule is not normally required in major works but could be adapted to suit if necessary .
when annexure numa is not used the text of clause num and the title of annexure numa should be replaced with not used while the table in annexure numa should also be deleted .
specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num annexure numb cover materials principal supply insert relevant details of principalsupplied aggregate .
insert contract specific requirements into text of specification as noted in item num of the specification guidance notes .
num annexure numc application details insert relevant details into table numc.num .
num .
minor works contracts num working hours clause num where sealing works are organised as a separate minor works contract a clause for working hours should be added in contract specific requirements if not already covered elsewhere e.g .
in the conditions of contract .
the hours stated here are typical vary to suit the conditions particularly in heavily trafficked areas .
num clearing clause num add this clause if required .
specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num screening requirements num .
aggregate supplied by the principal for use in the works shall be screened prior to being used as cover aggregate .
num .
all rejected material and byproducts of the screening operations shall remain the property of the principal and shall be stockpiled within each dumpsite as directed by the superintendent .
num .
all screened aggregate shall meet the particle size distribution specified in clause num when tested in accordance with wa num .
num cover material dump sites num .
the contractor shall be required to remove star picket fencing from the perimeter of dumpsites of principal supplied aggregate in order to gain access .
fences shall be carefully dismantled and fencing materials stacked at the dumpsites without damage .
the fences will be reerected by the principal at the completion of the works .
the contractor shall be liable for any damage to fencing or dumpsite signs caused by the contractors operations .
num .
cover material dumpsites shall be left in a tidy condition .
residual stockpiled aggregate shall be reheaped into a single uniformly shaped stockpile for each sized aggregate .
num working hours and days num .
the contractor may work up to num hours per fortnight with a maximum of num hours on any day between the hours of num am and num pm .
in addition the contractor shall complete each days spraying by num pm at the latest unless otherwise authorised by the superintendent .
the contractor shall notify the superintendent of the delivery times and dates for each dump site for the aggregate and work start times and working days for the sealing work prior to commencement of work on site .
the superintendent may approve variation to the start and finish times andor working days .
num .
the contractor may work outside the nominated working hours for the following activities a .
repairs to plant .
b. travelling to and from worksite by personnel .
c. travelling of plant and personnel from one worksite to another .
d. receipt and reheating of bitumen at worksite .
specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name e. screening of principals aggregate if specified .
num clearing num .
prior to the clearing of any area for any purpose the contractor shall notify the superintendent .
hold point specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title polymer modified bituminous surfacing revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
clause deletes shows as not used .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
project managers review completed .
specification guidance notes deleted .
table of contents updated .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num asphalt intermediate course copyright main roads western australia specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date table num added limit for deformation resistance mme num table num note num added option of asnzs num num tensile strength ratio added numb nummm aggregate spread rate amended to num num added flexiseal hd tape guidance notes nummm aggregate spread rate amended to num whole document reformatted sco num num title of asnzs num corrected bpc num num cnum bitumen added num num requirement for dilution of emulsion moved to num .
table num new limit for air voids after num gyratory cycles nummm nummm mixes same voids binder content by volume vfb removed num removed limit of num voids for nummm mix table num clarified limits on top sieve sizes num new temperature limit for cnum bitumen num num part of num and all of num moved to num num new clause on reporting of results num temperature limit for cnum bitumen num change in format and new clauses on use of paving tape num new sentence on paver requirements num requirements for a material transfer vehicle mtv num requirement to apply additional tack coat over a longitudinal joint num new limits for weather conditions when paving num update to requirement where asphalt exposed to water num text moved from num num new clause on reporting of air void results table num changes to insitu air voids values annexure numb table specifying requirement for mtv added table for echelon paving added guidance notes guidance on use of mtv num correction of specification title bpc num num added aapa advisory note num num update of definitions num and num specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num term bitumen changed to binder num added natural sand table num tolerances amended for largest sieves num cnum bitumen added num require reporting of all data num sampling cocks required on plants num text relocated from num num added sand num new clause on marshall properties num change of title and amended requirements for binder heating num text from num relocated num text deleted on water and power num new clause linking testing to specification num num new clause on sampling and test frequency num first sample from first numt of mix num new clause on response to no conforming result num text on tsr moved from num num now applies to any nonconformance num deleted watertight num deleted canvas num text on organic wax compound moved to num num hold point deleted num rates for binder application added num temperature when cutting asphalt deleted and clarified where cut is measured from num new clause on asphalt drawings num layer thickness of nummm mix changed num clause deleted num new title num new clause on rollers num no diesel on tyres num text moved from num num text on number of rollers amended num new clause on protection of services num text moved from num num title changed num added asphalt layer and all results for maximum density to be used table num title changed num added paver marks specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num materials num num binder num num bitumen emulsion num num aggregate num num mineral filler num num adhesion agent num num reclaimed asphalt pavement num num num not used num asphalt mix design num num asphalt mix design num num num not used num manufacture and transport num num mixing plant num num manufacture of asphalt num num storage and handling num num use of organic wax compound num num testing of asphalt num num nonconformance num num transport num num num not used num placing of asphalt num num general num num surface preparation num num method of placement num num tack coat num num not used num num weather conditions num num joints num num longitudinal joints num num transverse joints num num asphalt construction drawings num specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num spreading num num num not used num num compaction num num insitu air void content num num surface requirements num num opening finished works to traffic num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num schedule of works num annexure numb num specific contract requirements num specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num asphalt intermediate course general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and application of num and num mm dense graded asphalt hereafter referred to as asphalt for the construction of an asphalt intermediate course .
the supply and application of asphalt wearing courses is addressed in specification num asphalt wearing course .
num .
details of the location and extent of the asphalt are either summarised at annexure numa or are indicated on the drawings .
details num .
the works shall include surface preparation supply of materials production hauling placing and compaction of asphalt to the areas as shown in annexure numa or the drawings or as otherwise directed by the superintendent .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods and other test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num bituminous emulsions for the construction maintenance of pavements as num hot mix asphalt asnzs num sample preparation mixing quartering and conditioning of asphalt in the laboratory asnzs num sample preparation compaction of asphalt test specimens using a gyratory compactor asnzs num voids and density relationships for compacted asphalt mixes asnzs num moisture content of asphalt asnzs num degree of particle coating asnzs num determination of the resilient modulus of asphalt indirect tensile method main roads test methods wa num particle size distribution of aggregates specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name wa num aggregate moisture content convection oven method wa num aggregate moisture content microwave oven method wa num surface shape using a straightedge wa num surface profile arrb profiler wa num sampling and storage of asphalt wa num preparation of asphalt for testing wa num bitumen content particle size distribution of asphalt stabilised soil centrifuge method wa num stability flow of asphalt marshall method wa num maximum density of asphalt rice method wa num bulk density and void content of asphalt roads maritime services nsw test methods t num moisture content of bituminous mixes mass loss method department of transport and main roads queensland test methods qnuma permeability of asphalt ponding method qnumb assessment of asphalt permeability austroads test methods agpttnum deformation resistance of asphalt mixtures by the wheel tracking test agpttnum stripping potential of asphalt tensile strength ratio agpttnum binder film index australian asphalt pavement association advisory note num guide to the heating and storage of binders for asphalt manufacture main roads standards ern num engineering road note num procedure for the design of road pavements main roads specifications num quality systems num asphalt wearing course num materials for bituminous treatments specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num definitions num. asphalt base course is one or more layers of asphalt within a full depth asphalt pavement immediately below the asphalt intermediate course .
terminology num. asphalt course comprises one or more layers of a single asphalt type .
num. asphalt intermediate course is that part of a pavement which rests on the asphalt base course subgrade improved subgrade or subbase and is below the asphalt wearing courses .
num. asphalt layer comprises a single paving run of uniform asphalt .
num. asphalt pavement is a pavement the predominate structural strength of which is provided by asphalt layers .
num. asphalt wearing courses is that part of the pavement upon which the traffic travels including any dense graded asphalt course immediately below a course of open graded asphalt .
num. full depth asphalt pavement is a pavement in which asphalt is used for all courses above the subgrade improved subgrade or subbase .
num. reclaimed asphalt pavement rap is the material reclaimed from an asphalt wearing or intermediate course by cold planning and reprocessed by crushing andor screening for recycling into new asphalt .
num num not used materials num binder num .
binder used in the production of nummm dense graded asphalt shall be as shown on drawings .
where not shown class num bitumen class num bitumen or anume polymer modified binder as required in accordance with ern num conforming to the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments shall be used .
nummm dense graded asphalt num .
binder used in the production of nummm dense graded asphalt shall be as shown on drawings .
where not shown anume polymer modified binder conforming to the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments shall be used .
nummm dense graded asphalt num .
prior to the use of binder the contractor shall demonstrate compliance with the properties of the binder for each batch used on the contract .
audit testing undertaken by the principal shall not be used to demonstrate compliance .
hold point num bitumen emulsion num .
bitumen emulsion to be used as the tack coat during the preparation of the surface prior to the laying of asphalt shall be cationic slow setting emulsion grade cssnum or cationic rapid setting emulsion grade crsnum both conforming to as num mixed num by volume with water .
specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num aggregate num .
crushed aggregate including its source rock and natural sand shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
coarse and fine aggregate used in the manufacture of asphalt shall consist of crushed rock material .
num mineral filler num .
mineral filler shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
mineral filler num adhesion agent num .
the adhesion agent shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
adhesion agent num reclaimed asphalt pavement num .
rap shall meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments including preparing and storing rap prior to its use .
rap num num not used asphalt mix design num asphalt mix design num general num .
the asphalt manufacturer shall be responsible for the development of an asphalt mix design and its approval by main roads .
this clause specifies the properties and design process for nominal nummm and nummm asphalt .
num .
the asphalt shall incorporate aggregates binder filler and adhesion agent to produce an asphalt mix design that satisfies all specified requirements shall be resistant to segregation during handling and placing shall have low permeability and shall have adequate workability to achieve the specified levels of compaction in the asphalt pavement .
num .
for the purpose of asphalt mix design class num bitumen shall be used for the design of both nummm and nummm dense graded asphalt .
class num bitumen to be used num .
for the volumetric component of the design the mix shall be compacted using a marshall hammer with num blows on each face .
num blow marshall num .
the asphalt mix design shall be based on the use of crushed rock as the coarse and fine aggregates and the inclusion of num by mass of the total aggregate of hydrated lime .
the mix design may include the use of sand not derived from crushed rock up to a limit of num of the total mass of aggregates in the mix design .
num .
mix designs for asphalt to be placed within the perth metropolitan area shall be produced using granite rock from quarries in the perth region .
perth rock specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
all tests shall be performed in laboratories accredited with the national association of testing authorities of australia nata to perform the tests and the results shall be presented on nata endorsed test reports .
nata num .
asphalt mix designs shall not be designed including rap warm mix additives or other materials not specified .
num .
for the purpose of asphalt mix design the bulk density of laboratory prepared specimens shall be determined in accordance with wa num .
bulk density by presaturation in accordance with asnzs num shall not be used .
bulk density test method num design criteria num .
aggregates binder filler and adhesion agent shall be apportioned to produce a design target psd and design target binder content that complies with all of the requirements of table num for either nummm or nummm dense graded asphalt .
the gradation of the combined aggregates shall be continuous with a smooth grading curve passing through all of the sieves listed in table num .
the design target binder content of the asphalt mix design shall produce an asphalt mix design that meets the requirements of this specification .
table num design target psd as sieve size mm percentage passing by mass nummm mix nummm mix num num num num num report num report report num report report num report report num report report num report report num report report num report report num report report num report report num max num max num specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num mix properties property test method minimum maximum air void content design target psd production range after num cycles gyratory compaction applicable for design target only wa num num num num num num voids in mineral aggregate wa num num binder content by percentage volume of total mix nummm nummm applicable for design target only wa num num num stability wa num or as num num kn flow wa num or as num nummm nummm binder film index applicable for design target only note num num permeability of asphalt applicable for design target only qnuma and qnumb note num report note num deformation resistance applicable for design target only agpttnum maximum nummm resilient modulus applicable for design target only asnzs num report value note num note num calculate the binder film index using the formula in test methods as num or agpttnum .
note num report the linear regression relationship in accordance with qnumb .
the air void content of the test specimens shall be determined in accordance with asnzs num and the water absorption of each test specimen shall be reported to the nearest num .
note num determined using the standard reference test conditions in the test method on at least three test specimens compacted in a gyratory compactor with an air void content of num num determined in accordance with wa num or asnzs num .
specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num asphalt mix design process num .
mixes shall be manufactured in a laboratory to a consistent condition and shall be fully coated with binder .
all mixes shall be conditioned in accordance with asnzs num after mixing has been completed .
the particle size distribution psd of each mix produced in a laboratory shall not vary from the target psd or binder content or the outer psd limits for psd and binder content by more than the limits shown below .
num for nummm sieve num for nummm sieve num for binder content .
manufacture of mixes num .
a mix shall be prepared at the design target psd and design target binder content and tested for all properties listed in table num plus binder content and psd .
the average result for air voids of each mix shall be num num .
num .
mixes shall be prepared to the outer psd limits as described below .
these mixes shall be tested for psd binder content stability flow binder film index voids within the production range and vma .
outer psd limits fine psd high binder the fine psd shall be prepared by adding the positive production tolerance values shown in table num on to the design target psd .
the binder content shall be the design target binder content plus num binder .
fine psd low binder the fine psd shall be prepared by adding the positive production tolerance values shown in table num on to the design target psd .
the binder content shall be the design target binder content minus num binder .
coarse psd low binder the coarse psd shall be prepared by adding the negative production tolerance values shown in table num on to the design target psd .
the binder content shall be the design target binder content minus num binder .
coarse psd high binder the coarse psd shall be prepared by adding the negative production tolerance values shown in table num on to the design target psd .
the binder content shall be the design target binder content plus num binder .
specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num production tolerances particle size distribution as sieve size mm tolerances on percentage by mass passing nummm nummm num not applicable num num num num num num num and num and num num num num and num num num num and num num num num num num num num num num approval of asphalt mix designs num .
the asphalt manufacturer shall be responsible for submitting the following information to manager materials engineering materials engineering branch main roads western australia num colin jamieson drive welshpool wa num .
the nominal size of the asphalt mix design identification of the manufacturing plant where the asphalt will be produced a detailed description of all of the materials to be used in the manufacture of the asphalt mix design including a geological description of all of the aggregates or sand to be used .
the source of those materials shall be provided along with the proposed proportioning of the aggregates or sand .
test reports showing the latest results for the aggregates and sand to be used against all test properties in specification num materials for bituminous treatments .
the source of the cnum bitumen used for the asphalt mix design assessment .
the design target binder content for the proposed asphalt mix design num .
a psd based on the design target psd with production tolerances shown in table num .
specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the asphalt manufacturer shall be responsible for submitting nata endorsed test reports demonstrating compliance with all properties shown in clause num for the following mixes .
reports design target psd and design target binder content .
all other results used to establish the optimum binder content for the target psd shall be reported .
fine psd high binder fine psd low binder coarse psd low binder coarse psd high binder .
num .
if all of the asphalt mix design requirements of the specification have been met the materials engineering branch of main roads will issue a certificate for an approved asphalt mix design including the following information .
certificate identification number of the approved asphalt mix design .
date of approval .
identification of the asphalt manufacturer .
identification of the manufacturing plant at which the asphalt shall be produced .
source of aggregates to be used for the approved asphalt mix design .
nominal proportions of the aggregates to be used .
the psd in the format shown in table num with the lower and upper limits of the psd applied using tolerances from table num to the design target psd .
the binder content as the design target binder content num .
num .
an approved asphalt mix design shall have a lifetime of three years .
to renew an existing approved asphalt mix design the asphalt manufacturer shall submit an electronic version of a spreadsheet showing all production test results for the approved asphalt mix design since it was approved or last renewed .
the spreadsheet shall have test results from at least num test samples of the approved asphalt mix design .
materials engineering branch will review the results of the production records for consistency to specified properties and advise whether the approved asphalt mix design will be renewed .
if there are less than num results the approved asphalt mix design will not be renewed .
renewal num .
use of the approved asphalt mix design shall be for only those ranges in the mix proportions and the types and sources of materials nominated with the approved asphalt mix design .
specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num use of asphalt mix design num .
the contractor shall provide proof to the superintendent that the asphalt mix design has been approved by the principal before any asphalt is manufactured in accordance with that approved asphalt mix design and placed in the works .
hold point num num not used manufacture and transport num mixing plant num .
asphalt shall be manufactured in a central mixing plant by either batch mixing continuous mixing or drum mixing .
all mixing plant and equipment and associated facilities shall conform to the requirements of as num and shall be such as to prevent segregation of the asphalt at all stages .
plant num .
a sampling cock shall be installed in the inlet pipe between the road tanker and binder storage tanks .
an additional sampling cock shall be installed for sampling at the time of asphalt production between the binder tank and the mixing chamber to facilitate the sampling of any binder being used for asphalt production .
binder sampling cocks num .
for the verification of weights or proportions and character of materials and determination of temperatures used in the preparation of the asphalt the superintendent shall have access at any time to all parts of the plant subject to safety considerations .
num manufacture of asphalt num .
the quantities of coarse and fine aggregates sand mineral filler pigment adhesion agent bitumen and rap when used shall be accurately and positively controlled so as to produce the asphalt specified for use in the works .
the quantity of bitumen in the asphalt shall include that portion that comes from the use of rap in the asphalt .
control num .
up to num of rap by mass of the total aggregate may be used in the production of nummm or nummm asphalt .
the quantity of hydrated lime added as an adhesion agent shall be based on the total mass of aggregate and rap .
a management plan shall be prepared detailing amongst other things the stockpiling processing storage testing and plant mixing requirements of rap .
rap num .
the mixing process shall be such as to produce a uniform distribution of aggregate sizes and a uniform coating of binder on a minimum of num of aggregate particles when tested in accordance with asnzs num .
the mixing and drying processes shall be sufficient to ensure that moisture in asphalt that includes rap is not greater than specified .
coating specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name the mixing process shall be as such to produce asphalt that when tested in accordance with agpttnum will have values of greater than the following tensile strength ratio num dry strength greater than num kn wet strength after freezethaw conditioning greater than num kn .
stripping potential num .
the particle size distribution and the percentage of binder shall be in accordance with the approved asphalt mix design when tested in accordance with wa num .
particle size distribution num .
the air voids vma stability and flow shall be in accordance with table num when tested in accordance with wa num and num .
marshall properties num .
the moisture content of the asphalt at the completion of the mixing process shall not be greater than num by mass when measured in accordance with asnzs num or tnum .
moisture content num .
in a batch mixer the volume of material shall be limited to an amount allowing the paddle tips to be seen when passing through the top vertical position during mixing .
volume of material num .
the temperature of the mixed asphalt shall be measured and recorded at the discharge point of the pugmill or mixing drum .
the temperature of the asphalt shall not exceed numc for asphalt manufactured with class num bitumen numc for asphalt manufactured with class num bitumen and numc for asphalt manufactured with pmb unless otherwise directed by the superintendent .
temperature at discharge point num storage and handling num .
binders shall be heated and stored to meet the requirements of specification num materials for bituminous treatments and the aapa advisory note num .
at no time shall binder be heated to a temperature greater than numc .
binders num use of organic wax compound num .
sasobit may be used in the production of nummm or nummm dense graded asphalt in the following applications use of sasobit type a production of asphalt at normal temperatures where asphalt is being transported for long distances and temperature loss may occur during transport or transfer at the paving site .
this application is not applicable to asphalt manufactured using a polymer modified binder .
type b production of asphalt at normal temperatures where asphalt is being paved in cold weather and the asphalt is transported only for short distances .
this may include asphalt manufactured using a polymer modified binder .
type c production of asphalt at a lower temperature warm mix such as placement of multiple layers in an asphalt pavement in one shift of work .
this may include the use of a polymer modified binder .
specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
sasobit shall be used at a dosage rate of num by mass of the binder and added to the binder in accordance with the following dosage and mixing for small jobs in batch type plants where the total mass of asphalt manufactured in one day is num tonnes or less sasobit can be added as pellets directly to the pugmill .
where sasobit is to be used on a continuing basis of two consecutive days or more liquid or pelletised sasobit shall be added to hot binder and stirred in the tank or mixing container prior to its use or liquid sasobit can be dosed in line .
num .
the mixing process shall be such as to produce a uniform distribution of aggregate sizes and a uniform coating of binder on num of aggregate particles when tested in accordance with asnzs num .
the mixing and drying processes shall be sufficient to ensure that moisture in asphalt is not greater than specified .
mixing num .
where sasobit is used in the production of hotmixed asphalt the temperature of the mixed asphalt at the discharge point of the asphalt manufacturing plant shall not exceed numc .
where produced as warm mix asphalt the mixed asphalt at the discharge point of the asphalt manufacturing plant shall not be less than numc .
production temperature num testing of asphalt num .
the asphalt manufacturer shall provide and maintain at a suitable location at the site of the mixing plant for the duration of the contract a suitably equipped air conditioned testing laboratory accredited by the national association of testing authorities of australia nata to perform the following tests testing laboratory wa num num or num num num num num num num asnzs num or tnum asnzs num agpttnum andor asnzs num .
num .
the laboratory shall be equipped with all testing equipment necessary to perform these tests .
the asphalt manufacturer shall operate and maintain the equipment in good condition in accordance with nata requirements .
testing equipment num .
asphalt shall be tested for the properties and at the testing frequency shown in specification num quality systems .
tests to be undertaken include testing requirements routine testing full test psd bitumen content wa num maximum dry density of asphalt rice method wa num bulk density void content of asphalt wa num stability and flow of asphalt marshall method wa num routine testing partial test psd bitumen content wa num maximum dry density of asphalt rice method wa num specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name periodic testing moisture content asnzs num or tnum uniform coating of binder asnzs num stripping potential of asphalt tensile strength ratio test agpttnum using freezethaw conditioning .
num .
asphalt shall be sampled in accordance with wa num with samples tested immediately they are taken .
the number of tests undertaken shall be evenly spread across the entire period of production for each asphalt mix being tested within a shift .
sample testing frequency num .
the first sample of asphalt in a shift shall be taken from the first num tonnes of asphalt manufactured in the shift for each type of mix being manufactured .
first sample num .
if the result of any test sample does not conform to any specified requirements another sample of asphalt shall be taken immediately and tested immediately for a full test .
num .
for the stripping potential of asphalt tensile strength ratio test specimens shall be compacted at the site testing laboratory prepared without reheating of the test sample or test portion .
after preparation of the test specimens the stripping potential of asphalt tensile strength ratio test may be completed in the site laboratory or another laboratory away from the site of the asphalt plant .
preparation of tsr specimens num .
results of testing except for tsr shall be reported on a nata endorsed test report within num hours of a sample being taken .
the testing laboratory shall send all results directly to amongst others the contractor the superintendent and a nominated representative at the main roads materials engineering branch .
reporting num nonconformance num .
a hold point will apply when any mix test result indicating a nonconformance occurs .
this hold point shall also apply to a mix produced prior to the nonconforming test result but which has not been placed .
hold point num transport num .
the asphalt shall be transported from the asphalt plant to the works in metal bodied trucks or trailers previously cleaned of all foreign materials .
in long distance haul situations the material should be transported in insulated vehicles sufficient to ensure arrival of the material on site in a conforming condition .
vehicle type num .
the temperature of the asphalt in each truck load and each trailer load shall be measured using a calibrated digital probe thermometer before the truck leaves the site of the asphalt manufacturing plant .
the thermometer shall have a digital display readable to numc and have a measurement of uncertainty of not more than numc .
infrared thermometers shall not be used to measure temperature .
the temperature shall comply with the requirements of clause num .
temperature in truck specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the temperature of the asphalt shall be recorded on a printout showing date time and asphalt temperature for each truck load and each trailer load of mix dispatched .
the printout shall be provided with the load delivery docket .
temperature record num .
each load shall be covered with suitable material of sufficient size to prevent loss of heat from the asphalt .
heat loss num .
the asphalt shall be delivered at a uniform rate within the capacity of the placing and compacting plant .
delivery rate num num not used placing of asphalt num general num .
prior to commencing asphalting the contractor shall submit to the superintendent the proposed number and widths of asphalt runs and the proposed joint layout .
hold point num .
asphalt shall not be placed if the truck delivery docket does not include a printout of the date time and temperature of asphalt from the discharge point .
num .
asphalt shall be delivered to the work site at temperatures between delivery temperatures for nummm and nummm asphalt with class num bitumen numc to numc .
for nummm and nummm asphalt with class num bitumen numc to numc for nummm and nummm asphalt with anume binder numc to numc .
for asphalt produced as warm mix asphalt using sasobit numc to numc .
num .
if a delay occurs of more than num minutes between successive truck deliveries to the paver the machine shall be moved clear of the laid asphalt and a proper transverse joint formed .
delays num .
prior to commencing each days operations and also after any delay exceeding half an hour during the day the screed shall be preheated for at least num minutes in order to eliminate drag marks and imperfections in the finished mat .
screed to be preheated num .
all kerbs gullies grates and other structures shall be protected at all times from damage or defacement by asphalt placement works and the site shall be left in a clean and tidy condition .
damage num .
a sprayed seal shall be applied to the uppermost layer of nummm asphalt intermediate course no more than num working days after completion of the uppermost layer of nummm asphalt intermediate course .
the seal shall comply with seal on intermediate course specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name a .
apply a single seal in accordance with specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing .
snume binder at num lmnum and nummm aggregate at num mnummnum b .
in cold or cooler months when the seal will be trafficked construction traffic or public traffic or where specified apply a double double seal in accordance with specification num bituminous surfacing .
numst coat crsnum bitumen emulsion at num lmnum of emulsion and nummm aggregate at num mnummnum .
numnd coat crsnum bitumen emulsion at num lmnum of emulsion and nummm aggregate at num mnummnum .
num surface preparation num .
prior to the placement of asphalt the contractor shall carry out preparation work as detailed in the following clauses .
general num .
the contractor shall sweep all surfaces on which asphalt is to be placed under this contract to a clean condition with no appreciable amounts of loose materials or any other foreign matter remaining .
loose surface material against kerbing shall be removed by handwork if necessary .
the surface to be paved shall be dry .
sweeping num .
the pavement layer below the first layer of asphalt shall have a uniform texture with a tightly bonded surface and be primed .
the texture of this surface should key the asphalt to the surface and resist any tendency for slippage failures .
surface condition num .
where paving tape is shown in asphalt drawings the tape shall be denso paving tape nummm wide flexiseal tape hd nummm wide or bitac ds multilaminate tape nummm wide .
the tape shall be applied to a surface that is clean dry and all loose material has been removed beyond the width of the tape to be applied .
joins of the tape shall be overlapped and any air bubbles or creases in the tape shall be cut and flattened .
paving tape on joints num .
paving tape shall be applied to the area of the joint around a drainage structure .
the tape shall be placed over the intermediate course asphalt where it flush joins with the cementitious material backfill around the drainage structure .
paving tape drainage structures num method of placement num .
asphalt must be placed by a selfpropelled paver equipped with the ability to be operated with automatic thickness control and automatic joint matching facility .
the paver must be equipped with a ski or laser control system and cross fall controller to maintain levels and also suitable sensing equipment to provide longitudinal joint matching .
it shall further be equipped with a vibrating or tamping screed capable of achieving num of final compaction .
paver specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
where the use of a material transfer vehicle mtv is specified at annexure numb the mtv shall be a selfpropelled machine capable of receiving asphalt from delivery trucks storing the asphalt heating asphalt in storage and transferring the asphalt to the paver without any contact with the paver .
the mtv must have a minimum storage capacity of num tonnes and the paver must be fitted with a bin in its hopper to transfer asphalt directly to the feed conveyor of the paver .
material transfer vehicle num tack coat num .
a tack coat shall be applied to the prepared surface at the rate of num litresm of the dilute emulsion or as directed by the superintendent .
the tack coat shall be sprayed in a uniform film over the entire surface including all longitudinal and transverse joints .
an additional application of tack coat shall be applied at the same rate to a width of nummm over any longitudinal joint .
composition num .
no asphalt shall be placed on the tack coat until the emulsion has broken and the water has substantially evaporated .
num .
the superintendent may direct the pavement area ahead of the spreader to be resprayed and may specify the time to be allowed between the spraying of tack coat and the placing of asphalt .
however this area shall not exceed the requirements for half a days placing of asphalt .
respraying num .
the tack coat shall be applied with care to reduce the possibility of concrete kerbs driveways and footpaths being sprayed with bitumen .
any such contamination shall be removed by the contractor at no cost to the principal .
contamination num not used num weather conditions num .
asphalt placement shall not commence or continue upon a surface which is not clean and dry and only when the pavement temperature meets the requirements shown in table num .
pavement temperature specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num pavement temperatures for placement binder in mix minimum pavement temperature when wind speed num kmhr minimum pavement temperature when wind speed num kmhr cnum bitumen numc numc cnum bitumen numc numc cnum bitumen with sasobit numc numc polymer modified binder numc numc polymer modified binder with sasobit numc numc polymer modified binder numc numc polymer modified binder with sasobit numc numc num .
where asphalt intermediate course is exposed to rainfall or surface water before the sprayed seal is applied to the nummm mm asphalt intermediate course and the insitu air void content has an upper characteristic value greater than num the moisture content of the asphalt within the affected lot shall be sampled and determined in accordance with wa num and wa num .
where the moisture content within the lot is greater than num the lot shall be removed and replaced at no cost to the principal .
num joints num .
the number and extent of joints in asphalt layers shall be kept to a minimum and the paving pattern shall be designed accordingly in advance of the work paving pattern num .
the main paving runs shall be laid first and any smaller or irregular adjacent areas later so that they can be matched to the main run .
num .
each joint shall be neat thoroughly compacted and have a surface finish equal in quality to that of the surrounding asphalt layer .
surface finish num .
where the edge of the previously laid work has become distorted it shall be cut back a sufficient distance to provide the true cross section .
edges specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num longitudinal joints num .
longitudinal joints shall be continuous and parallel to the lane markings .
the side of the previous run shall be tack coated before the paving of the adjacent run proceeds .
longitudinal joints in asphalt intermediate courses shall be offset from layer to layer by not less than num mm and shall be within num mm of the traffic lane line or the centre of traffic lane .
joints shall be located away from traffic wheel paths .
where new pavement abuts an existing pavement the existing pavement shall be removed in steps to achieve an offset from layer to layer of not less than num mm position num .
unconfined edges of a paving run shall be compacted using an edge compaction device .
the outer nummm in width from the top of the compacted asphalt layer shall be removed using a cutter or cold planer except for edges of the pavement that will not form a joint .
the cost of the asphalt and its removal shall be at no cost to the principal .
edge compaction num .
when the adjacent paver run is placed the uncompacted asphalt shall be placed to overlap the compacted asphalt of the previous run by between num and nummm in width of loose asphalt .
the loose asphalt shall be pushed back using a lute to form a ridge along the edge of the joint .
excess asphalt in forming the ridge shall be removed before rolling .
next paver run num .
where echelon paving occurs with a second paver placing asphalt on a second paving run when the temperature of the first paving run is greater than numc cutting back of the asphalt is not required .
overlap of the first paving run shall occur as specified at clause num .
echelon paving num .
temporary longitudinal ramps shall be provided for any asphalt course that has not been completed to the full carriageway width and is subjected to traffic .
these ramps shall be cut back before the adjacent lane is laid .
temporary ramps num transverse joints num .
transverse joints shall be at right angles to the direction of paving .
they should be staggered by at least one num metre between successive layers and between adjacent runs .
num .
the end of the previous run shall be tack coated before the paving of the next run proceeds .
tack coat num .
temporary transverse ramps shall be provided where traffic is to use the newly laid work prior to a run being completed .
these ramps shall be cut back before the next run is laid .
temporary ramps num asphalt construction drawings num .
unless otherwise specified details for transverse joints longitudinal joints and profiles shall be in accordance with the asphalt construction drawings available on the main roads website as listed in table num specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num list of asphalt construction drawings drawing number title num pavement series typical details full depth asphalt transverse joints num pavement series typical details granular transverse joints num pavement series typical details full depth asphalt longitudinal joints and profile num wearing course series typical details ogadga transverse joints num wearing course series typical details dga transverse joints num wearing course series typical details sma transverse joints num wearing course series typical details longitudinal joints num spreading num .
all asphalt shall be spread with a paver except for small areas where use of a paver is not practicable .
where specified in annexure numa two pavers in echelon shall be used in locations where a full carriageway wider than num m is available clear of traffic .
num .
the uppermost layer of asphalt intermediate course shall be nummm dense graded asphalt intermediate course .
unless approved otherwise by the superintendent other layers of asphalt intermediate course shall be constructed using nummm asphalt intermediate course .
uppermost intermediate course layer num .
nominal nummm asphalt intermediate course shall be placed in layers of compacted thickness not less than nummm and not greater than nummm .
nominal nummm asphalt intermediate course shall be placed in layers of compacted thickness not less than nummm or greater than nummm .
layer thickness num .
asphalt intermediate course other than the uppermost layer of asphalt intermediate course shall be covered with the next layer of asphalt intermediate course no more than num working days after completion of rolling of the layer to be covered .
maximum time between layers num .
a layer of asphalt intermediate course or wearing course shall not be placed over the preceding layer until the maximum surface temperature at any point on the surface of the preceding layer has cooled to numc or less .
the temperature shall be measured on a surface free of surface moisture .
the requirement is not applicable where the work will not be opened to public traffic for at least num hours .
temperature of previous layer specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used num compaction num .
selfpropelled steel wheel rollers and pneumatic tyred rollers meeting the requirements of as num shall be used .
vibratory pneumatic tyred rollers may be used .
all rollers shall be fitted with reticulation to water wheels or tyres to prevent pick up of asphalt and be fitted with scrapers to clean the wheels or tyres .
the steel wheeled rollers shall be fitted with additional equipment to assist with compaction of unsupported edges of the paver run .
the edge compaction device shall stop asphalt from moving away from the wheel of the roller by placing pressure on the edge of the asphalt by means of an arm pneumatically or hydraulically powered .
equipment num .
roller speed shall be uniform .
stops and starts shall be controlled so that displacement shoving of the asphalt does not occur when changing direction .
any shoving occurring as a result of changing direction or from any other cause shall be corrected at once by the use of rakes and of fresh asphalt when required .
to prevent adhesion of asphalt to the roller all wheels shall be kept properly moistened but excess of water shall be avoided .
diesel or other petroleum based fluids shall not be applied to pneumatic tyres during the rolling process .
procedures num .
vibratory compaction shall be discontinued in areas where it is considered such vibrations could cause damage to adjacent buildings or structures .
under these conditions initial compaction of the asphalt shall be achieved using the selfpropelled static steel wheeled rollers of appropriate mass to meet the compaction requirements in clause num .
vibratory compaction num .
rollers shall be kept in continuous operation as much as practicable and in such a manner that all parts of the pavement receive substantially equal compaction .
in the event of a delay in the laying operation rolling is to be carried out as close as practicable to the paving machine .
rollers shall not be parked on work carried out the same day .
continuous operations num .
the number of rollers on site shall be commensurate with the rate of supply of asphalt and the output of the paving machine .
number of rollers num .
all joints must be filled and edges adjacent to kerbing and such other hand work as may be necessary must be rolled with a suitable pedestrian type roller .
joints num .
at places not accessible to the roller thorough compaction must be ensured by means of hot tampers and at all joints with structures the surface mixture must be effectively sealed .
hot tampers num .
the contractor shall ensure the protection of services and property from deterioration or damage due to the works .
protection num .
finish rolling shall be carried out while the material is still warm enough for the removal of tyre marks .
steel wheeled rollers shall be used finish rolling specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num insitu air void content num .
the characteristic insitu air void content for any lot shall be deemed to be conforming if it attains a value complying with table num .
the characteristic insitu air voids shall be determined for each layer of intermediate course asphalt placed within an asphalt pavement in accordance with specification num quality systems .
insitu air void num .
air voids shall be calculated on the basis of the results of tests of core samples of asphalt sampled from an asphalt layer after laying and compaction in accordance with wa num .
the density of the core samples shall be determined in accordance with wa num .
the air voids shall be calculated using the mean maximum density of all asphalt results from the same production shift in accordance with wa num and wa num .
num .
core samples shall be taken within num hours of placement of a lot of asphalt .
results of testing shall be reported on a nata endorsed test report within num hours of the core samples being taken .
the testing laboratory shall send all results directly to amongst others the contractor the superintendent and a nominated representative at the main roads materials engineering branch .
testing and reporting of results table num insitu air voids requirements mix type characteristic value minimum maximum all layers of nummm and nummm asphalt num num note note the aim is for asphalt suppliers to be able to consistently achieve a characteristic insitu air void content of num num .
to allow for asphalt suppliers to implement new asphalt mix designs and construction practices to achieve this outcome and until a transition is fulfilled the maximum characteristic value for insitu air voids is num .
num .
where any lot of asphalt work is deemed nonconforming the contractor shall apply remedial action in accordance with the procedures contained in specification num quality systems and the lot shall be removed and replaced with fresh asphalt and retested .
removal shall be carried out so as not to damage the underlying layers or any road furniture such as gully gratings .
any such damage shall be repaired at no cost to the principal .
non conformance num surface requirements num .
the surface of the compacted asphalt shall be smooth true to the specified crown and grades be of uniform appearance free of dragged areas cracks open textured patches and roller or paver marks .
any section of asphalt that is loose or broken mixed with dirt or other impurities or is in any way defective shall be removed and replaced .
specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
when using the num metre straight edge in accordance with wa num the shape of the top of the compacted asphalt intermediate course shall be deemed to be conforming when the maximum deviation from a numm straight edge placed in any position on the surface of the asphalt intermediate course does not exceed the limits specified in table num .
a numm straight edge shall be provided with each paver .
shape numm straightedge num .
when using the arrb tr walking profiler in accordance with wa num the shape of the top of the compacted asphalt intermediate course shall be deemed to be conforming when the maximum deviation measured in any direction and within any numm long section of the surface does not exceed the limits specified in table num .
shape arrb profiler table num surface shape direction of measurement maximum deviation maximum rate of change of deviation longitudinal num mm num mm per num mm transverse num mm num mm per num mm num .
for construction works the upper surface of the compacted asphalt intermediate course shall be within nummm and nummm of the design level .
level and thickness num .
the plan location of the outer edge of the asphalt shall be within num mm of its true location and the rate of change of the edge from its true plan position shall not exceed num in num .
position num .
the contractor shall test for compliance with the specified lines levels thickness and surface finish immediately after initial compaction .
any variations shall be corrected by removing or adding asphalt as may be necessary .
rolling shall then be continued as specified .
after final rolling out the smoothness of the course shall be checked again .
compliance num .
where work is deemed nonconforming the contractor shall apply remedial action in accordance with the procedures contained in specification num quality system and the lot shall be removed and replaced with fresh asphalt and retested .
non conformance num opening finished works to traffic num .
prior to opening the finished asphalt surface to traffic the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the final road surface is completed in accordance with the specification and that the works are properly delineated and safe for public use .
hold point specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa schedule of works section length m width m area m depth mm nominal size of mix from to insert appropriate details of all asphalt treatments for main roads policy refer guidance note num .
supplement with drawings diagrams etc .
where necessary specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numb specific contract requirements num .
material transfer vehicle a material transfer vehicle is required to be used for the following layers .
location yes no num .
echelon paving echelon paving is required to be used for the following areas .
location yes no specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is bituminous products consultant .
num .
use of a material transfer vehicle num the requirement to use a mtv has to be specified at annexure numb .
mtvs facilitate continuous paving by having a truck come in contact with the mtv to empty its load whilst asphalt is transferred into the paver by conveyor .
removing contact between a truck and paver overcomes bumps from the stopstart of the paver and reduces the likelihood of mix segregation near the end of a truckload .
the outcome is more uniform temperature of the asphalt which will result in improved and more uniform compaction improved ride and less incidence of segregated areas of asphalt .
mtvs are not suited to all asphalting applications as shown below .
where a mtv must be used includes on a project where there will be high daily production outputs of asphalt eg .
widening of tonkin and leach highways near perth airport gateway wa project where there are long paving runs e.g .
kwinana fwy widening roe to armadale and armadale to russell where improved ride quality is required e.g .
great eastern hwy from graham farmer fwy to tonkin hwy city east alliance where asphalt is to be placed in adverse weather conditions such as low temperatures or strong winds e.g .
winter paving when paving thin layers of asphalt containing a polymer modified binder .
mtvs may not be suited for the following scenarios on a project where there will be small daily production outputs of asphalt e.g .
small minor improvement works where there are confined spaces small areas of widening such as intersection channelisation including short turn pockets .
specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
seal on asphalt intermediate course num the aim of the seal is to waterproof the surface of the uppermost layer of the nummm asphalt intermediate course .
details of the binder aggregate type binder application rate and aggregate spread rate should be included in specification num or num as appropriate .
the amount of binder applied will dictate how effective the seal will be at waterproofing the surface .
single coat seals using nummm and nummm cover aggregate will have low binder application rates and will not provide sufficient waterproofing therefore the smallest size aggregate specified for a single coat seal is nummm nominal size applied to snume modified binder at the following application rate binder application rate numc lmnum aggregate spread rate mnummnum nummm single coat seal using snume num num where an emulsified binder is used it is not practical to apply the seal as a single coat of nummm aggregate .
the specification requires that where an emulsion seal is to be applied over the nummm intermediate course it has to be a nummm two coat seal .
binder application rate numc lmnum aggregate spread rate mnummnum numst coat nummm aggregate num num numnd coat nummm aggregate num num num .
minor works contracts num where this document is used in a minor works contract with asphalt surfacing as the sole or primary work required authors should ensure that the following specifications are also included in the tender documentation a. specification num general requirements b. specification num pavement marking if required note current minor works tender documentation contains its own quality traffic and osh specifications .
num contract specific requirements include any details provided or required by the principal such as a .
setting out information b .
working hours and days if not already included in the tender document c. surface preparation e.g .
normally sweeping only but may include localised surface correction requirements specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name d. record forms to include any required details of proof and origin of asphalt supply etc .
insert appropriate annexures and reference to annexures to suit in conjunction with these additional provisions .
specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num asphalt intermediate course num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title asphalt intermediate course revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager contracts .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num materials for bituminous treatments copyright main roads western australia specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num num included as num and wa num bpc num num conformance requirements for blended bitumen tbl num split into num tables one with test methods and the other with limits num num included natural sand for intermediate course num amended rap source wording bpc num tables num num added new adhesion agent num deleted dense graded num four methods referenced for geotextile fabric bpc num num new clause with requirements for geotextile fabric for sealing num removed reference to cold mix bpc num num updated title of aapa advisory note no .
num num quantity of adhesion agent required now numml num clarification of who does which testing num rhodoval danum added and rhodoval da num removed from list of adhesion agents num red oxide allowed only in laterite dense graded asphalt num num num num as num removed as it no longer has a sampling method bpc num num limit for rolling average durability amended to num days specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num products and materials num num bitumen num num bitumen emulsion num num polymer modified binders num num reclaimed asphalt pavement num num aggregates num num cutting oils num num precoat fluid num num adhesion agent num num fibres num num anti foaming agent num num crumb rubber num num pigment num num mineral filler num num protective paper num num geotextile fabric num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num materials for bituminous treatments general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and use of materials for sprayed bituminous surfacings and asphalt .
materials used for microsurfacing are addressed in specification num microsurfacing and materials used for the enrichment of seals are addressed in specification num enrichment .
num .
the works shall include the supply storage transport and handling of materials .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below acts and regulations dangerous goods safety storage and handling of nonexplosives regulations num wa australian standards as num methods for sampling and testing aggregates as num specification for test sieves as num bituminous emulsions for the construction and maintenance of pavements as num determination of the linear shrinkage of a soil standard method as num limes for building as num geotechnical site investigations as num bitumen for pavements as num determination of the flashpoint of flammable liquids closed cup as num methods of testing bitumen and related road making products as num road tank vehicles for dangerous goods as num geotextiles methods of test specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name astm test methods astm dnum standard test method for kinematic viscosity of transparent and opaque liquids astm dnum hydrocarbon types in liquid petroleum products by fluorescent indicator adsorption astm dnum distillation of petroleum products astm dnum standard test methods for identification of fibres in textiles astm dnum standard test method to determine asphalt retention of paving fabrics used in asphalt paving for fullwidth applications other standards and publications austroads bitumen sealing safety guide australian asphalt pavement association advisory note no .
num guide to the heating and storage of binders for asphalt manufacture rock colour chart rock colour chart committee geological society of america num .
main roads test methods wa num linear shrinkage wa num sampling procedures for aggregates wa num sampling and preparation of granulated rubber wa num particle size distribution of aggregate wa num aggregate moisture content convection oven method wa num aggregate moisture content microwave oven method wa num average least dimension wa num flakiness index wa num los angeles abrasion value wa num crushing test value wa num bulk density of granulated rubber wa num particle size distribution of granulated rubber wa num steel content of granulated rubber wa num rubber content of bitumenrubber blends wa num colour of aggregate specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name wa num sampling procedures for bitumen and oils wa num bitumen durability dynamic shear rheometer method wa num assessment of liquid adhesion agents wa num bitumen content and particle size distribution of asphalt and stabilised soil centrifuge method wa num stone coating and water resistance test cationic bitumen emulsions austroads test methods agpttnum method of sampling pmbs polymers and crumb rubber agpttnum pretreatment and loss on heating of bitumen and multigrade agpttnum segregation of polymer modified binders agpttnum handling viscosity of polymer modified binders brookfield thermosel agpttnum flash point of polymer modified binders agpttnum elastic recovery consistency stiffness of pmbs agpttnum torsional recovery of polymer modified binders agpttnum softening point of polymer modified binders agpttnum compressive limit of polymer modified binders gpttnum rubber content of digested crumb rubber binders trichlor bath method agpttnum particle size and properties of crumb rubber agpttnum morphology of crumb rubber bulk density test main roads specifications specification num quality systems specification num asphalt wearing course specification num enrichment specification num microsurfacing num definitions num .
the terms seal and reseal have the same meaning except where the context of any particular passage indicates otherwise .
seal and reseal num .
durability value is defined as the time in days to reach the specified apparent viscosity level when determining the long term effect of heat and air in accordance with as num or wa num .
durability specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
rolling average durability value for a source of bitumen supply is defined as the average of all durability values determined over the previous num calendar months or the average of the previous six ship loads of imported bitumen determined in accordance with clause num .
rolling average durability value num .
reclaimed asphalt pavement rap is surplus plant mix or the material reclaimed from an asphalt wearing or intermediate course by cold planing which is reprocessed by crushing andor screening for recycling into new asphalt .
rap num .
polymer modified binder pmb refers to polymer modified bitumen including crumb rubber modified bitumen .
pmb num num not used products and materials num bitumen num general num .
all bitumen used or for manufacturing cutback bitumen polymer modified bitumen multigrade bitumen or bitumen emulsion shall be a straight run slightly blown or blended product prepared by distillation from crude bituminous base oils .
the bitumen shall be homogeneous .
it shall not foam when heated to numc .
the formation of a thin layer of bubbles will not be regarded as foaming .
bitumen shall be sampled in accordance with wa num .
num .
where class num or class num bitumen is produced by the blending of a low and high viscosity bitumen the following process shall be completed to verify conformance of the blend formulation blended bitumen the viscosity at numc and other properties as required of the low and high viscosity bitumen shall be determined .
a blend formulation shall be determined to manufacture class num or class num bitumen .
the blend formulation shall be assigned a unique identifier .
a unique formulation shall be applicable to the batch of each of the two or more constituent materials used to manufacture the class num or class num bitumen .
when a blend formulation is determined a laboratory or plant batch shall be manufactured .
the batch shall be tested for all properties shown in specification num .
manufacture of class num or class num bitumen using the new blend formulation shall not be undertaken until testing confirms the blend complies to all specified requirements .
bitumen manufactured using the blend formulation shall be sampled and tested for viscosity at numc at the frequency in specification num quality systems .
when a batch of one of the constituent materials changes a new blend formulation shall be determined .
specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num properties num .
class num class num and class num bitumen shall conform to the properties shown in table num at the time of manufacture and at any time until the bitumen is used .
properties methods of testing bitumen method of test property as num or as num viscosity at numc pa.s as num or as num or as num viscosity at numc pa.s as num penetration at numc numg nums pu num pu num mm as num density at numc kgm as num flash point c as num matter insoluble in toluene percent as num effect of heat and air on a moving film of bitumen rolling thin film oven test as num or as num viscosity of residue at numc as percentage of original as num ductility at numc mm asnzs num or wa num durability value specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num properties of bitumen property class num class num class num min max min max min max viscosity at numc pa.s num num num num num num viscosity at numc pa.s num num num num num num penetration at numc numg nums pu num pu num mm num num note num num density at numc kgm num num num flash point c num num num matter insoluble in toluene percent num num num rolling thin film oven test viscosity of residue at numc as percentage of original num num num ductility at numc mm num not applicable durability value refer clause num not applicable note the penetration value can exceed the maximum limit of num if the result for viscosity at numc has been verified by a second laboratory to the laboratory that did the initial testing .
num bitumen durability num .
in addition to the properties specified in table num class num bitumen shall conform to the following requirements at the source of initial supply within western australia .
the rolling average durability value shall be num days or greater .
the method for determining the monthly average durability value is detailed in the clauses num a and b based on the source of the bitumen .
durability a .
locally produced bitumen i the frequency of testing class num bitumen to determine the durability value shall be at least one batch of bitumen per month .
ii the rolling average is the mean of all durability values reported during the previous num calendar months including values reported by both the bitumen supplier and main roads western australia .
the rolling average value shall be calculated on the first day of each month by determining the average of all durability values reported during the preceding num calendar months .
the average is the sum of all of the durability values divided by the number of reported values during the num month period .
specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name iii the durability values used to determine the rolling average durability value must be traceable to batches of class num bitumen .
the rolling average shall be determined on the first day of each month as a single value rounded to the nearest num day .
b. bitumen produced outside of western australia where supply is from a bulk storage depot with bitumen sourced from outside of western australia at least one sample shall be taken from any delivery to the bulk depot .
the sample shall be tested in full to demonstrate compliance with the properties shown in table num including a durability test .
a rolling average durability value shall be determined for each bulk storage depot .
i annual volume of class num bitumen less than num shipments the rolling average is the mean of all durability values reported for bitumen sampled and tested from the last six num shipments of class num bitumen delivered to a bulk storage depot including values reported by both the bitumen supplier and main roads western australia .
the rolling average value shall be calculated on the first day of each month by determining the average of all of the durability values of the last num shiploads of class num bitumen .
the durability values used to determine the rolling average durability value must be traceable to all batches of class num bitumen .
the rolling average shall be determined on the first day of each month as a single value rounded to the nearest num day .
ii annual volume of class num bitumen more than or equal to num shipments the rolling average is the mean of all durability values reported during the previous num calendar months including values reported by both the bitumen supplier and main roads western australia .
the rolling average value shall be calculated on the first day of each month by determining the average of all durability values reported during the preceding num calendar months .
the average is the sum of all of the durability values divided by the number of reported values during the num month period .
the durability values used to determine the rolling average durability value must be traceable to all batches of class num bitumen .
the rolling average shall be determined on the first day of each month as a single value rounded to the nearest num day .
specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num handling and transport num .
in respect to the loading transporting heating circulation blending transfer and sampling of bitumen and cutback bitumen procedures as detailed in the austroads publication bitumen sealing safety guide shall be followed .
the supplier and carrier shall also observe the provisions and be licensed to perform delivery and heating in accordance with the dangerous goods safety storage and handling of nonexplosives regulations num wa in respect to the transport of dangerous goods including flammable liquids .
num .
bitumen shall be loaded into road tankers at temperatures between numc and numc or in accordance with the safe loading requirements of the facility at which the bitumen is being loaded .
num bitumen emulsion num general num .
the bitumen used for the manufacture of the bitumen emulsion shall comply with the requirements of clause num .
bitumen to be used to manufacture bitumen emulsion shall be sampled in accordance with wa num .
num properties num .
bitumen emulsion shall be manufactured as specified in as num and conforms to the properties in as num .
in addition where crsnum emulsion is specified for primerseal or seal works it shall meet or exceed the following criteria when tested in accordance with wa num .
dry aggregate num coated wet aggregate num coated num .
bitumen emulsion shall be sampled in accordance with as num except that only one sample shall be taken from a prepared batch .
the single sample shall be representative of the properties of the emulsion in the storage tank .
samples shall be collected in appropriately sized and clean containers that will not alter or interfere with the properties of the emulsion .
num dilution of bitumen emulsion num .
water used to dilute bitumen emulsion shall be compatible with the emulsion .
the water shall be added to the emulsion at a suitable temperature .
emulsion shall not be added to the water .
num handling and transport num .
bitumen emulsion shall be loaded into road tankers at a temperature that ensures the product remains stable and in accordance with the manufacturers written instructions .
road tankers shall be lagged and shall have thermometers suitably located to give a representative temperature reading of the product in the tanker .
the tanker shall be provided with facilities to enable circulation and mixing of bitumen emulsion prior to unloading .
road tanker specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
bitumen emulsion is not classified as a dangerous good however it should be transported and handled only by competent and experienced personnel preferably in possession of a current dangerous goods licence .
num heating and circulation num .
operations involving heating and circulating of bitumen emulsion shall be done by appropriately trained personnel .
the circulating rate and heating rates shall be such that no premature breaking of the bitumen emulsion occurs .
circulating shall be continuous while heating is in progress .
num .
circulating shall continue for at least ten minutes after heating ceases .
burners shall not be used unless the level of the material in the heating tank is at least num mm above the tops of the heating tubes .
the circulatory pipework shall be such that no foaming or air entrapment occurs during circulation .
num .
any bitumen emulsion heated in excess of numc num or num standard emulsion or numc pmb emulsion after leaving the place of manufacture shall not be used and shall be removed from site .
the quantity of bitumen emulsion heated shall be that quantity that is to be applied to the pavement within six num hours of the heating being carried out .
if bitumen emulsion is held in site storage for prolonged periods then such heating as may be necessary to prevent the bitumen emulsion temperature falling below numc shall be permitted .
num .
a record of the heating locations and times is to be recorded by the driver on the delivery or despatch documentation or other traceable documentation .
num polymer modified binders num general num .
the bitumen used for the manufacture of polymer modified binders pmb shall comply with the requirements of clause num .
bitumen to be used to manufacture pmb shall be sampled in accordance with wa num .
pmb shall be sampled in accordance with agpttnum .
num .
crumb rubber modified binders shall be manufactured in a facility using a high shear mill and digestion tank .
processing oils shall not be added to the binder .
crumb rubber modified binder num properties sprayed sealing binders num .
polymer modified binders pmb for use in sprayed sealing shall conform to the properties shown in table num .
specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num properties of pmb for sprayed sealing binder property test method binder class snume snume snume snume snumr consistency at numc pa.s minimum agpttnum note num num num num num num consistency num at numc pa.s agpttnum note num num report only report only report only report only report only stiffness at numc kpa maximum agpttnum num num num num num rubber content minimum agpttnum or wa num na na na na num compression limit at numc numkg mm minimum agpttnum na na na na num elastic recovery at numc nums num minimum agpttnum note num na na num na num viscosity at numc pa.s maximum agpttnum num num num num num flash point c minimum agpttnum num num num num num loss on heating mass maximum agpttnum num num num num num torsional recovery at numc nums agpttnum num num num num num num num num num num softening point c agpttnum num num num num num num num num num num segregation value maximum agpttnum num num num num num note num test using mould b for snume and snume binder with a breakpoint of nummm and test speed of nummms .
other classes shall be tested using mould a with a breakpoint of nummm and test speed of nummms .
note num consistency num is derived from the elastometer data using the same test conditions as the consistency test .
num properties asphalt binders num .
pmb for use in hot mixed asphalt shall conform to the properties shown in table num .
specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num properties of pmb for asphalt binder property test method binder class anume anume anume anump anume polymer type not specified eva polybutadiene only consistency at numoc pa.s minimum agpttnum note num num num num num num consistency num at numc pa.s agpttnum note num num report only report only report only report only report only stiffness at numoc kpa maximum agpttnum num num num num num viscosity at numoc pa.s maximum agpttnum num num num num num flash point oc minimum agpttnum num num num num num loss on heating mass maximum agpttnum num num num num num torsional recovery at numoc nums agpttnum num num num num num num num num num num softening point oc agpttnum num num num num num num num num num num segregation value maximum agpttnum num num num num num note num test using mould b for anume binder with a breakpoint of nummm and test speed of nummms .
anume anume anume and anump shall be tested using mould a with a breakpoint of nummm and test speed of nummms .
note num consistency num is derived from the elastometer data using the same test conditions as the consistency test .
num handling and transport num .
in respect to the loading transporting heating circulation blending transfer and sampling of pmb procedures as detailed in the austroads publication bitumen sealing safety guide shall be followed .
the supplier and carrier shall also observe the provisions and be licensed to perform delivery and heating in accordance with the dangerous goods safety storage and handling of nonexplosives regulations num wa in respect to the transport of dangerous goods including flammable liquids .
specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
pmb shall be loaded into road tankers isotainers or sprayers at temperatures not exceeding numc or the manufacturers recommended maximum temperature whichever is the lower .
road tankers shall be equipped with internal tank circulation .
the binder shall not be heated above the manufacturers recommended maximum temperature at any time .
the binder shall be delivered at a temperature suitable for its application at the time of delivery .
num heating and circulation num .
the binder shall be kept at the lowest practical temperature during transport and shall not be heated to spraying or asphalt mixing temperatures until the time it is to be used .
num .
the heating and circulating of binder shall be done only by competent experienced and trained personnel .
the circulating rate shall not be less than num litres per minute for hot pmb but may be circulated at a lesser rate for emulsified pmb .
circulating shall continue for at least twenty minutes after heating ceases .
the heating rate shall not exceed numc per hour at any stage during the heating process .
burners shall not be used unless the level of the material in the heating tank is at least num mm above the top of the heating tubes .
num .
when binder is heated on site the temperature shall not be heated to a temperature greater than the maximum of the manufacturers recommended temperature range or numc whichever is the lower value .
any binder that has been reheated to a temperature greater than the manufacturers recommended maximum temperature or has been otherwise contaminated shall not be used .
a record of the heating locations and times is to be recorded by the driver on the delivery or despatch documentation or other traceable documentation .
num .
guidance on the storage of pmb at elevated temperatures is provided in aapa advisory note no .
num .
pmb used as an asphalt binder when stored in a fixed or mobile tank at an asphalt plant shall comply with the requirements of aapa advisory note no .
num .
binder held at the mixing temperature for periods of time longer than those shown in advisory note no .
num shall not be used for the production of asphalt .
num reclaimed asphalt pavement num properties num .
rap shall be obtained from surplus plant mix or the material reclaimed from an asphalt wearing or intermediate course by cold planing .
rap shall not contain any of the following materials a. granular pavement materials clay soil or organic matter b. bricks concrete glass or building materials c. laterite asphalt tar based products geotextile fabrics raised pavement markers or road surface treatments such as high friction surfacings or coloured pavement markings .
specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num processing and storage num .
rap shall be maintained in a separate stockpile prior to processing for use in asphalt .
rap shall be crushed and screened to produce a nominal nummm or nummm sized material incorporating fines with num of the material passing a nummm sieve .
rap material of a nominal nummm size may be crushed and screened but shall not incorporate fines .
the processed nummm rap shall have num of the material passing a nummm sieve and less than num of the material passing a nummm sieve .
the processed rap shall be free flowing and consistent in appearance .
where the stored rap is not free flowing it shall be screened andor crushed again .
size num .
all processed rap shall be stored under cover until it is used in asphalt production .
the storage facility must be covered on the top and at least three sides and not allow rainfall or other sources of moisture to wet the rap after screening .
the floor of the storage facility shall be concrete sloping down to a drain to allow removal of excess moisture .
storage facility num stockpile management and testing num .
processed rap shall be maintained in lots to ensure traceability .
a management plan shall be prepared detailing amongst other things the stockpiling processing storage and testing of rap .
a minimum of three samples are to be taken for every num tonne in each lot of processed rap and tested for particle size distribution and bitumen content in accordance with wa num and moisture content in accordance with wa num or num .
num aggregates num general num .
the specification for aggregates is divided into five headings .
a .
source rock for aggregate used for sprayed sealing and asphalt works .
b .
crushed aggregates used for sprayed sealing works including handling and transport of aggregate .
c. crushed aggregates used for asphalt works including handling and transport of aggregate .
d. natural sand for intermediate course asphalt .
e. properties of crusher dust and sand for primersealing .
num source rock for crushed aggregate num .
source rock shall be selected from an approved quarry site such that the feed to the primary crusher is fresh hard and durable rock free from clay organic matter weathered except as allowed below or friable material and is consistent in appearance .
a classification system for rock material weathering is defined in table anum of as num .
the proportions of weathered rock material in the source rock shall not exceed the following limits by mass slightly weathered rock num maximum distinctly weathered rock num maximum specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name extremely weathered rock num maximum residual soil num maximum num .
selection of source rock shall be such that the requirements shown in table num are satisfied .
this property is not applicable for aggregate used for primerseals with a life less than num years or for intermediate course asphalt .
table num source rock properties property limit method of test pendulum friction test pafv num min as num or as num num crushed aggregate for sprayed sealing works num .
source rock shall be processed to produce crushed andor screened aggregate suitable for sprayed sealing works and shall conform to the requirements shown in table num .
the aggregate shall be of uniform quality clean hard and durable and shall be free from clay organic matter and elongated particles .
the aggregate shall be of a uniform colour and appearance for the whole of the application .
other than for flakiness index moisture content and average least dimension testing for conformance shall only be undertaken on either num mm or num mm sized aggregate .
specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num crushed aggregate properties sprayed sealing property requirement test method moisture content dry free of visible surface moisture wa num or wa num los angeles abrasion value note num granite and other rock types num maximum wa num basalt num maximum wa num flakiness index note num num maximum note num wa num average least dimension note num report as num or wa num water absorption num maximum as num num wet strength numkn minimum as num wetdry strength variation num maximum as num stripping test value note num num maximum as num degradation factor num minimum as num secondary mineral content note num num maximum as num petrographic examination statement of suitability for use as a sealing aggregate note num the aggregate shall be tested in a clean dry condition without precoating .
the binder shall include num by volume of one of the approved adhesion agents listed at clause num .
note num not applicable for crusher dust sand num mm and num mm aggregate .
note num ald is the mean of three samples from a roadside stockpile used in calculating the binder application rate as referenced in the contract specification .
where the aggregate is supplied direct from a quarry the size of a lot for the purpose of testing must not exceed num mnum .
note num applicable to the mean of three results for each lot .
note num this test is only applicable to basic igneous rock .
num .
the particle size distribution of the crushed aggregate shall conform to the requirements shown in table num .
the specification applies to the mean of three psd results determined for each lot .
test sieves shall comply with the requirements of as num .
specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num particle size distribution psd as sieve size mm percentage by mass passing each sieve for each nominal size of aggregate num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm note num num mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num note num where nummm aggregate is not available from a regional quarry it can be produced by screening conforming nummm sized aggregate to remove retained nummm size and passing nummm sizes .
num crushed aggregate for asphalt works num .
source rock shall be processed to produce crushed andor screened aggregate suitable for asphalt works .
the aggregate shall be of uniform quality clean hard and durable and shall be free from excess dust clay organic matter and elongated particles .
the aggregate shall be of a uniform colour and appearance for the whole of the application .
coarse aggregate is defined as the material retained on a num mm sieve .
physical properties of crushed aggregates shall conform to the requirements of table num .
other than for flakiness index testing for conformance shall only be undertaken on either num mm or num mm sized aggregate .
coarse aggregate num .
in addition to the properties in table num the following colour requirements shall apply to all wearing course asphalt mixes produced in the perth metropolitan area .
the coarse aggregate shall be uniform in colour and shall not contain diorite stones .
when tested in accordance with wa num no more than num by mass of the aggregate shall be darker than value lightness num on the neutral grey axis scale of the rock colour chart .
the value lightness of the aggregate after removal of the stone darker than value num shall not be darker than num on the neutral grey axis of the rock colour chart .
coarse aggregate specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num crushed aggregate properties asphalt property requirement test method los angeles abrasion value note num granite and other rock types num maximum wa num basalt num maximum wa num flakiness index note num num maximum note num wa num water absorption num maximum as num num wet strength numkn minimum as num wetdry strength variation num maximum as num stripping test value note num only applicable to regional plants num maximum as num degradation factor num minimum as num secondary mineral content note num num maximum as num petrographic examination statement of suitability for use as an asphalt aggregate note num the aggregate shall be tested in a clean dry condition without precoating .
the binder shall include num by volume of one of the approved adhesion agents at clause num .
note num only applicable to num num and num mm aggregate .
note num applicable to the mean of three results for each lot .
note num this test is only applicable to basic igneous rock .
num .
fine aggregate is defined as all material retained on a num micron australian standard sieve and passing a num mm australian standard sieve and shall consist of clean tough durable grains free from clay loam or other foreign matter .
fine aggregate shall only consist of crushed rock material .
when the fine aggregate is tested in accordance with as num the water absorption shall not exceed num .
fine aggregate num .
local granite aggregates shall be used for asphalt produced in the perth metropolitan area with the following requirements applying to all wearing course asphalt mixes .
fine aggregate shall be uniform in colour and shall not contain excessively coloured or stained material .
when tested in accordance with wa num the value lightness of the granite shall not be darker than num on the neutral grey axis of the rockcolour chart .
aggregate sources shall be kept constant throughout the period of works .
fine aggregate specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
screened or crushed laterite aggregate used for coloured mixes shall conform to the following requirements .
screened laterite aggregate when tested in accordance with wa num the percentage of stones crushed shall not exceed num and the percentage of stones cracked shall not exceed num .
crushed laterite aggregate when tested in accordance with wa num the percentage of stones crushed shall not exceed num and the percentage of stones cracked shall not exceed num .
when tested in accordance with as num the pafv of the laterite aggregate shall be a minimum of num .
laterite aggregate num .
aggregate shall be loaded transported and stockpiled in such a manner so as not to cause contamination loss of material or deterioration of properties .
any aggregate that is considered contaminated or otherwise nonconforming or unsuitable for use at any stage prior to use shall not be used .
aggregates are to be stockpiled only in agreed suitable areas that are free draining and do not allow contamination with other stockpiles or surrounding or floor materials .
handling and transport num natural sand for intermediate course asphalt num .
natural sand shall be clean hard durable nonplastic free from clumps or other aggregations not contain any organic matter or other deleterious material .
num .
the sand shall have a water absorption value of no more than num when determined in accordance with as num .
water absorption num .
the sand shall have a linear shrinkage value of no more than num when determined in accordance with as num or wa num .
linear shrinkage num crusher dust or sand for primersealing num .
crusher dust or sand use as cover material for primersealing shall meet the requirements of table num and shall be free of clay or silt .
table num properties of crusher dust or sand property requirement test method moisture content dry free of visible surface moisture wa num or num water absorption of fine aggregate num maximum as num particle size distribution grading see below wa num specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
crusher dust or sand shall have properties not less than the following requirements .
grading a .
material shall be coarse with a d num nummm and num cu coefficien t of uniformity where num d is the particle size in millimetres at which num by mass of the sample is smaller in size and num num d cu d where dnum and dnum are respectively equal to the particle size in millimetres at which num and num by mass of the sample is smaller in size .
b .
the maximum particle size shall be num mm .
oversize material shall be removed by screening .
c. shall not have more than num by mass passing the num mm sieve .
num cutting oils num general num .
oils used for reducing the viscosity of bituminous binders shall comply with the properties shown below at any stage after manufacture and until the cutting oil is used .
products such as high flash point cutter shall not be used .
num medium curing cutting oil num .
medium curing cutting oil shall be a petroleum product conforming to the requirements shown in table num .
supply of certified aviation turbine fueljet anum with a statement that it had been denatured and supplied without other change as medium curing cutting oil is acceptable .
table num properties of medium curing cutting oil property requirements test method distillation astm dnum initial boiling point num numc final boiling point numc maximum temperature at num recovery numc maximum flash point pensky martin closed numc minimum as num viscosity at numc num num mms astm dnum density at numc num num kgm as num miscibility with equal parts of class num bitumen complete no precipitation water content num maximum as num percentage aromatics num minimum vol astm dnum specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num slow curing cutting oil num .
slow curing cutting oil shall be the recognised petroleum product distillate fuel oil conforming to the requirements shown in table num .
supply of certified automotive distillate with a statement that it had been supplied without change as sc cutting oil is acceptable .
table num properties of slow curing cutting oil property requirement test method distillation astm dnum initial boiling point num numc final boiling point num numc temperature at num recovery num numc flash point pensky martin closed numc minimum as num viscosity at numc num num mms astm dnum miscibility with equal parts of class num bitumen complete no precipitation water content num maximum as num num precoat fluid num general num .
unless otherwise specified distillate precoating fluid shall be used for works using hot bitumen .
crushed aggregate used for bitumen emulsion surfacing work shall not be precoated with distillate or bitumen based precoating fluids .
for emulsion sealing or primersealing the aggregate shall be prewetted with water to assist adhesion of the binder .
num distillate precoating fluid num .
unless otherwise specified the standard precoating fluid shall be slow curing cutting oil with num by volume of an approved adhesion agent for sprayed sealing works .
num bitumen based precoating fluid num .
where specified bitumen based precoating fluid shall be a blend of slow curing cutting oil class num bitumen and an approved adhesion agent for sprayed sealing works .
the blend may contain between num and num by volume of bitumen and shall contain num by volume of adhesion agent .
the volume of slow curing cutter must be adjusted dependent upon the proportion of bitumen within the blend .
the fluid shall not contain any other materials whether they are bituminous materials fuels solvents water or oils .
specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num adhesion agent num adhesion agent for sprayed sealing works num .
adhesion agent shall be added to bitumen rubberised binders and polymer modified binders used for primerseals seals or reseals in the proportion given in the contract specification using an adhesion agent from the list of approved adhesion agents shown table num .
table num adhesion agents for sprayed sealing works bitumite concentrate redicote be diamin tol rhodoval da num aggrebond pc num adhesion agent for asphalt works num .
adhesion agent for asphalt mixes shall be hydrated lime conforming to as num .
for mixes produced in rural regions where the inclusion of hydrated lime may be impractical an approved liquid adhesion agent shown in table num shall be added to the asphalt binder to promote adhesion .
when liquid adhesion agents are used the concentration of adhesion agent in the binder tank at any time during production shall be between num to num by mass of the binder .
the adhesion agent shall have been added to the binder no more than num hours before production of the asphalt .
table num adhesion agents for regional asphalt mixes bitumite concentrate redicote be diamin tol rhodoval da num aggrebond pc num specification and approval process for adhesion agents num .
adhesion agent shall be a clear liquid product with no sediments readily miscible with bituminous binders easy to pour and does not deteriorate in storage .
the adhesion agent shall be a concentrate without addition of diluents or other materials .
suppliers seeking approval of an adhesion agent must submit the following to the materials engineering branch num colin jamieson dve welshpool wa num .
specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name i letter showing the details of the supplier and the product and an intent to supply the product into the wa industry .
ii sample of the adhesion agent in a solid container applicable for the material .
the sample is to be no older than num days with a minimum quantity of num ml .
iii a complete materials safety data sheet msds for the product being assessed .
num .
when assessed in accordance with wa num the adhesion agent shall meet the requirements shown in table num .
the materials engineering branch shall undertake assessment of the adhesion agent for visual assessment pourability and stripping consistency .
the supplier shall provide a nata endorsed test report for the flashpoint of the adhesion agent .
table num properties of adhesion agent property requirement visual assessment the adhesion agent shall remain clear and not segregate or separate during storage shall show no signs of crusting hardening or formation of a crystalline appearance pourability the adhesion agent shall be fluid and pour readily at the test temperature of numc stripping consistency the maximum stripping for each of the three conditioning periods shall not be greater than num .
flashpoint the flashpoint shall be greater than numc num fibres num .
fibres for use in stone mastic asphalt shall be viatop pur or topcell or an approved equivalent cellulose fibre .
num anti foaming agent num .
dow corning fluid dcnum cs shall be used as an antifoaming agent in a rubberised seal binder .
the anti foaming agent may be diluted to a num solution in slow curing cutting oil and added to the bitumen at a rate of num ml per num litres of bitumen .
num crumb rubber num .
crumb rubber for use in crumb rubber modified binders shall consist of either natural or synthetic rubber processed from tyres or other suitable rubber products .
crumb rubber shall be supplied in a dry condition shall be protected against moisture ingress and shall be stored undercover to ensure the product remains dry .
crumb rubber shall be sampled and prepared for testing in accordance with austroads test methods agpttnum and agpttnum and main roads test method wa num .
specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
crumb rubber shall meet the requirements shown in table num .
crumb rubber shall not contain any foreign material such as sand fibres or aggregate .
crumb rubber shall not contain more than num of elongated particles .
an elongated particle is one where the length of the major axis of the particle is more than double the length of the minor axis .
table num properties of crumb rubber property requirement test method bulk density num kgm agpttnum or wa num iron or steel content num by mass agpttnum or wa num particle shape mean of measured particles maximum nummm agpttnum moisture content maximum num agpttnum particle size distribution sieve size mm percentage passing by mass agpttnum or wa num num num num num num num minimum num num maximum num num maximum num pigment num .
red iron oxide pigment shall be incorporated into laterite asphalt mixes .
the contractor shall use an appropriate type quantity and process for the incorporation of red iron oxide pigment to meet the requirements of specification num .
oxide num mineral filler num .
mineral filler shall be defined as all material passing a num micron australian standard sieve and shall consist of dry mineral dust .
where hydrated lime is used as filler in asphalt it shall conform to as num .
specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num protective paper num .
a heavyduty protective paper such as a bitumenlaminated paper shall be used for all start finish and taper operations on sprayed sealing works .
the paper shall be held securely in place during spraying operations and shall be of sufficient width and strength to prevent overspray and spillage during removal .
a suitable minimum standard is sisalkraft num with a minimum width of num mm .
num geotextile fabric num .
the geotextile fabric shall be nonwoven needle punched fabric manufactured from polyester .
the fabric shall be free of any flaws that may impact upon performance of the fabric .
geotextile fabric used for sprayed seal applications shall comply with the requirements of table num .
properties table num properties of heavy grade geotextile fabric test property note num test method requirements wide strip tensile strength knm as num num mass per unit area gmnum as num num num maximum elongation as num num num uv stabilisation retained strength note num as num at least num melting point c astm dnum num bitumen retention at numc lmnum note num astm dnum num num thickness mm as num num num note num test shall be completed using class num bitumen as per as num .
the sample of bitumen shall be reheated only once .
note num results are to be reported for both fabric directions .
test specimens are to be exposed for a period of num num hours with a total exposure of num kjmnum .
note num geotextile fabric shall be dry conditioned prior to testing .
num .
a roll of geotextile fabric shall geotextile roll a .
be rolled on to a rigid pvc tube b .
be evenly wound on to the tube to create square ends with the roll varying no more than nummm in rolled width c. be within nummm of the ordered width for the full length of the roll d. not be shorter than the ordered length and be no more than numm longer .
specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
when stored geotextile fabric shall be storage a. wrapped with a waterproof opaque material including the ends of rolls b. stored in a shed away from direct sunlight and rain c. kept off the ground and away from any source of moisture .
num .
rolls of geotextile fabric shall show the manufacturers name batch number and date of manufacture .
labelling num .
geotextile fabric shall be used within num years of the date of manufacture .
age num .
the contractor shall test the geotextile fabric for conformance to the properties in table num and at the testing frequency shown in specification num quality systems .
testing shall be undertaken in a laboratory accredited by nata or a laboratory accredited by a body that is signatory to the ilac mutual recognition agreement .
compliance testing num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is bituminous products consultant .
specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num materials for bituminous materials num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title materials for bituminous treatments revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num signs copyright main roads western australia specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted as per corporate guidelines sco num annexure numh class numwz class numwwz sheeting material added to orafol tesm num whole document format changes tesm num whole document inclusion annexure numh for approved retroreflective sheeting materials annexure numi for accredited sign manufacturers annexure numj for installation of multipost signs checklist .
added signfix aluminium fluted posts in annexure numg and signfix post selection chart drawing in annexure numf .
note num in table num warranty performance schedule is altered to entrance angle num and observation angle num instead of all angles .
taper lock base added for circular sign post in clauses num num numb .
requirement for vertical joints in large gantry sign assembled in pieces included in clause num and clause.num .
clause num modified to include relevant drawings .
tesm num whole document inclusion specific uses of class numx reflective sheeting material horizontal alignment brackets as alternative to z stiffener monel and stainless steel rivets for replacing aluminium rivets footing details for removable signs signflex nonmetallic substrate in annexure numb post details for bicycle directional signs in annexure numd polyflex sign base in annexure numg atesm num specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num retroreflective traffic signs num num manufacturers certification and warranty num num sign categories num num sign materials num num tolerances num num sheet metal works num num substrate preparation num num flat aluminium and steel sheet signs braced num num box edge section signs num num sign overlays num num background surfaces num num sign background legend symbols and borders num num protective overlay film or coating num num rear of signs num num marking of reflectorised traffic signs num num packaging for delivery num num num not used num sign supports num num general num num materials num num holes num num post length num num surface finishing num num powder coating num num packaging for delivery num num design of posts num num num not used num associated fixings num num manufacture num num packaging for delivery num num num not used num specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name installation num num sign location num num sign orientation num num flat aluminium and steel sheet signs unbraced num num extruded aluminium section signs num num flat aluminium sheet signs braced post mounted num num flat aluminium sheet signs braced gantry or bridge mounted num num sign overlays num num num not used num sign removal num num sign removal num num sign support removal num num surface reinstatement num num num not used num transportation and storage of signs num num transportation num num indoor storage num num outdoor storage num num sign covering num num num not used num sign maintenance num num sign maintenance num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num specification requirements num annexure numb num mrwa approved alternative sign materials num annexure numc num mrwa approved fixings for metal sheeting num annexure numd num single traffic sign posts num specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure nume num mrwa approved sign fixings num annexure numf num main roads standard sign drawings num annexure numg num mrwa approved alternative sign posts and post fixing devices num annexure numh num mrwa approved retroreflective sheeting materials num annexure num i num sign makers accredited by retroreflective sheeting manufacturers num annexure numj num manufacture installation of multipost signs checklist num specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num signs general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the requirements for the manufacture delivery installation and maintenance of all regulatory warning guide freeway guide direction temporary works hazard marker signs sign supports and associated fixings .
num .
where the signs to be manufactured are not included in the mrwa signs index as num or as num detailed sign drawings will be provided to enable manufacture .
num .
a check list for the manufacture and installation of multipost signs is provided in annexure numj .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num steel sheet and strip hot dip zinc coated or aluminiumzinc coated as num steel tubes for mechanical purposes as num metal finishing preparation and pretreatment abrasive blast cleaning as num metal finishing preparation and pretreatment of surfaces pickling as num metal finishing preparation and pretreatment of surfaces chemical conversion treatment of metals as num aluminium and aluminium alloys flat sheet coiled sheet and plate as num manual of uniform traffic control devices part num and num as num road signs specifications as num colour standards for general purposes as num hot dip galvanised zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name australiannew zealand standards asnzs num aluminium and aluminium alloys extruded rod bar solid and hollow shapes asnzs num retroreflective materials and devices for road traffic control purposes retroreflective materials asnzs num structural steel hotrolled plates floorplates and slabs asnzs num structural steel hotrolled bars and sections asnzs num paints for steel structures organic zincrich primer main roads standards guidelines main roads wa signs index main roads sign standards main roads sign structural design guidelines main roads multimessage signs for road works guidelines main roads drawings as per annexure numf main roads specifications specification num kerbing specification num segmental paving specification num guide posts specification num concrete general works num num not used retroreflective traffic signs num manufacturers certification and warranty num general num .
retroreflectorised traffic signs shall be manufactured and supplied in accordance with the mrwa signs index as num as num and this specification .
num .
where the signs to be manufactured are not included in the mrwa signs index as num or as num detailed sign drawings will be provided to enable manufacture .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num certification from sheeting manufacturer num .
the contractor shall provide the following details related to support for sign performance warranty programs underwritten by the retroreflective sheeting manufacturer a. report of the last audit of the manufacturing facility conducted by the retroreflective sheeting manufacturer to assess the contractors manufacturing performance b. certification issued by the retroreflective sheeting manufacturer that the contractor is currently eligible to offer a sign performance warranty arrangement that is underwritten by the retroreflective sheeting manufacturer c. num copies of a guideline to storage and handling of signs published by the retroreflective sheeting manufacturer shall be included with the tender submission .
the contractor shall provide sign storage areas meeting the specified conditions so that sign performance warranty statements are not adversely impacted or jeopardised and d. a guideline to cleaning and field maintenance of signs published by the retroreflective sheeting manufacturer .
note num contractors shall provide additional copies of the guidelines described in c and d for distribution to work sites and other locations where signs may be stored installed or maintained .
note num the current list of sign makers accredited by retroreflective sheeting manufacturers is given in annexure numi .
num .
before commencement of sign manufacture the contractor shall provide the department with technical literature describing the materials intended for use .
specifically related to the retroreflective material intended for use the contractor shall provide a certificate of conformance showing total compliance with the requirements of asnzs num for each class supported with test results from independent test facilities unless the conditions of clause num are met .
contractors are advised that results from testing complying with asnzs num clause num outdoor accelerated weathering test is considered to be of special importance .
num .
the certificate of conformance in the previous clause is not required for those retroreflective sheeting materials approved by main roads and given in annexure numh .
num .
manufacture of signs shall not proceed until the principal has acknowledged receipt of the certification and guidelines referred to in subclauses num and num in writing .
hold point num retroreflective sheeting num .
the retroreflective materials used in the background or legend of the signs shall conform in all respects with the requirements defined for each of class numw class num and class num retroreflective sheeting as defined in asnzsnum .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the new type of optimum wide angle retroreflective sheeting designated as class numx has higher luminous intensity than class numw .
class numx sheeting material may be used as an alternative to class numw provided there is no cost implication to the principal .
however class numx material shall be used for certain signage instead of class numw as specified by mrwa where better visibility potential provided by the product can be used to make those signs more visible .
num .
the minimum coefficients of luminous intensity per unit area cilm required for a class numx sheeting are shown in table num .
this new class must meet all other requirements of asnzs num for class numw sheeting .
num .
the list of approved retroreflective sheeting materials is given in annexure numh .
num .
the use of class numw material is mandatory for the following regulatory signs a. rnum stop b. rnum giveway c. rnum roundabout num .
class numx material shall be used in the following circumstances a. signs on overhead gantries and bridges .
b. where sign observation angle is greater than numo from the road alignment .
table num photometric performance for class numx reflective sheeting entrance angle  degrees observation angle  degrees minimum coefficient of luminous intensity per unit area cilmnum white yellow red std green blue brown fluro ygrn fluro yellow fluro org num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num sign warranties i general num .
the complete sign panel including all components and fitting thereon or attached except for any aspects covered in clause numii for the sign face shall be guaranteed against any defects caused by failure of the components for a period of at least num months from the date of installation .
num .
responsibility for failure shall be limited to the following a. poor workmanship b. use of unapproved materials c. inappropriate use of approved materials d. incorrect installation by the contractor including fastenings e. poor or incorrect design f. damage during transporting handling and installation num .
in the event of defects the contractor shall be responsible for the total costs of any replacement or repair of signs including removal and erection .
ii sign sheeting material num .
during the warranty period while maintaining a photometric performance of retroreflectivity of at least the percentage shown in table num warranty performance schedule the sign manufacturer shall guarantee that the signs are free of defect in a .
material b. workmanship c. structure d. sign face performance num .
where materials with differing performance characteristics are combined such as a guide sign using class numx for the legend and class num for the background the warranty period applicable is ten num years together with num retained photometric .
num .
in the event of defects the manufacturer shall undertake any replacement or repair of signs including all labour and material involved at the time of replacement at a prorata cost related to the length of service of the sign .
num .
if a sign needs to be replaced and the sign manufacturer is no longer in business the manufacturer of the retroreflective sheeting used in producing the failed sign shall undertake the replacement or repair .
this shall include all costs for labour material and installation and be calculated on a prorata basis related to the provided service life of the sign .
the sign manufacturer shall provide certification confirming acceptance of this condition signed by an authorised corporate officer of the retroreflective sheeting manufacturer specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
this warranty shall not apply to signs that have failed in service as a result of improper fabrication failure to substrate damage during installation improper storage and handling improper maintenance and cleaning practices vandalism negligence inadequate storage conditions accidental damage caused by vehicle accidents or abnormal environmental conditions .
num .
to qualify for warranty entitlement signs must be packaged labelled transported and stored in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer of the retroreflective sheeting together with the substrate being stamped engraved or marked as per clause num .
table num warranty performance schedule background sheeting class used in combination with warranted outdoor exposure warranted retained cilm percentile  class numx class numx class numw class num electronic cuttable films screen printed colours num years num  class numw class numx class numw class num electronic cuttable films screen printed colours num years num  class num class num electronic cuttable films num years num  class num screen printed colours num years num  class num class numx class numw class num electronic cuttable films screen printed colours num years num  note num warranted retained brightness levels apply to reflective sheetings used for sign backgrounds borders and legends .
note num retained cil percentile is based on minimum cil values for new reflective sheetings by class for observation angle num  and entrance angle num  defined in relevant tables included in asnzsnum and table num for class numx material .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num sign categories num flat signs unbraced num .
this category comprises flat aluminium sheet signs of the following maximum dimensions aluminium signs a. rectangular signs not exceeding nummm nominal width and nummm nominal length b. triangular signs not exceeding nummm nominal vertical depth c. diamond signs not exceeding nummm x nummm square d. other shaped signs including circular octagonal and trapezoidal etc not exceeding nummm depth num .
unbraced flat steel or nonmetallic substrate signs may be used for those signs specified in clause num only which are vulnerable to damage by vehicles or vandalism .
the signs shall be in accordance with the approved items given in annexure numb and are generally used with alternative sign posts given in annexure numg .
steel signs num .
chevroflex flexible chevron alignment marker comprised of polymer panels may be used as an alternative to the unbraced flat aluminium sheet sign dnum num .
the complete system including the base shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
chevroflex chevron alignment markers are included in the list of approved items in annexure numb .
num flat aluminium sheet signs braced num .
this category comprises flat aluminium sheet signs of the following dimensions a. rectangular signs exceeding nummm nominal width and nummm nominal length b. triangular signs exceeding nummm nominal vertical depth c. diamond signs exceeding nummm x nummm square d. other shaped signs including circular octagonal and trapezoidal etc exceeding nummm depth num extruded aluminium section signs num .
this category comprises extruded aluminium section signs such as street and road name signs attached directly to sign supports .
num temporary information signs num .
this category comprises flat aluminium or steel sheet signs as specified in clause num to be used for short term purposes .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num box edge section signs num .
this category comprises hot dip zinc coated or powder coated steel signs used at construction work zone sites or unbraced flat aluminium sheet signs fastened to a frame consisting of num x num shs welded tubes to be used for shortterm purposes only .
num sign overlays num .
signs overlays are used for the modification or amendment to a sign legend .
num .
overlays less than nummm x nummm shall be of the decal type and greater than nummm x nummm shall be made from nummm thick flat aluminium sheet .
however all overlays requiring a protective overlay film shall be made from nummm thick flat aluminium sheet regardless of size .
num multimessage signs num .
multimessage signs may be used as an alternative or in conjunction with standalone signs for traffic management in road works .
num .
multimessage signs shall be used and installed in accordance with mrwa guidelines for multimessage signs .
num .
multimessage signs shall be mounted in a frame complying with asnum .
typical frame details are given in drawing no .
num .
num .
multimessage signs may be manufactured using the substrates detailed in table num .
num sign materials num .
signs shall be manufactured from the following materials unless indicated in annexure numb specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num sign materials sign category material description material compliance flat aluminium sheet signs unbraced clause num aluminium sheet nummm thick as num in the following grades and tempers alloy temper num hnum or hnum num hnum hnum or hnum flat aluminium sheet signs braced clause num aluminium sheet nummm thick as num in the following grades and tempers alloy temper num hnum or hnum num hnum hnum extruded aluminium section signs clause num extruded aluminium section as num in the following grades and tempers alloy temper num tnum num tnum temporary information signs clause num hot dip zinc coated or powder coated steel nummm thick as num in the following grades and coating class alloy class gnum zfnum gnum aznum flat steel sheet signs unbraced clause num hot dip zinc coated or powder coated flexible steel nummm thick as num in the following grades and coating class alloy class gnum aznum box edge section signs clause num hot dip zinc coated or yellow or off white powder coated steel num nummm thick with folded edge .
alternatively in place of a folded edge the sheet is fastened to a welded numxnum shs galvanised or yellow or offwhite powder coated steel tube see drawing no .
num num .
as num in the following grades and coating class alloy class gnum zfnum gnum aznum sign overlays clause num aluminium sheet nummm thick as num in the following grades and tempers alloy temper num hnum or hnum num hnum hnum or hnum multimessage signs clause num different materials can be used for substrates including nummm core flute aluminium uv stabilised plastic the thickness and rigidity should be sufficient to prevent the signs being blown out of the frame specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
extruded aluminium sections shall have a track along the top and the bottom of the blade .
num .
flat aluminium sheet shall be smooth and free from cracks sharp edges and other blemishes and shall not be swaged have the edges rolled or be treated in any form to provide additional stiffness .
num tolerances num .
signs shall be manufactured to the following tolerances a .
length and width nummm b. hole diameters nummm c. hole centre position tolerances laterally nummm d. hole centre position tolerances vertically nummm e. maximum allowable twist warp or departure from flatness nummmm num sheet metal works num .
holes in unbraced signs shall be drilled or punched in the locations specified on drawing no .
num .
num .
burrs and rough and sharp edges shall be removed after cutting drilling and punching of holes .
num substrate preparation num .
after the completion of sheet metal works and prior to the application of paint or sheeting aluminium material shall be etched on both sides by acid etching in a num num phosphoric acid bath at a temperature in the range numo numoc followed by thorough rinsing in clean water .
as an alternative to acid etching the substrate shall be cleaned degreased and mechanically abraded in accordance with the reflective sheeting manufacturers recommendation .
num .
the sign face shall be treated in accordance with the paint or sheeting manufacturers published instructions as appropriate and in a manner to validate the manufacturers product warranty .
num .
steel material used for temporary information signs construction work zones and any other special purposes shall be prepared in accordance with the sheeting manufacturers published recommendations and in a manner to validate the manufacturers warranty as applicable .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num flat aluminium and steel sheet signs braced num sheet size and joint limitations num .
flat sheet signs that can not be manufactured from a single sheet of material and which exceed nummm in length but do not exceed nummm in height shall be manufactured from the least number of sheets possible .
num .
flat sheet signs that can not be manufactured from a single sheet of material and which are greater than nummm in length may be fabricated as single multipiece signs using vertical joining of either nummm nummm or nummm wide sheets and least number of sheets possible .
num .
flat sheet signs that can not be manufactured from a single sheet of material and which are greater than nummm in height may be fabricated in horizontal modules with each module using the least number of sheets possible .
all horizontal joints shall be by using an approved interlocking stiffener system equivalent to types specified in clause num .
num joints i general num .
joints shall be located so as to minimise the amount of legend directly over the joint .
num .
legend and background on either side of a joint shall be colour matched .
ii horizontal joints num .
the top edge of a module that is to join the bottom edge of another module shall have a type anum bnum or cnum aluminium stiffener attached as specified in clause num .
the bottom edge of a module that is to join the top edge of another module shall have a z section stiffener attached as specified in clause num .
the aluminium stiffeners shall be attached to the aluminium or steel sheet by a single row of evenly spaced rivets or other fixings as specified in clause num .
num .
as an alternative to the horizontal joint constructed in accordance with the above clause horizontal joints may be constructed using type a type b or type c stiffeners together with a sign alignment bracket as detailed on drawing no .
num provided the maximum spacing of the stiffeners is less than nummm .
the maximum spacing of the alignment bracket should be nummm .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name iii vertical joints num .
before vertical joints are constructed the adjoining sheets shall be painted or covered with reflective sheeting .
joints shall be covered with a backing strip of the same metal type as the sign num nummm wide terminating num nummm short of the edge of the sign and discontinued at each horizontal stiffening section with a gap not exceeding nummm .
the backing strip for a joint may be omitted if the calculated length of the strip is less than nummm .
the backing strip shall be attached to each aluminium sheet by a single row of evenly spaced rivets or by other approved fixings as specified in clause num .
the resultant gap between two sheets so butted shall not at any point exceed nummm .
workshop assembly num .
an approved joining tape may be used as an alternative method of constructing a joint the backing strip is to be fixed to the sign by num mm wide very high bond vhb joining strips on both sides of the joint and running along the full length of the backing strip .
such an approved tape is numm vhb tape which shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
num .
for large gantry single sign spanning across more than one lane or other very large signs sign panels may be assembled on site in pieces to reduce the difficulty of handling and erecting .
the vertical joints along the full height of the sign shall be formed using preinstalled aluminium angles num x num x nummm in accordance with drawing no .
num .
the angles shall be bolted together with a galvanised mnum bolt and nut at nummm spacing with equal distances from sign edges on both sides .
onsite assembly num extruded aluminium stiffeners num .
type a type b type c type anum type bnum type cnum and type z stiffeners are detailed on drawing no num .
they shall be affixed to the rear of a sign .
type a type b type c type anum type bnum and type cnum stiffeners shall be affixed at interval specified on the sign drawings and z stiffeners shall be used to brace the signs .
where horizontal alignment brackets are used to brace the signs instead of z stiffeners in terms of clause numiinum maximum spacing shall be nummm .
num .
type a type b type c type anum type bnum type cnum and type z stiffeners shall be extruded from aluminium type numtnum in accordance with asnzs num .
num .
stiffeners attached to signs less than or equal to num nummm in length shall be a continuous length of extrusion not joined in any way .
where stiffeners longer than num nummm are required and the sign is to be manufactured as a single continuous horizontal unit and continuous lengths of extrusion are not available lengths of stiffener extrusion may be joined .
num .
the ends of the extrusions to be joined shall be machined to facilitate a general purpose full penetration butt weld and the extrusions shall be butt welded together .
extended stiffeners shall be attached with the connections staggered so that the join in two adjacent stiffeners is separated by a distance exceeding numm .
num .
stiffeners shall be attached to the aluminium or steel sheet by a single row of evenly spaced rivets or other fixings as specified in clause num .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num route name tags distance tags and drop tags num .
route name tags distance tags and drop tags shall be manufactured and fixed to signs using the methods shown on drawing nos num num num and num .
where a sign is fabricated using modules then the tag shall only be fixed to the module immediately adjacent to the tag .
num .
the stiffeners and braces attached to the tags shall be the same type of stiffener section as used on the sign .
braces shall be fixed to the stiffeners using a bolted connection as specified in clause num .
num .
signs to be delivered outside the perth metropolitan area shall have their tags and braces removed after trial assembly to simplify packaging .
num rivets and other fixings num .
rivets for attaching stiffener sections and backing strips shall be nummm in diameter and colour matched to the legend and background of the sign .
for signs other than temporary information signs rivets shall be monel or stainless steel pop rivets or selfpiercing riveting system .
for temporary information signs rivets may be manufactured from other suitable materials .
the distance between each rivet shall not exceed nummm with the first and last rivets positioned at a distance not exceeding nummm from the end of each backing strip or stiffener .
a minimum of two rivets shall be used on each side of a joint to fix a backing strip .
num .
the acceptance of fixings other than rivets for attaching stiffener sections and backing strips shall be by type approval in individual cases .
num .
bolted connections used to fix vertical braces to stiffener sections for route name and drop tag attachment shall use the components and the method shown on drawing nos num num and num .
num box edge section signs num .
box edge section signs shall be a .
formed from a single steel sheet and incorporate a formed nummm box edge on all sides in accordance with drawing no num or b .
constructed by fastening a single steel or aluminium sheet to a frame consisting of welded numxnum shs tubing in accordance with drawing no.num .
num sign overlays num .
sign overlays shall have the reflective sheeting of the same colour and reflective class as stated on the sign drawings .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
aluminium sheet panel overlays shall be fastened to sign panels using monel or stainless steel pop rivets of size nummm in diameter and colour matched to the legend and background of the sign .
the distance between each rivet shall not exceed nummm with the first and last rivet positioned at a distance not exceeding nummm from the edge of the overlay .
num .
if required protective overlay film compatible with and approved by the sheeting manufacturer shall be applied to the sign overlay prior to installation .
num background surfaces num painted surfaces num .
an undercoat that is suitable for aluminium surfaces and which is compatible with the finishing coat paint shall be applied to the prepared substrate in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
num .
a suitable exterior long life industrial quality matt finish acrylic paint shall be applied to the prepared surface in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
the paint shall be pigmented to give finished colours and specular gloss values in accordance with as num .
num retroreflective sheeting num .
retroreflective sheeting shall be applied to the prepared substrate in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the sheeting shall be applied in one continuous piece without joints as far as possible and shall be in accordance with asnzs num and as num .
the retro reflective sheeting for box edge signs shall have the photometric performance of class num as defined in asnzs num and as specified on the drawings .
num sign background legend symbols and borders num reflectorised a colour num .
the colour of retroreflective sheeting to be used for the sign background legend symbols and borders shall be as specified in as num or as shown on the drawings for signs not included in as num .
these colours shall fall within the respective designated colour box defined in asnzs num .
b class num .
the class of retroreflective sheeting to be used shall be as follows i .
for main roads signs as per the drawings contained in the main roads signs index .
ii .
for project related signs as per the project sign drawings for all other signs including australian standards signs as per main roads sign standards on the website .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
retroreflective sheeting shall be applied to the prepared substrate in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
typically the sheeting shall be applied in one continuous piece without joins and shall conform in all respects with the requirements of asnzs num and as num .
num .
coloured legends or backgrounds may be provided by using either transparent or opaque screen process colours or electronic cut films manufactured by the manufacturer of the retroreflective sheeting to ensure compatibility and durability with the retroreflective sheeting .
the screen process colours or electronic cut films shall be applied using materials and techniques recommended by the manufacturer of the retroreflective sheeting .
where joins in the cut films are required they shall be of the butt join type and must not be overlapped .
num .
where joins in the sheeting are required for class num and num retroreflective sheeting they shall be of the overlap type and shall not allow the ingress of moisture after the sign is installed .
where joins in the sheeting are required for class numw and numx material they shall be of the buttjoin type and must not be overlapped .
num nonreflectorised num .
the colours of the nonreflectorised sign legend symbols and borders shall be in accordance with as num or as shown on the sign drawings .
num .
the nonreflectorised sign legend symbols and borders of flat aluminium unbraced signs may be applied by the silk screening process .
silk screening inks shall be applied to the background surface in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
num .
nonreflective sheeting shall be applied in accordance with as num asnzs num and the manufacturers published recommendations .
typically the sheeting shall be applied in one continuous piece without joins .
where joins in the sheeting are required they shall be of the overlap type and shall not allow the ingress of moisture after the sign is installed .
the nonreflective sheeting for temporary signs shall be similar in appearance and have similar qualities as specified in as num and asnzs num .
num protective overlay film or coating num .
in the perth metropolitan area a protective overlay film or coating shall be applied to the face of all signs apart from temporary information signs and box edge signs .
in rural regions protective overlay film shall only be used when specified .
num .
the overlay film or coating shall be compatible with and approved by the sheeting manufacturer and shall not affect the warranty of the retro reflective or nonreflective sheeting .
num .
along the top of every individual sign or interlocking sign segment the overlay film or coating shall be extended over to the back of the sign for a distance of nummm from the top of the sign to prevent ingress of moisture under the overlay film or coating .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num rear of signs num .
the rear surface of all multipost guide service and tourist traffic signs and all poles brackets and other fixings located in the green zone as shown in drawing no num and national parks in rural areas shall be painted bottle green gnum brunswick green num in bsnumc in accordance with clause num .
num marking of reflectorised traffic signs num flat aluminium sheet signs unbraced num .
unbraced flat aluminium sheet signs shall be stamped or neatly engraved using an engraving tool and stencils on the rear face of the sign in capital block letters and numerals nummm in height with the following details a .
the letters mrwa .
b .
the manufacturers initials or trademark or assigned identification code and state of manufacture e g bsc wa for burns sign company western australia .
c. the month and year of manufacture e.g .
num for october num. d. a coding to identify the manufacturer and class of the retroreflective sheeting .
e. the sheet thickness the relevant international registered designation of the alloy and the temper e.g .
numhnum or numhnum .
f. as num sign number or mrwa sign number .
num flat aluminium sheet signs braced num .
braced flat aluminium sheet signs shall have the aluminium identification plate attached by rivets or other fixings as specified in annexure numc clause num .
the plate shall be attached to the rear bottom corner of the sign nearest to the road normally the bottom left hand corner on the back of the sign nummm above the lowest stiffener to allow the identification plate to be read after the sign is installed .
the identification plate shall be of the same nummm thick aluminium plate as the main sign panel except that the identification plate for signs with protective overlay film shall be anodised bronze colour with an additional capital letter g on the lower right hand corner of the plate .
the identification plate shall be stamped or neatly engraved using an engraving tool and stencils in capital block letters and numerals nummm in height with the following details a .
the letters mrwa .
b .
the manufacturers initials or trademark or assigned identification code and state of manufacture e.g .
bsc wa for burns sign company western australia .
c. the month and year of manufacture e.g .
num for october num .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name d. a coding to identify the manufacturer and class of the retroreflective sheeting .
e. the sheet thickness the relevant international registered designation of the alloy and the temper e.g .
numhnum or numhnum .
f. the mrwa sign drawing number or as num sign number or mrwa sign number .
g. the sign location number as specified on the sign drawing if available .
num extruded aluminium section signs num .
singlesided extruded aluminium signs shall be metal stamped or engraved on the rear of the sign using capital block letters and numerals nummm in height .
an adhesive identification label with letters and numerals of nummm in height shall be attached to the bottom corner nearest to the post of double sided signs .
the identification label shall be designed to last the life of the sign .
the following details shall be shown on the sign or label a .
the letters mrwa .
b .
the manufacturers initials or trademark or assigned identification code and state of manufacture e.g .
bsc wa for burns sign company western australia .
c. the month and year of manufacture e.g .
num for october num .
num temporary information signs num .
temporary information signs shall have an adhesive identification label with capital block letters and numerals nummm in height .
the label shall be attached to the bottom left corner of the rear of the sign .
the identification label shall be designed to last the life of the sign .
the following details shall be shown on the signs a .
the letters mrwa .
b .
the manufacturers initials or trademark or assigned identification code and state of manufacture e.g .
bsc wa for burns sign company western australia .
c. the month and year of manufacture e.g .
num for october num. d. the sign location number as specified on the sign drawing .
num box edge section signs num .
box edge section signs shall have an adhesive identification label with capital block letters and numerals nummm in height .
the label shall be attached to the bottom right corner of the front face of the sign .
the identification label shall be designed to last the life of the sign .
the following details shall be shown on the signs a .
the letters mrwa .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name b .
the manufacturers initials or trademark or assigned identification code and state of manufacture e.g .
bsc wa for burns sign company western australia .
c. the month and year of manufacture .
num packaging for delivery num .
signs shall be packaged and handled in accordance with the sign sheeting manufacturers recommendations to ensure delivery in an undamaged condition .
num .
signs manufactured with class num numw numx sheeting shall be packaged in accordance with the retroreflective sheeting manufacturers recommendations incorporating interleaves of thin foam sheeting .
signs manufactured with class num retroreflective sheeting shall be packaged for delivery interleaved with the backing sheet of the retroreflective sheeting used .
num .
unbraced signs as specified in clause num shall be packaged in groups not exceeding num signs .
each package of signs shall contain signs of the same type with the quantity and description of the signs marked on each package .
num .
braced signs shall be packed face to face in packs of two .
the twosign packs shall be packed in groups not exceeding num packs supported by timber framing for protection during transportation .
num .
the packaged signs shall contain a label with the sheeting manufacturers recommendations for handling and storage and shall be marked keep dry on both faces with letters exceeding nummm in height .
num .
signs shall be transported and stored in accordance with clauses num .
num num not used sign supports num general num .
sign support dimensions shall be in accordance with drawing nos num num num num and num and the post schedules shown on the sign drawings .
num .
the gauge of rectangular hollow section rhs and circular hollow section chs sign posts for single post signs shall be as specified in annexure numd .
num .
circular hollow section chs signposts must be secured using an approved fixing device and or sign mounting bracket as specified in annexure numg .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
flexible sign posts and or mounting bases may be used for single post signs vulnerable to impact .
normally the post mounting base and sign substrate would be designed to be flexible .
approved fixing devices are specified in annexure numg .
flexible sign posts are defined as sign posts which deflects when impacted by a vehicle and then returns to a vertical position without maintenance intervention .
flexible sign posts may only be used for the installation of signs that are mounted near the nose of a traffic island .
the height from the ground to the top of the sign shall not exceed numm .
this application may typically be applied to the following signs flexible sign post a. rnuml or r keep leftkeep right b. rnum no uturn c. rnum uturn permitted d. mrgtnum l or r cars only e. mrhmnum divisional marker or dnum bidirectional hazard marker the types of flexible posts and bases used shall be as specified in annexure numg .
num .
removable sign posts are defined as sign posts which enables the posts to be removed and reinstated from their base with specially designed tools or a lock and key arrangement without damaging either the base or post .
removable sign posts shall be used where specified for all removable signs on highwide load corridor routes .
a pvc casing arrangement and footing details for a removable sign post located in a concrete or paved area is shown in drawing no .
num .
removable sign posts may be also be used in locations where signs are frequently hit and the removable post design enables the post to be replaced using the existing footing .
alternative types of removable sign posts used shall be as specified in annexure numg .
removable sign posts num .
frangible aluminium posts as specified in annexure numg and installed in accordance with the manufacturers requirements are also approved for use in wa .
num materials num normal nonflexible posts num .
materials used for the fabrication of the posts shall be of the following a .
low carbon electric resistance welded erw steel tube in accordance with as num. b. galvanised steel strip in accordance with as num. c. universal beams shall be bhp grade num in accordance with asnzs num .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name d. base plates for breakaway posts shall be grade num in accordance with asnzs num. e. fuse plates for breakaway posts shall be bisalloy num. f. ground support stands for box edge section signs shall be num mpa mild steel box section and rod .
g. fluted aluminium poles and sleeves shall be aluminium grade num tnum in accordance with asnzs num .
num .
the posts shall be saw cut not sheared .
holes may be drilled or punched .
no deformation to posts shall result from cutting drilling or punching .
num .
drilling holes in the field on galvanised or powder coated posts shall be kept to a minimum .
if it is required to drill any holes in the field the drilled holes shall be coated with suitable galvanising paint prior to attaching the sign .
num flexible posts num .
flexible signposts shall be made with material which provide the properties of strength flexibility impact resistance and durability required .
the material used shall not shatter into multiple parts on impact and after being struck signposts shall not project a dangerous impaling section .
num .
the material shall be resistant to combustion if located in areas subjected to fire of intensity typical of roadside bush and grass fires .
the material shall not be affected by hydrocarbon solvents such as mineral turpentine kerosene and diesel which may be used for cleaning purposes .
any metal component should be anticorrosive .
num .
the signposts shall be capable of retaining its colour appearance and physical properties for at least three years when exposed to weather conditions existing in western australia .
num .
the flexible post shall be capable of selferecting and remaining serviceable after being subjected to a series of direct impacts by a typical passenger vehicle at temperatures between numc and numc .
the posts to be tested shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
the sign post shall be capable of withstanding a series of num bumper bar impacts at a speed of numkmh directed at num degrees to the front face of the post .
the impacting vehicle shall suffer little or no damage during the impact tests .
the sign post shall return to within num degrees of vertical within num seconds of impact .
num holes num .
the following tolerances for holes shall apply a .
diameter nummm b. lateral hole centre position nummm c. vertical hole centre position nummm specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num post length num .
chs and rhs post lengths shall have a tolerance of nummm .
ground support stands for box edge section signs shall have a tolerance of nummm .
num .
dimensions and tolerances of universal beams shall be in accordance with as num num surface finishing num powder coated sign chs and rhs posts num .
posts fabricated from electric resistance welded erw steel tube shall be either zinc coated mill finished or hotdip galvanised after cutting and drilling .
the galvanised coating mass requirement shall be as specified in as num table num for articles that are not centrifuged .
holes and ends of posts shall have burrs removed prior to galvanising and powder coating .
num galvanised sign chs and rhs posts and components num .
steel components shall be galvanised to the requirements as specified in as num table num for articles that are not centrifuged .
all galvanising runs and beads shall be removed without exposing the underlying steel surface .
num .
posts and components shall be hotdip galvanised as follows a .
posts and components shall be grit blasted to achieve a class num standard of surface preparation as specified in as num .
after grit blasting posts and components shall be pickled in dilute sulphuric or hydrochloric acid in accordance with as num and then washed in water to remove all traces of acid .
b. galvanising of posts and components shall occur within num hours of pickling and washing .
posts and components shall be dipped in a bath of molten zinc not exceeding num by weight of impurities to produce a minimum coating thickness specified in as num table num for articles that are not centrifuged .
num .
posts shall be galvanised inside and outside .
areas of steel exposed during machining including holes and edges shall be touched up with a zinc enriched primer in accordance with asnzs num .
num breakaway sign posts num .
steel components shall be hotdip galvanised in accordance with as num and the requirements of clause num .
num .
areas of steel exposed during machining including holes and edges shall be touched up with a zinc enriched primer in accordance with asnzs num .
num .
where required in terms of clause num breakaway sign posts shall be painted with a suitable exterior long life industrial quality matt finish acrylic paint in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
the paint shall be pigmented to give finished colours and specular gloss values in accordance with as num .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
where posts are painted in terms of the above clause an undercoat that is suitable for galvanised surfaces and compatible with the finishing coat paint shall be applied to the prepared substrate in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
num other approved sign posts num .
the finished surface of all approved sign posts as specified in annexure numg shall be to the manufacturers requirements .
num powder coating num general num .
where specified in annexure numd or on the sign drawings posts shall be covered with exterior grade lead free polyester powder coat .
the finished colour and specular gloss value shall be equivalent to golden yellow ynum colour or bottle green gnum as specified in as num and as required in clause num .
num preparation num .
zinc coated mill finished and galvanised surfaces shall be degreased using an alkaline cleaning dip .
the alkaline cleaning dip shall be removed with water prior to powder coating .
num .
a zinc phosphate conversion coating in accordance with as num shall then be applied to zinc coated mill finishes or galvanised surfaces .
num .
after completion of etching the posts shall be thoroughly rinsed with water and allowed to dry .
num application num .
the powder coat shall be applied by an electrostatic powder spray to the coating manufacturers specifications to give a finished colour in accordance with clause num .
coated surfaces shall be cured for a period exceeding num minutes at a metal temperature exceeding numc .
num packaging for delivery num .
sign posts shall be packaged and handled to ensure delivery in an undamaged condition .
num .
each bundle of posts shall contain a label with recommendations for handling and storage and a description of the posts .
num design of posts num .
design of sign supports shall be in accordance with the main roads sign structural design guidelines and the following drawings a .
post design drawing nos .
num to num b .
sign stiffeners drawing no .
num specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name c. sign footings drawing nos .
num num d. post design for fluted aluminium frangible poles drawing no .
num num num not used associated fixings num manufacture num .
clamps saddle extrusions security washers lock washers t bolts knuckles and sign brackets shall be manufactured in accordance with drawing nos num num and num unless other fixings have been approved as given in annexure nume .
num .
any fixings associated with mounting of removable posts and flexiposts shall be in accordance with drawing no .
num or the recommendation of manufacturers for approved products given in annexure numg .
num packaging for delivery num .
all fixings shall be properly packaged stored and handled during transit and upon delivery .
num .
packages of fixings shall be labelled such that the type and size of fixings can be identified .
num num not used installation num sign location num longitudinal placement num .
the longitudinal placement of signs will be specified in the sign drawings .
num lateral placement and height num .
the lateral placement and height of signs supported by one post shall be in accordance with drawing no num .
num .
the lateral placement and height of signs supported by two or three posts shall be in accordance with drawing no num .
num .
the lateral placement of signs supported on overhead gantry or bridge structures will be specified in the sign drawings .
where multiple signs are fixed to a gantry or bridge structure the signs shall be fixed such that the lowest edges of the signs are at the same level .
num .
signs shall not be erected on any other infrastructure other than mentioned in this document except that street name blades installed by local government authorities may be installed on street lighting poles with the asset owners approval .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num sign orientation num .
postmounted signs shall be orientated in the direction of oncoming traffic in accordance with drawing no .
num .
num flat aluminium and steel sheet signs unbraced num sign support num .
unbraced flat aluminium and steel sheet signs shall be supported by one post .
num .
the type and gauge of the sign post to be used shall be as specified in annexure numd .
num .
the length of post required shall be in accordance with drawing no .
num num or as indicated on the post schedule drawings for the specific project .
num post hole excavation num .
a square or circular hole as shown on drawing no .
num or manufacturers drawing for flexible and removable posts shall be excavated to accommodate the sign post footing and any attachments .
the excavated soil shall be stockpiled adjacent to the hole for use as backfill or disposed of in an acceptable manner .
num sign fixing num .
the signs shall be fixed to the sign post prior to installation using a mnum or mnum galvanised bolt a nylon washer between bolt head and the sign face and nut with a security washer manufactured in accordance with clause num or as specified otherwise in the contract .
num installation num .
the sign post with the signs fixed in place shall be positioned in the centre of the post hole .
num .
compacted earth and concrete shall be used to backfill the hole in accordance with drawing no .
num .
the top nummm shall be filled using a similar material to the surrounding ground .
num .
the sign post shall be vertical as measured by a spirit level and the sign shall be orientated towards oncoming traffic in accordance with clause num .
num .
each layer of backfill shall be compacted with six blows of a numkg hand tamper .
the level of the completed backfill shall be within nummm and nummm of the surface level of the surrounding ground .
excess material shall be disposed of at an authorised disposal site .
num .
flexible and removable signs posts shall be installed in accordance with the drawing no.num or manufacturers recommendation for approved products given in annexure numg .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
a plastic or aluminium end cap shall be fitted to the top of the post to prevent the ingress of water .
num .
if an approved selflocking taper is used for installing the sign post the footing sleeves and bases for the installation of the sign post shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendation .
num erection num .
once signs have been transported to the road site they should not be laid flat on the ground .
laying signs flat can result in damage to the reflective face through direct contact with the ground .
num .
when attaching signs to posts all connecting bolts should be tightened using offset spanners not socket wrenches .
the use of offset spanners minimise tool and hand contact with the sign face and avoids scratching or the surface as well as allowing the extent of tightening to be observed .
only one end of the nut and bolt should be tightened preferably tightened from the rear of the sign .
num .
tightening from both sides can transfer stress into the top film of reflective sheeting resulting in permanent pinwheel style wrinkles .
avoid over tightening the connecting bolts as this can cause specular glare from dimples on the sign face .
num .
nylon washers shall be used between connecting bolt heads and the sign face to protect the reflective sheeting from the twisting action of the bolt heads .
num .
a circle of diameter slightly larger than the bolt head may be scored in the reflective sign face around the bolt hole to minimise any fine cracking that may inadvertently occur during bolt tightening .
num .
when erecting large guide and information signs care must be taken to prevent lifting ropes cables and chains from contacting the sign surface .
these can cause permanent visible damage .
num .
after installation and before leaving the road site inspect all signs to see that they have not been damaged during erection and are free of oil and dirt residue from fingers and tools .
num traffic islands num .
rigid and nonremovable sign posts a .
during construction of concrete filled islands a circular hole nummm nummm in diameter or nummm nummm square hole and nummm nummm in depth shall be excavated to accommodate a nummm long section of nummm diameter pvc bore casing as shown in drawing num. b .
the pvc bore casing shall be positioned centrally in the hole such that the top of the bore casing is within nummm and nummm of the proposed finished surface level of the concrete infill .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name c. the pvc bore casing shall be filled with clean sand up to a depth nummm below the top of the bore casing within nummm and nummm limit .
d. when installing the sign any damage to brick paving or concrete infill shall be repaired with materials of the same type size and colour in accordance with the mrwa kerbing and concrete infill specification and the mrwa brick paving specification .
e. excess material shall be disposed of at an authorised disposal site .
num .
flexible and removable sign posts a. footings sleeves and bases for flexible and removable posts shall be constructed in accordance with drawing no .
num or the manufacturers drawings .
num alternative sign post fixing devices num .
for signs to be installed where a concrete surface can not readily be removed to excavate the post hole an approved galvanised post mounting bracket may be bolted to the surface .
main roads approved mounting brackets are listed at annexure numg .
the taperlock method for fixing the sign post may be used as an alternative by core drilling the surface or removing the pavers to install the socket in the case of a paved area .
the method of installation shall be as recommended by the manufacturer .
num attachment of signs to traffic signal poles num .
mounting brackets for signs attached to traffic signal poles shall be as shown on drawing no num or an equivalent stainless steel banding strap .
under no circumstances shall mounting brackets or any other fixing be used which necessitates drilling holes into the traffic signal pole .
num extruded aluminium section signs num general num .
extruded aluminium section signs are supported by one or two posts .
num .
street name signs mounted below an intersection warning sign shall be installed as part of the warning sign as specified in clause num for its lateral placement and height .
num .
other extruded aluminium section signs including street name blades shall be installed as specified in clause num for its longitudinal lateral placements and height .
num .
standard fingerboard signs brackets are shown in drawing no .
num .
num flat aluminium sheet signs braced post mounted num sign supports num .
braced aluminium and steel sheet signs post mounted are generally supported by two or three posts .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the number type size and length of the posts required will be specified on the sign drawings .
in special circumstances braced signs may be installed on a single post provided that a .
the post is designed to withstand the bending moment caused by wind loading b .
the post meets frangibility requirements c. the post is restrained from rotating in the ground d. the sign is restrained from rotating around the post e. the stiffeners shall be designed in accordance with drawing no .
num. f. the post is restrained from becoming a projectile in the event of it shearing off or becoming dislodged from its footing after a vehicle impact .
num post hole excavations num .
the dimensions of post hole excavations shall be designed in accordance with drawing no .
num and specified on the sign drawings .
the excavated soil shall be stockpiled adjacent to the excavations for use as backfill or disposed of in an acceptable manner .
num post footings num .
the post footing dimensions shall be designed in accordance with drawing no .
num and specified on the sign drawings .
the associated steel reinforcing details shall be in accordance with drawing no .
num unless otherwise specified on sign drawings .
num installation num .
the sign posts shall be positioned vertically in the centre of the post holes .
num .
the concrete post footings shall be poured with class nnum concrete and compacted around the base of each post in accordance with specification num concrete general works .
num .
the sign posts shall be vertical as measured by a spirit level and the signs shall be orientated towards oncoming traffic in accordance with clause num .
num .
excess material shall be disposed of at an authorised disposal site .
num .
where applicable a plastic or aluminium end cap shall be fitted to the top of the post to prevent the ingress of water .
num sign fixing num .
the sign post footings shall be allowed to cure for a minimum of num hours prior to fixing the signs unless rapid hardening concrete is used in which case the cement manufacturers requirements shall be complied with .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the signs shall be attached to the posts using fixings manufactured in accordance with clause num and be level as measured by a spirit level .
num .
fixing and installation details for hazard markers and one way two way direction arrow markers on posts are show on the following drawings a .
combination hazard markers drawing no .
num b .
single hazard markers drawing no .
num c. one way two way arrow direction signs drawing no .
num num flat aluminium sheet signs braced gantry or bridge mounted num sign supports num .
the structure and support details for mounting overhead signs will be detailed on the sign drawings .
for large gantry signs assembled at the site with vertical joints constructed in accordance with clause numiiinum the spacing of supports shall provide any additional support required for the joints and shall avoid coinciding directly with the vertical joints .
num .
the final approval for the gantry design for large signs mentioned above shall not proceed until the principal acknowledges in writing that the supports are positioned appropriately to support the sign assembly .
num .
signs fixed directly to bridge structures shall be in accordance with guideline drawing no .
num .
hold point num installation num .
the sign support structure andor supports shall be installed in accordance with the details shown on the sign drawings and be level as measured by a spirit level .
num sign fixing num .
the signs shall be attached to the sign supports using fixings manufactured in accordance with clause num .
num sign overlays num .
sign overlays shall be fixed to the sign panels in accordance with clause num .
num num not used sign removal num sign removal num .
signs shall be detached from the sign supports and either reused or disposed of at an authorised disposal site .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
traffic signs that are to be reused shall be transported and stored in accordance with clauses num num .
num sign support removal num .
sign supports fittings and footings shall be removed and disposed of .
num .
sign support holes shall be backfilled watered and compacted in layers not exceeding nummm to within nummm and nummm of the surface level of the surrounding ground .
num .
the backfill shall be compacted until the final passes or blows of the compaction equipment leave no impressions on the backfilled surface .
num .
excess material shall be disposed of at an authorised disposal site .
num surface reinstatement num .
damaged brick paving or concrete infill shall be repaired with materials of the same type size and colour in accordance with specification num kerbing and specification num segmental paving .
num .
grass verges shall be backfilled and reinstated to the same standard as the surrounds .
num .
excess material shall be disposed of at an authorised disposal site .
num num not used transportation and storage of signs num transportation num .
traffic signs are intended to communicate information to the road user in a clear and concise manner .
num .
this can only be accomplished if the surface of the sign is free of damage abrasion dirt oil or other markings causing loss of legibility .
these problems are especially severe when dealing with reflective material since nighttime legibility is directly related to the quality and clarity of the reflective surface .
num .
this guide serves to highlight the important aspects of correct reflective sign storage and handling and is designed to be used by sign manufacturers sign users and erectors .
num .
all finished signs should be handled transported and stored to prevent damage to the sign face or other components .
signs should be stored vertically with their edges clear of the ground and in such a manner that the sign faces are not scuffed or marked making use of protruding stiffening members where possible .
num .
back to back storage of signs is permitted but pressure must not be transferred onto a sign face by any other sign or sign support .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
when transporting signs by truck or trailer it is imperative that signs be securely braced vertically and adequately supported and secured to avoid damage due to scuffing abrasion and load shifting .
num .
large guide and information signs should be braced using wooden stiffeners attached to the extensions at the back of the sign and transported with the stiffeners in place to avoid buckling and rivet popping .
num indoor storage num .
signs should be preferably stored indoors .
signs required to be stored outdoors must have the packaging removed and be stored so as to permit free air circulation and normal moisture evaporation .
moisture must be prevented from remaining in contact with the face of the sign at all times .
packaging that has become wet or damp must be removed immediately and the signs permitted to dry completely .
steps need to be taken to ensure that high temperature and high humidity conditions do not occur in either indoor or outdoor storage .
num outdoor storage num .
signs stored outdoors shall be unwrapped from their transport packaging and stored upright on edge using wooden battens on the floor or as vertical supports or both .
num .
signs stored outdoors especially large guide or information signs should be stored using a racking system that will provide vertical support for the stored signs that will avoid pressure points on sign faces and allow adequate air circulation between sign faces to prevent a buildup of moisture .
num sign covering num .
covering signs is not good general practice due to the damage that can be caused to the sign face through the interaction of environmental conditions .
num .
if it is necessary to cover a sign face temporarily after erection caution must be exercised as some coverings may cause permanent damage to the sign face following exposure to moisture and sunlight .
some porous materials have been used successfully for limited periods by folding the material over the sign and securing it at the back of the sign .
at the same time the material needs to have sufficient opacity to prevent the reflective face of the sign showing through at night .
num .
covering signs with paper or plastic materials especially black is forbidden as it is known that these materials are responsible for severe and permanent damage within num hours as a consequence of the high temperatures and humidity conditions that can be generated during entrapment .
num .
avoid the use of ropes wire fasteners or strapping that may abrade the sign surface .
do not apply tape to the sign race because sunlight will cause it to bond permanently .
masking or application tape must be removed prior to exposure to sunlight .
num .
some specially formulated low tack pressure sensitive films are available that are suitable to mask signs .
for specific details on use refer to technical literature available from the manufacturer of the retroreflective sheeting .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
it is important that suitable materials are selected for covering signs in order not to jeopardise sign performance warranties provided by the manufacturer of the retroreflective sheeting .
num num not used sign maintenance num sign maintenance num general num .
all materials and application processes used for the maintenance of signs shall comply with this specification .
num .
the level of service of all signs shall not fall below the minimum performance criteria as specified in clause num .
num sign replacement num .
signs to be replaced shall be removed in accordance with clause num .
num .
replacement signs shall be attached to the post using fixings manufactured in accordance with clause num and be level as measured by a spirit level .
num .
the replacement of signs shall be carried out in a single operation to ensure a minimum length of time during which the signs are not in use .
num sign removal num .
sign removal sign post removal and surface reinstatement shall be in accordance with clauses num to num .
num sign cleaning num .
traffic signs shall be cleaned without damage to the sign face and legend .
num .
traffic signs shall be cleaned to remove all dust grime and other loose or foreign material from the sign face legend and rear of sign panel .
num .
typical cleaning methods include washing using a mild detergent agent mixed in water with soft bristle brooms or brushes and rinsing with potable water .
the sign surface shall be free from streaks after washing .
num .
graffiti shall be removed in accordance with the paint sheeting or protective overlay sheeting manufacturers instructions .
num .
the contractor shall be responsible for ensuring the compatibility of the proposed cleaning method and medium without injurious effect to the sign sign face and legend .
traffic signs damaged by the contractors cleaning works shall be rectified at no cost to the principal .
num .
for maximum performance signs should be kept clean and free from dirt road tar oil bituminous material and mulch .
primarily this means cleaning the surface of the reflective sheeting the essential characteristic of a sign .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
a wet detergent type nonabrasive cleaner suitable for high quality paint surfaces is recommended .
the cleaner must also be free or strong aromatic solvents or alcohols and be chemically neutral i.e .
ph of around num .
following use of any cleaning agent the sign surface must be thoroughly and immediately rinsed with clean water .
in all cleaning operations care should be taken not to abrade the sign by use of stiffbristle brushes or by unnecessary scrubbing .
num normal cleaning procedure num .
flush the surface with clean water to remove loose dirt particles .
a squeeze or triggered hose nozzle is convenient for this purpose .
num .
wash the sign face with a rag or sponge using detergent or any of several suitable commercial cleaners .
wash thoroughly from the top down .
once suds have been applied keep a steady stream of water flowing on the sign face to wash away dirt particles .
num .
rinse the entire sign face with clean water and allow the sign to drain dry .
num .
take extreme care in cleaning screened sign faces since some cleaning solvents may damage the screen printed area .
use a mild solvent such as mineral spirits .
follow with detergent and water then rinse with clean water .
do not use high pressure sprayers .
do not direct sprays at sign face edges .
num performance criteria a colour fade or change num .
when blue brown or green signs are viewed under either daytime or night time conditions the perceived colour shall be that commonly associated with that designated colour that is there shall be no degradation of appearance that would allow a sign using one of these colours to be confused with either of the other colours .
b retroreflectivity and luminance num .
the retroreflectivity shall be measured in accordance with as num appendix a at an observation angle of numo and at an entrance angle of numo the value must be an average of five readings equally spaced across the width of larger signs or within the area of smaller signs and shall be greater than the minimum value specified in table num .
num .
the luminance factor is measured in accordance with as num appendix c using the y function of the cie num colour system and shall be less than the maximum value specified in table num .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num performance criteria sign type red regulatory signs white regulatory signs yellow warning signs hazard signs guide service tourist signs description legend colour white black red black black white black background colour red white yellow orange white yellow green blue brown white minimum retro reflectivity class num numw numx legend white numcdlx.mnum n.a .
n.a .
n.a .
numcdlx.mnum class num numw numx background red numcdlx.mnum n.a .
n.a .
n.a .
n.a .
class num numw numx background white n.a .
numcdlx.mnum n.a .
numcdlx.mnum numcdlx.mnum class num numw numx background yellow n.a .
n.a .
n.a .
numcdlx.mnum n.a .
class num numw numx background orange n.a .
n.a .
numcdlx.mnum n.a .
n.a .
class num legend white n.a .
n.a .
n.a .
n.a .
numcdlx.mnum class num background white n.a .
numcdlx.mnum n.a .
numcdlx.mnum numcdlx.mnum class num background yellow n.a .
n.a .
numcdlx.mnum numcdlx.mnum n.a .
maximum luminance factor red colour num num n.a .
n.a .
n.a .
orange colour n.a .
n.a .
num n.a .
n.a .
minimum internal contrast ratio num num n.a .
n.a .
num specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa specification requirements this section must be completed by the contract originator num .
hold points the following hold points shall apply to this sign specification a possible hold point could be applied on completion of signs prior to installation num .
protective overlay film protective overlay film shall be applied to the following signs all signs to no signs to signs as shown on contract drawings other specify delete those which are not applicable num .
sign drawings are all sign drawings supplied yes no specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numb mrwa approved alternative sign materials unbraced flat steel sheet signs num .
keep left sign rnum lr durapost aust .
pty ltd unbraced flat nonmetallic substrate material num .
sign flex small signs on islands and medians delnorth international pty ltd num .
chevroflex flexible chevron alignment marker dnum rud pty ltd specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numc mrwa approved fixings for metal sheeting num .
other method for fixing aluminium identification plate to the rear bottom corner of braced flat aluminium sheet signs shall be using numm vhb double sided adhesive tape .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numd single traffic sign posts num .
metropolitan and builtup areas sizes num m num x num x num rhsnum or num chs num where additional strength is requirednum .
num m num x num x num rhs surface finish yellow powder coating num .
rural areas a areas subject to tropical cyclones regions c and d on drawing no .
num size num x num x num rhs surface finish hotdip galvanised or with yellow powder coating for town sites as required by mrwa regional manager .
b other rural areas sizes num m num x num x num rhsnum or num chs num where additional strength is requirednum .
num m num x num x num rhs surface finish hotdip galvanised or with yellow powder coating for townsites as required by mrwa regional manager .
num .
all areas parking restriction signs num chs num mrrpk rnum series street name blades num chs with welded brackets refer to drawing no .
num bicycle directional signs num x num x num hotdip galvanised and powder coated with bottle green gnum brunswick green num in bsnumc note num the larger num x num x num rhs post may be used for size a b signs to protect against vandalism .
note num for signs facing oncoming traffic num chs num posts are to be used in conjunction with a fixing bracket that provides a flat surface of approximate nummm x nummm around the bolt fixing area to secure the sign to the post .
the fixing bracket shall also restrain the sign from rotating around the post .
note num the chs posts may be also used in situations where the use of a removable post system can have a significant cost benefit in replacing the damaged sign post by reusing the existing footing .
approved systems are given in annexure numg .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure nume mrwa approved sign fixings num .
catesby sign fixing bracket num .
signfix arc series stainless steel saddle brackets .
num .
lxnum sign security washers patent application no .
num. a. swnum nummm clear polycarbonate sign security washer for nummm bolt b. swnum nummm clear polycarbonate sign security washer for nummm bolt c. swnum nummm clear polycarbonate sign security washer for nummm bolt d. swnum nummm clear polycarbonate sign security washer for nummm bolt num .
signfix wicks security washers for mnum and mnum galvanised bolts num .
signfix rsj mnum toe clamp unit num .
smart urban reusable sign bracket num .
signfix stainless steel channel clips a .
double bolt saddle brackets hdtb series b. rhs brackets hrh and lrh series c. back to back clips bbc series d. mnum channel bolts and nuts e. uccnum mnum universal channel clamp num .
signfix aluminium brackets a. tdnum sgnfx nummm nb single sided brackets b. tdnum sgnfx nummm nb double sided brackets c. tdnum uni num nummm nb and tdnum uni num nummm nb single bolt uniclamp brackets d. heavy duty double bolt uniclamp bracket nummm nb aunummchnum e. heavy duty double bolt uniclamp bracket nummm nb aunummchnum num .
signfix stainless steel banding and buckles a .
num grade band and buckles str and buc series num .
signfix banding brackets a. mr num b. ur num nummm c. ur num nummm d. ur num ch nummm e. ur num nummm num .
signfix buckle straps a. bs num b. bs num specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numf main roads standard sign drawings the following main roads standard sign drawings are available on the main roads web site .
users are responsible for ensuring that the latest revision is sourced .
drawing no .
description num posts for unbraced signs common lengths used num location details for two three post signs num typical mounting for single sided back to back signs num aluminium extrusion for the rear of road signs num typical mounting detail single side and back to back signs num unbraced sign blanks .
bolt hole locations num traffic sign brackets num attachment of route name tag to sheet aluminium intersection direction sign num attachment of distance tag to sheet aluminium intersection direction sign num attachment of drop tag to sheet aluminium intersection direction sign num green zone advanced direction signs within the perth metropolitan area num fixing and installation details for combination hazard markers num standard fingerboard signs brackets .
num temporary signs .
construction work zone series num location details for one post signs num fixing and installation details for single hazard markers num sign support details on bridges sample design drawing num fixing and installation details for one way arrow direction signs and two way arrow direction signs .
num wind speed region category chart specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num sign area moment lever arm post spacing chart num force acting on sign chart num sign area num nummnum num force acting on sign chart num sign area num nummnum num post selection chart num force num numkn num post selection chart num force num numkn num sign stiffener selection chart num footing dimensions for ground mounted signs num breakaway sign post fabrication details small ub selections num breakaway sign post fabrication details large ub selections num breakaway sign post fabrication details fuse plates and frangible circular hollow selections .
num sign footing details num horizontal joints for braced signs num frame for multimessage signs num post selection chart for signfix fluted sign supports num typical assembly of multipiece sign on site vertical joints specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numg mrwa approved alternative sign posts and post fixing devices num .
sab pop num .
flexible sign post durapost aust .
pty ltd num .
flexible sign post springy post jmb manufacturing pty ltd num .
smart taper post fixing device smart urban pty ltd num .
dynaflex sign base mulford plastics pty ltd num .
polyflex sign base delnorth international pty ltd num .
signfix aluminium fluted frangible sign posts signfix australia num .
retro post flexible rubber sign post rps industries distributer traffic systems west num .
lattix sign masts types nenum nenum nenum nenum specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numh mrwa approved retroreflective sheeting materials num .
retroreflective sheeting manufacturer kiwalite class product class num engineering grade num white num yellow num red num blue num brown num white num yellow num red num blue class num high intensity grade num white num yellow num red num blue num brown num standard green prismatic grade num white num yellow num red num blue num fluorescent yellow green num fluorescent orange class numw prismatic grade num white num yellow num red num blue num fluorescent yellow green num fluorescent orange class numwwz prismatic grade num fluorescent orange class numwz prismatic grade num fluorescent orange class numx prismatic grade num fluorescent yellow green overlay film kiwacal transparent film afnum yellow afnum red afnum blue afnum brown ff num moss green standard green specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
retroreflective sheeting manufacturer numm australia pty ltd class product class num scotchlite engineering grade num standard green num yellow num red num blue num brown num white class num scotchlite high intensity prismatic grade num white num yellow num blue num yellow num red class numwnumx dgnum diamond grade num fluorescent yellow num fluorescent yellow green num fluorescent orange num white num yellow num red num blue overlay film transparent film num yellow num red num blue num standard green num brown specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
retroreflective sheeting manufacturer nikalite class product class num engineering grade pressure sensitive num yellow num red num green num brown num white class num ultralite special uls grade pressure sensitive num yellow num red num green num brown num white class numw crystal grade num yellow num green num white class numx nil overlay film transparent film num yellow num red num blue num green num brown specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
retroreflective sheeting manufacturer avery dennison class product class num engineering grade tnum white tnum yellow tnum blue tnum red tnum brown class num high intensity prismatic grade t num white t num yellow t num blue t num red t num brown class numw high intensity prismatic grade t num white t num yellow t num blue t num red t num brown class numx omnicube prismatic grade t num white t num yellow t num blue t num red t num brown t num fluorescent yellow t num fluorescent yellow green w num fluorescent orange overlay film transparent film olnum yellow olnum blue olnum red olnum brown olnum green std.green specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
retroreflective sheeting manufacturer orafol class product class num nil class num prismatic grade oralite num white oralite num yellow oralite num red oralite num orange oralite num blue oralite num brown class numw prismatic grade oralite num white oralite num yellow oralite num red oralite num orange oralite num blue oralite num brown class numwz high intensity prismatic construction grade oralite num white oralite num yellow oralite num fluorescent orange prismatic construction grade oralite num white oralite num yellow oralite num fluorescent yellow oralite num fluorescent yellow green oralite num fluorescent orange class numwwz high intensity prismatic construction grade oralite num white oralite num yellow oralite num fluorescent orange prismatic construction grade oralite num white oralite num yellow oralite num fluorescent yellow greenoralite num fluorescent yellow oralite num fluorescent orange class numx nil overlay film transparent film oralite num yellow oralite num red oralite num orange oralite num blue oralite num brown oralite num dark green standard green specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure num i sign makers accredited by retroreflective sheeting manufacturers num .
sheeting manufacturer kiwalite sign manufacturer location date of accreditation or renewal date of expiry or validity period comments artcraft pty ltd. num port road beverley sa num tel num num november num num supply signage to wa market from south australia corsign wa pty ltd. unum john street bayswater wa num tel num num november num num street name blades and single post signage .
hartac sales distribution pty ltd. num wheeler street belmont wa num tel num num november num num single post signage jason signmakers num mcdowell street welshpol wa num tel num num november num num road signs australia pty ltd num victoria street malaga wa num tel num num november num num sunny sign company deneefe signs pty ltd num boulder road malaga wa num tel num num november num num num .
sheeting manufacturer numm australia pty ltd sign manufacturer location date of accreditation or renewal date of expiry or validity comments hartac sales distribution pty .
ltd num wheeler street belmont wa num tel num num year num num full accreditation jason sign makers num mcdowell street welshpool wa num tel num num year num num full accreditation sunny sign company pty ltd deneefe signs pty ltd num boulder road malaga wa num tel num num year num num full accreditation specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
sheeting manufacturer avery sign manufacturer location date of accreditation or renewal date of expiry or validity comments corsign unum john street bayswater wa num tel num num num num full approval road signs australia ex allpack num victoria road malaga wa num tel num num num num full approval sunny sign company pty ltd deneefe signs pty ltd num boulder road malaga wa num tel num num num num full approval stickerworld num hogarth street cannington num num limited to screen printed num .
sheeting manufacturer nikalite sign manufacturer location date of accreditation or renewal date of expiry or validity comments none num .
sheeting manufacturer orafol sign manufacturer location date of accreditation or renewal date of expiry or validity period comments none specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numj manufacture installation of multipost signs checklist sheet num of num road name direction northsouthbound sign description drawing no location no no .
item description requirement field observation comments num coefficient of luminous intensity sign spec .
clnum intensity at entrance angles and observation angles to comply with values given in asnum for all classes except class numx for which refer sign spec.table num taking into consideration the warranty requirements given in sign.spec table num num overlap type decal if nummmxnummm sign spec .
clnum num mm flat aluminium ifnummmxnummm aluminium sheet overlay fastened by monel or stainless steel pop rivets of nummm dia and nummm spacing with first and last not more than nummm from the edge .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name sheet num of num no .
item description requirement field observation comments num aluminium sheet sizes and joint limitations sign spec .
clnum if lengthlnummm heighthnummm minimum number of sheets should be used if lnummm vertical joint spacing should be either nummm nummm or nummm if hnummm horizontal joints should be interlocked using z stiffener or an additional stiffener with horizontal alignment bracket at maximum spacing of nummm mrwa .
drg.no.num num .
num aluminium sheet joints sign spec .
num a cover strip is required when the length is nummm and the join is backed with a cover strip of same sheet and width nummm and terminated short of nummm from edge or not less than num mm from stiffener .
the gap join width should not exceed nummm alternative method for joint construction is using an approved tape such as numm vhb .
num stiffeners length sign spec .
clnum if l nummm should be continuous otherwise joints should be butt welded and staggered by distance greater than numm num stiffener type for tags sign spec .
clnum same as main sign stiffeners mrwa.drg.nos .
num num num .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name sheet num of num no .
item description requirement field observation comments num rivets and fixing for stiffeners and back strips sign spec .
clnum monel or stainless steel pop rivets nummm dia nummm maximum spacing colour to match legend and back ground continues as possible not exceeding nummm from the edge minimum two on each side of back strip .
num reflective sheeting sign spec .
clnum when join sheeting required for class num num overlap and for class numw numx transparent film butt join num protective overlay sign spec clnum film or coating required in perth along top of sign or interlocking sign segment the film or coating should be extended nummm from the top of sign .
num rear of signs sign spec clnum poles brackets and other fixings located in green zone mrwa.drg.no.num num should be painted in brunwick green specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name sheet num of num no .
item description requirement field observation comments num marking traffic signs braced sign spec .
clnum plate fixing method rivet or approved as plate position rear bottom corner of the sign nearest to the road and nummm above the lowest stiffener .
lettering numbering stamped or engraved using engraving tool stencil in capital block and height nummm .
contents mrwa sign manufacturers identification and state month and year of manufacture format num coding to identify reflective sheeting manufacturer and class aluminium sheet thickness and international registered designation of alloy and temper numhnum sign drawing number or asnummrwa sign number sign location number as per drawing identification for protective layer anodised bronze colour plate and letter g on lower right corner specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name sheet num of num no .
item description requirement field observation comments num installation mrwa.drg.no .
num sign face edge lateral displacement nummm from unsealed shoulder edge or kerb face mounting height flat ground breakaway posts nummm for both urban and rural nonbreakaway postsnummm urban and nummm rural above path for both breakaway and nonbreak away nummm .
mounting height embankment fill nearest post same as flat ground mounting height cut slope nearest post same as flat ground also the furthest which is the smallest post should not be less than nummm num breakaway posts mrwa.drg.no .
num mrwa.drg.no .
num height of stub post above ground level which is top of concrete footing is nummm hinge position below sign panel is nummm post stiffener required for ub post larger than numubnum stiffener section same as the post breakaway direction left right or bidirectional fuse plate perforated arrangement should be to mrw.drg.no.num num specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is traffic engineering standards manager .
num .
sign types this specification includes details for various types of signs braced unbraced extruded temporary and boxed edge .
the contract documentation needs to a. make clear instruction to the type of signs required b. provide or refer to design details for all signs other than signs contained in the australian standard num .
details to include sign size colour reflective sheeting class post and footing details .
c. provide information about sign location asset number for all two posted signs .
num .
sign legend sign legend designs to be in accordance with a .
main roads sign index b .
main roads guidelines for directional service and tourist signing .
num .
structural design structural designs for sign panels posts and footings to be in accordance with main roads sign structural design guidelines on the website .
num .
warranty the specification includes a nummonth warranty for sign construction and a range of sign sheeting warranties between num to num years .
specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num signs num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title signs revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager contracts .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num guide posts copyright main roads western australia specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date num guidance notes figure num updated figure num warranty form added re num whole document reformatted sco num annexure numb list of approved guide posts amended re num num amendment of the as num title and addition of as num .
re num num requirements for vehicle impact test modified re num requirements of clause amended re num dimensions in figure num changed .
re num clause modified .
in accordance with as num re num clause added re num figure num .
dual carriageway white delineator replaced with yellow delineator .
re annexure numb list of approved guide posts amended re annexure numc annexure numc added re annexure numb delinexpro guidepost added to approved guide post list re num annexure numb delinex guidepost added to approved guide post list asre num annexure numb park flexible steel guide post added to approved guide post list re num specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num products and materials num num general num num guide post colour num num guide post surface finish num num guide post dimension and shape num num guide post warranty num num guide post markings num num rigid guide posts num num flexible guide posts num num delineators num num fixings for delineators num num num not used num installation num num removal of existing guide posts num num timing num num location of guide posts num num positioning num num buried guide posts num num driven guide posts num num guide post slots num num installation height num num orientation num num delineators num num installation tolerances num num num not used num maintenance num num refurbishment of guide posts num num realigning guide posts num num replacing missing or damaged guide posts num num temporary removal of guide posts num num delineator replacement num specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num washing delineators insitu num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num guide post schedule num annexure numb num approved guide post list num annexure numc num checklist for flexible guide post approval submission num specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num guide posts general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply installation and maintenance of guide posts and delineators .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num paints and related materials methods of test .
as num manual of uniform traffic control devices traffic control devices for general use as num retroreflective materials and devices for road traffic control purposes retroreflective sheeting as num retroreflective materials and devices for road traffic control purposes retroreflective devices nonpavement application .
as num timber hardwood visually stressgraded for structural purposes as num timber softwood visually graded for structural purposes as num guide to the properties of paints for buildings primer wood solventborne interiorexterior as num guide to the properties of paints for buildings undercoat solventborne interiorexterior as num guide to the painting of buildings saa trnum part num specification for full gloss paint solvent borne exterior as num guide to the properties of paints for buildings solventborne interiorexterior full gloss enamel specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num definitions flexible guide post a guide post which deflects when impacted by a vehicle and then returns to a vertical position without maintenance intervention .
flexible rigid guide post a guide post which either fractures or remains intact and straight but not vertical when impacted by a vehicle .
rigid num num not used products and materials num general num .
the contractor shall supply new guide posts delineators and fixings in accordance with this section of the specification .
an approved list of guidepost manufacturers for use in western australia is supplied in annexure numb .
num guide post colour num .
all faces of the guide post shall be white in colour for at least a length of nummm from the top of the guide post .
num guide post surface finish num .
the guide post shall be free of sharp edges burrs discolouration or other defects which may affect its appearance andor serviceability .
the portion of the guide post that is white in colour shall have a surface finish that permits repeated easy cleaning .
num guide post dimension and shape num .
the cross sections of the guide post are to be such that it permits the guide post to meet the requirements of this specification .
num .
the following dimensional requirements as shown in figure num must be satisfied a. width guide post shall have a projected width of nummm nummm width b .
length guide posts shall be manufactured to a length that permits insitu above ground height and below ground depth in accordance with figure num .
length c. shape the shape of the guide post shall be such that approved delineators can be permanently and securely attached to the guide post .
shape d. tops the tops of timber guide posts shall be cut to an angle to promote water run off in accordance with figure num .
the tops of other types of guide posts may be cut square to the sides or may be angled .
the shape of the bottom face of the guide post can be made to suit the method of installation .
tops specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num guide post warranty num .
the period of the warranty for guide posts shall be a minimum of num years .
during the period of the warranty the supplier shall without delay and at no cost to the principal correct all defects and omissions covered by the warranty by way of repair replacement or modification or other means .
the warranty must be in writing naming main roads western australia principal as the product owner .
when a product fails this specification under the warranty period the supplier is required to replace the product at no cost to the main roads western australia .
refer to main roads special conditions of contract warranties from third parties .
warranty num guide post markings num .
to enable traceability of the guide post each post shall have legible markings for the duration of the warranty period containing the following information traceability marking a. name of the supplier b. date of manufacture c. batch number d. end of warranty date e. model identification number name num .
the markings shall be placed on at least one side of the guide post and shall be between nummm and nummm from the top of the guide post .
the lettering size shall be between nummm and nummm high .
num .
a horizontal depth indicator shall be marked across the rear face of the guide post nummm from the top .
the indicator shall remain clear for the full life expectancy of the guide post .
specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name figure num guide post and delineator num rigid guide posts num general num .
rigid guide posts shall not shatter into multiple parts on impact .
after being struck guide posts shall not project a dangerous impaling section .
num .
rigid guide posts shall have a minimum bending strength of numknm and a maximum bending strength of numknm at yield .
num timber num .
timber guide posts shall be manufactured from nummm x nummm structural grade num timber being either jarrah or treated pine conforming to as num and as num respectively .
timber guide posts specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
both nummm faces shall be lightly dressed to remove all saw marks over num of the face area .
thicknessing is not required on any dimension .
num .
timber may be unseasoned .
the guide post shall be free from compression failures and other fractures termite galleries end splits and bark .
num .
the entire exposed above ground surface area of the guide post shall be coated in paint either by brushing spraying or immersion in accordance with the paint manufacturers published requirements .
the exposed surface area shall be painted as follows painting timber guide posts a .
one coat of primer to as num b .
one coat of white undercoat to as num c. one coat of white gloss to saa tri part num and as num num .
paint for rigid guide posts shall conform to the requirements of as num .
the perimeter of the guide post shall be finished in a durable gloss or semi gloss opaque white colour .
num .
the surfaces of the guide post to be painted shall be dry and free from all foreign matter including sawdust sand dust dirt or other material or substance that could prevent the paint adhering .
num steel guide posts num .
all faces of steel guide posts shall conform to a smooth gloss white powder coat finish to a minimum coat thickness of nummm .
rigid steel guide posts num .
steel guide posts shall be free of rust or other defects for the duration of the warranty period .
num .
steel guide posts shall not have blunt edges exposed to passing motorists .
num flexible guide posts num .
flexible guide posts shall be manufactured from material that does not shatter into multiple parts on impact .
after being struck guide posts shall not project a dangerous impaling section .
materials num .
details of the materials used in the manufacture of the guide post shall be supplied .
these may include but are not limited to plastic and rubber .
details of the material properties including information relating to the use of recycled materials shall also be provided .
num .
the material shall not vary beyond commercially accepted limits from the composition stated by the manufacturer at the time of offering .
specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the guide post shall be made to a design and from material which provide the properties of strength flexibility impact resistance and durability required .
the guide post shall be capable of retaining num of its colour appearance and physical properties for at least num years when exposed to weather conditions existing in western australia .
the material shall be resistant to mould growth and shall not be affected by hydrocarbon solvents such as mineral turpentine kerosene or diesel which may be used for cleaning purposes .
the material shall be resistant to termites and resistant to combustion if subjected to fire of intensity typical of roadside bush and grass fires .
any metal component shall be free of rust or other defects for at least num years of the operational life of the guidepost .
num .
the guide post shall be installed in the ground such that it resists overturning or displacement by wind forces and does not work out of the ground due to oscillations .
guide post anchorage num .
all testing specified in this clause shall be undertaken by a nata accredited laboratory .
the vehicle impact test num can be undertaken by a non nata accredited laboratory .
a single submission of all the test results listed within this clause shall be provided .
these results shall be less than num years old unless approved otherwise by the principal and shall be for the exact type of guide post offered .
test results num .
if a warranty is not available for the guidepost then a sample of the guide post shall be subject to artificial weathering for a period of num hours in either a. atlas twin sunshine carbon arc weatherometer or weathering resistance b. xeon arc weatherometer at num wattsmnum irradiance level with boro boro filters .
during the weathering of the sample it shall be subject to c. light and dark alternating cycles num of the testing time .
d. temperature during light cycles shall be a minimum of num degrees .
e. humidity temperatures shall be cyclic and be num of the testing time .
num .
after exposure the surface shall be free from crazing or blistering .
the degree of chalking and colour change shall not fall below a rating of num and the loss of gloss shall not exceed num gloss units egg shell gloss when evaluated in accordance with as num methods num and num specular gloss .
num .
the guide post shall demonstrate shape retention under the specified thermal tests within this clause .
for each shape retention test the guide post shall be held in a clamp .
the jaws of the clamp shall be shaped to match the profile of the guide post .
shape retention specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the guide post shall be conditioned at numc numc for num hours in an oven prior to being clamped .
the conditioned guide post shall be capable of straightening itself to within num of vertical within num seconds of being bent num at the midpoint .
this test is to be performed four times for both directions and each test shall be completed within num minutes of removal from oven .
heat resistance num .
the guide post shall be conditioned at numc numc ice bath for num hours prior to being clamped .
the following tests shall then be performed cold resistance a .
the conditioned post shall be capable of straightening itself to within num of vertical within num seconds of being bent num at the midpoint .
this test is to be performed four times for both directions .
the post shall be reconditioned for num seconds between bend tests .. b .
the conditioned post shall show no signs of fracturing cracking or splitting when a steel ball weighing num kilogram is dropped a distance of nummm through a vertical frictionless guide to impact the surface of the post .
the surface of the post being struck by the ball shall be in a horizontal position with the post supported and clamped in position at both ends .
the length between supports shall be nummm .
this impact test shall be carried out five times and concentrated near the middle of the post .
the post shall be reconditioned for num seconds between impact tests .
impact testing num .
the guide post shall be capable of self erecting and remaining serviceable after being subjected to a series of direct impacts by a typical passenger vehicle at temperatures between numc and numc .
a minimum sample of three guide posts shall be tested .
the testing of the guide posts shall be conducted in a single run .
the guide posts to be tested shall be installed in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer and shall be furnished complete with delineators .
the guide posts shall be capable of withstanding a series of num bumper bar impacts at a speed of numkmh followed by num bumper bar impacts at a speed of numkmh directed at num degrees to the front face of the guide post .
the impacting vehicle shall suffer little or no damage during the impact tests .
the guide post shall return to within num degrees of vertical within  hour of impact .
test results which show the guide posts are capable of withstanding the above vehicle impacts are to be provided .
this shall include video footage evidence .
the video footage shall be uninterrupted and show the guide posts returning to within num degrees of vertical within  hour of impact .
ending the video footage before the guide posts return to vertical is not acceptable .
the video footage requires a time and date stamp .
vehicle impact num .
the design and composition of flexible guide posts shall be such that they conform to the requirements of test a and test b of the guide post rigidity tests drawing as shown in figure num .
the rigidity tests are to be performed at a temperature of numc .
rigidity specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name figure num guide post rigidity tests specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num delineators num .
delineators supplied for attachment to guide posts shall meet the following requirements a corner cubed delineator type a type a delineators comply with as num red and white delineators shall be nominally nummm in diameter b retroreflective sheeting delineator class numa class num a delineators comply with requirements of class numa material as defined in as num red and white delineators shall be nummm nummm for height and width respectively .
num fixings for delineators num .
the following fixings shall be provided for installing delineators to guide posts .
a. screws or nails shall be supplied to affix class numa delineators to guide posts .
selfadhesive delineators may be used on guide posts that have a surface finish that permits adequate bonding of the delineator to the guide post .
b. vandal proof screws shall be supplied to affix type a delineators to rigid guide posts .
num num not used installation num removal of existing guide posts num .
any existing guide posts that need to be removed prior to or during works are to be removed by the contractor .
the guide posts shall be disposed of by the contractor and a new guide post shall be installed .
if the guide posts are suitable for reuse or refurbishment the contractor may either reuse or refurbish the guide posts in accordance with this specification .
existing posts removed num .
redundant treated pine guide posts shall be removed to a hazardous materials disposal area .
hazardous materials num timing num .
guide posts shall be installed on new works after completion of bituminous surfacing and final trimming of batters or as soon as practicable .
specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num location of guide posts num .
new guide posts with appropriate delineators shall be located in accordance with the guide post schedule at annexure numa .
num .
guide posts shall be installed in conjunction with road safety barriers in accordance with as num clause num b .
road safety barriers num positioning num .
on unkerbed roads guide posts shall be positioned so that the inside face of the posts line up with the outside edge of the road shoulder refer to figure num .
position from shoulder num .
on kerbed roads the setback from the kerb face to the roadside face of guide posts shall be numm refer to figure num .
position from kerb num buried guide posts num .
guide post holes shall be drilled or dug with vertical sides and having depth as per figure num .
the material excavated shall be used for backfilling around the guide post .
num .
once the guide post has been put in place the hole shall be backfilled and compacted with the guide post vertical when measured with a spirit level such that the top of the guide post is within nummm of the guide post at ground .
the density of the compacted backfill shall be not less than that of the material in the adjacent shoulder .
backfill and compaction num .
surplus material shall be disposed of by the contractor .
num driven guide posts num .
driven guide posts shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers published requirements to a depth as per figure num .
installed depth num .
manual guide post rammers shall not be used for driven guide post installations .
num guide post slots num .
guide posts installed in floodways shall be installed in guide posts slots .
if the slot is to be located in the concrete floodway edge wall care shall be taken when installing the slot so as not to damage the edge wall .
a wedge shall be used to secure the guide post in the slot .
floodways num installation height num .
on unkerbed roads guide posts shall be installed so that the top of the guide post is nummm above the level of the adjacent outside edge of the road shoulder with a tolerance of nummm or nummm as shown in figure num .
unkerbed roads num .
on kerbed roads guide posts shall be installed so that the top of the guide post is nummm above the adjacent seal edge level with a tolerance of nummm or nummm as shown in figure num .
kerbed roads specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num orientation num .
all guide posts shall be installed with the nummm face at right angles to the carriageway such that the face is directed at the approaching vehicles .
num .
guide posts with a curved cross section shall be installed with the convex face front towards approaching traffic in the lane nearest the guide post .
curved cross sections num .
guide posts with angled tops shall be installed such that the highest point at the top of the guide post is nearest to the carriageway as shown in figure num .
angled tops num delineators num .
delineators shall be fitted to guide posts as follows refer also to figure num a. when viewed in the direction of travel along the carriageway red delineators shall be on the left side and white delineators shall be on the right side of the carriageway .
delineator colour b .
on undivided roads delineators shall be provided on both sides of each guide post .
undivided roads c. on divided roads where guide posts are used delineators shall be provided only on the side of the guide post seen by a driver on that carriageway .
divided roads num .
rigid guide posts shall be fitted with delineators meeting either type a or class numa requirements .
where guide posts are installed on both sides of the carriageway the same delineator type shall be used .
delineator type rigid posts num .
flexible guide posts shall be fitted with delineators meeting class numa requirements .
type a delineators shall not be fitted to flexible guide posts .
delineator type flexible posts num .
delineators shall not be fitted to road safety barriers .
delineation of road safety barriers shall be by way of guide posts in accordance with clause num .
road safety barriers num .
mounting location a .
if corner cubed delineators type a are to be attached to the guide post a flat area at least nummm in diameter shall be provided in the centre of both nummm faces of the guide post .
for timber posts this flat area shall be recessed to the depth of the delineator .
the centre of these flat areas shall be nummm from the top of the guide post as per figure num .
delineator mounting location b .
if retroreflective sheeting class numa delineators are to be fitted to the guide post an essentially flat area nummm long by nummm wide shall be provided in the centre of both nummm faces of the guide post .
the centre of the flat areas shall be nummm from the top of the guide post as per figure num .
if the surface of the guide post has a curvature the radius of the curvature is to be no less than nummm .
specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name figure num delineator locations num installation tolerances num .
the following tolerances shall apply to the installation and maintenance of guide posts post height above ground level num nummm offset from outside of shoulder mark nummm longitudinal position from chainage mark nummm deviation from vertical measured at top of post nummm painted length of guide post nummm delineator position nummm num num not used maintenance num refurbishment of guide posts num .
refurbishment of guide posts with faded or peeling paint shall be carried out in accordance with this specification .
painting specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num realigning guide posts num .
guide posts not vertical shall be realigned to the vertical .
the material around the base of the post shall be compacted so that the density of the material retaining the guide post is not less than that of the material in the adjacent shoulder .
num replacing missing or damaged guide posts num .
missing or damaged guide posts shall be replaced at their previous location in accordance with this specification .
num .
damaged guide posts shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor .
treated pine guide posts shall be disposed of in accordance with clause num .
num temporary removal of guide posts num .
where guide posts are temporarily removed to facilitate roadworks they shall be reinstated in their previous locations in accordance with this specification .
num delineator replacement num .
damaged or nonreflecting delineators shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor .
num .
damaged or missing delineators shall be replaced with delineators of the same type and colour as used by adjacent guide posts for consistency .
num .
guide posts shall not be left without delineators overnight .
num washing delineators insitu num .
existing delineators that still have adequate retro reflectivity shall be washed clean so that they are free of all road grime dust and dirt .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa guide post schedule chainage left right notes complete above schedule as required or mark as not used if guide post locations are listed on the drawings and delete this note specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numb approved guide post list rigid product type of guidepost manufacturer date approved treated pine guideposts timber timber treaters wa num may num durapost steel guide post steel durapost aust pty ltd num delnorth rolled edge guide post steel delnorth international roadside products num december num delnorth straight edge guide post steel delnorth international roadside products num december num sparx guide post unplasticized polyvinyl chloride upvc all round safety num june num flexible product type of guidepost manufacturer date approved roadking guideposts previously superflex guideposts pvc australian safety products num may num dig in rubber guideposts rubber saferoads formally rubbertough num july num supa drive rubber guideposts rubber saferoads formally rubbertough num july num flexi num guide post fgpnum fgpnum fgpnum fgpnum plastic durapost aust pty ltd num october num delnorth steelflex guideposts steel delnorth international roadside products num december num omni flex guide post high density polyethylene hdpe traffic systems west num october num flexloc guide post plastic with urethane hinge safe roads num october num spring return guide post gpnum plastic jmb manufacturing num may num duraflex guide post fpvnum fpvnum pvc durapost aust pty ltd num may num park reboundable plastic guide post plastic park roadside guide posts num january num specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numc checklist for flexible guide post approval submission a single submission meeting all the requirements of this specification shall be submitted for approval of a guide post product .
the checklist below details the requirements for flexible guide posts .
a submission that does not address all the requirements will not be assessed by main roads western australia .
details of materials used in the manufacture of the guide post shall be supplied num .
weathering resistance num only required when a warranty num is not available .
heat resistance num .
cold resistance numa .
impact testing numb .
vehicle impact num .
rigidity num specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is road engineer .
num .
nummm installation height clause num num guide posts have previously been installed to a height of nummm above the adjacent edge of shoulder and kerb invert for unkerbed and kerbed roads respectively .
the current standard is nummm and as such this document has been written with reference to nummm only .
where there are no other feasible alternatives guide posts manufactured to the previous standard may be used .
in such cases clause num shall be added to contract specific requirements .
num .
warranty num warranty num for guide post approval submission shall be in the format as shown in figure num .
specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name figure num warranty form specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num installation height num .
on unkerbed roads guide posts shall be installed so that the top of the guide post is nummm above the level of the adjacent outside edge of the road shoulder with a tolerance of nummm nummm .
num .
on kerbed roads guide posts shall be installed so that the top of the guide post is nummm above the adjacent seal edge level with a tolerance of nummm nummm .
specification num guide posts num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title guide posts revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num safety and traffic barrier systems copyright main roads western australia specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date page nos num to num date of publication in header amended sco num whole document reformatted sco num clause num minimum foundation depth for road safety barrier systems pde num annexure numa ingal civil product part no .
deleted and limit of dynamic deflection revised for ingal flexfence num wire rope barrier pde num annexure numd details of approved solid blockouts amended pde num annexure numb notes numbered pde num annexure numa and guidance notes sentryline ii numwire rope safety barrier approved pde num num specification for posts and steel blockouts changed pde num num use of galvanized prestressing strands permitted pde num num item num amended the requirement to use approved solid blockout on wbeam same num num b g item b amended new item c added annexure numd additional information added for ingal block and apc blocks num items num num added same num num item num added num sub clause f added num item num added numb modified numf added annexure numa sub clause c added annexure numd acp solid blockout added to list of approved blockouts .
specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num products and materials num num general num num wbeam and thriebeam barriers num num wire rope safety barrier systems num num concrete barriers num num steel rail barriers num num transitions and end treatments num num num not used num fabrication num num general num num wbeam and thriebeam barriers num num wire rope safety barrier systems num num steel rail barriers num num transitions and end treatments num num not used num installation num num general num num wbeam and thriebeam barriers num num wire rope safety barrier systems num num concrete barriers num num steel rail barriers num num transitions num num end treatments num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num asbuilt information num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name approved wire rope safety barrier systems num annexure numb num road safety barrier systems requirements num annexure numc num concrete class for concrete barriers num annexure numd num approved solid blockouts num annexure nume num principals storage area num annexure numf num principal supplied items num specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num safety traffic barrier systems general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply fabrication protective treatment and installation of permanent road safety barrier systems and traffic barriers for structures as shown on the drawings and in accordance with asnzs num .
num .
except where this specification states otherwise where this specification refers to road safety barrier systems the requirements shall also apply to traffic barriers for structures .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num iso metric hexagonal bolts and screws as num iso metric hexagon nuts as num structural steel hollow sections as num hot dipped galvanized coatings on threaded fasteners as num flat metal washers for general engineering purposes metric series as num high strength steel bolts with associated nuts and washers for structural engineering as num steel wire for tendons in prestressed concrete as num steel tendons for prestressed concrete num wire stress relieved steel strand for tendons in prestressed concrete as num steel tendons for prestressed concrete coldworked hightensile alloy steel bars for prestressed concrete as num specification and supply of concrete as num low carbon steel electrodes for manual metal arc welding as num structural steel welding specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name as num hotrolled steel flat products as num cold rolled unalloyed steel sheet and strip as num timber preservativetreated sawn and round as num timber structures as num visually stress graded hardwood for structural purposes as num cored electrodes for arc welding as num timber softwood visually stress graded for structural purposes as num formwork for concrete as num structural steel hot rolled plates floorplates and slabs as num liquid membraneforming curing compounds for concrete as num hot rolled bars and sections as num steel structures as num hotdip galvanized coatings on fabricated ferrous articles australiannew zealand standards asnzs num road safety barrier systems asnzs num steel reinforcing materials main roads standard drawings num treatment of posts in rock main roads specifications specification num quality systems specification num earthworks specification num pavements specification num concrete for structures specification num minor steel items specification num protective treatment of steelwork specification num concrete general works num definitions num .
the following definitions shall apply specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name a .
road safety barrier systems are all barriers not attached to a structure .
b .
traffic barriers for structures are all barriers attached to a structure .
c. this specification does not cover temporary barrier systems .
d. road safety barrier systems shall be wbeam thriebeam wire rope or concrete as nominated on the drawings .
e. traffic barriers for structures shall be as nominated on the drawings .
f. structure shall include bridges tunnels culverts retaining walls and any associated approach slabs .
g. the meaning of terms and definitions in this specification shall be as defined in as nzs num. h. snugtight is the tightness attained by a few impacts of an impact wrench or by the full effort of a person using a standard podger spanner in accordance with as num .
num num not used products and materials num general num .
all materials supplied by the contractor shall be new .
num .
unless otherwise specified all steel plate bars and sections used in the works shall be as a minimum grade num in accordance with as num or as num as appropriate .
steel num .
all bolts and nuts shall comply with asnzs num and asnzs num commercial grade bolts except those shown on the drawings as high strength which shall comply with asnzs num grade num .
bolts nuts num .
flat washers shall comply with as num .
num .
the contractor shall retain the test certificates showing that materials used in the works conform to the specified standards for the superintendents inspection as required .
certificates num .
all materials used in the works shall be identified with the test certificates .
the contractor shall establish and maintain a comprehensive system of identification records .
copies of these records shall be forwarded to the superintendent on request .
records num .
all materials whether fabricated or not shall be stored in such a manner that damage and corrosion are prevented .
generally storage at least num mm above the ground on platforms slabs or other supports under cover will be satisfactory .
rusted or bent or damaged steel shall be rejected .
the contractor shall store components in such a manner that the freshly galvanized surfaces are protected from the attack of white rust .
storage of materials specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
any timber posts andor blockout blocks shall not be stored on top of the steel sections .
num .
the contractor shall ensure that loading transport unloading stacking and handling operations before and after fabrication are carried out in such a way that the items are protected from distortion and that galvanized surfaces are protected from damage .
handling and stacking num wbeam and thriebeam barriers num .
corrugated wbeam and thriebeam beam elements and buffered ends shall be formed from steel grade ha num or equivalent in accordance with asnzs num .
beams num .
wbeam and thriebeam road safety barrier posts shall be formed from steel grade ha num or equivalent in accordance with asnzs num .
posts num .
posts for traffic barriers for structures shall be formed from grade num steel to as num for sidemounted application .
posts mounted on top of kerb shall be universal columns formed from grade num steel to as num attached to a grade num steel baseplate to as num .
num .
wbeam and thriebeam steel road safety barrier blockouts shall be formed from steel grade hu num in accordance with asnzs num .
blockouts num .
steel blockouts for traffic barriers for structures shall be formed from steel grade hu num in accordance with asnzs num .
num .
any hardwood timber posts andor blockouts used in the works shall be western australia jarrah eucalyptus marginata .
all timber shall be structural grade no .
num .
structural grading shall be in accordance with as num .
timber hardwood num .
any softwood timber posts and or blockouts used in the works shall be pinus radiata preservative treated to hazard level hnum in accordance with as num .
all timber shall either be structural grade no .
num or structural grade no .
num providing the timber has a stress grade of not less than fnum and no more than fnum .
structural grading shall be in accordance with as num and stress grading to as num .
timber softwood num .
the contractor shall submit written documentation indicating the type of timber to be used for posts andor blockouts and its structural grading to the superintendent prior to installation .
timber num .
approved solid blockouts as listed in annexure numd shall be used on w beam road safety barriers .
solid blockouts num .
the contractor shall not use solid blockouts on proprietary end treatments unless specifically approved by the supplier of the end treatment system .
num wire rope safety barrier systems num .
only tensioned wire rope barrier systems detailed in annexure numa shall be used in the works .
specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall submit written certification by the manufacturer that the proposed wire rope barrier system will meet the deflection criteria and perform satisfactorily on the curve radii and for the k values detailed in table numb.num to the superintendent prior to the purchase of any wire rope barrier system .
hold point num .
proprietary wire rope barrier systems shall be in accordance with the manufacturers published requirements .
num concrete barriers num .
concrete class for barriers shall be in accordance with annexure numc unless otherwise detailed on the drawings .
num .
all n class concrete shall be in accordance with specification num concrete general works .
nclass concrete num .
all s class concrete shall be in accordance with specification num concrete for structures .
sclass concrete num .
all reinforcing bar and fabric used in the works shall comply with the requirements of as num .
reinforcing bars shall be grade n and fabric shall be fabric grade sl .
reinforcement num .
all prestressing strand used in the works shall comply with the requirements of as num .
all steel stressing wire tendons and stress bars shall conform to the requirements of as num as num or as num as appropriate .
galvanized prestressing strands are permitted .
num .
in accordance with as num clause num b the slump at the point of acceptance shall be num mm .
num .
waterreducing admixtures shall not be used .
num steel rail barriers num .
structural steel hollow sections shall conform to the requirements of as num and shall be grade cnum .
num .
unless otherwise specified all structural steel sections shall be a minimum grade num in accordance with as num .
structural sections num .
each rail and post shall be marked with durable identification marks with its relevant identification number as shown on the drawings .
this number shall be used on all related schedules and documents .
identification num transitions and end treatments num .
materials for nonproprietary transitions and end treatments shall comply with the products and materials requirements of the specification .
num .
materials used in proprietary end treatments including transitions shall be in accordance with the manufacturers published requirements .
num .
proprietary end treatments to be used for each barrier shall meet the test level specified in table numb.num in annexure numb .
specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
only those end treatments specified in table numb.num and in the configuration nominated in table numb.num shall be used .
num .
the drawings may indicate a nominated proprietary end treatment with the wording or similar approved product or a generic name for the end treatment .
similar approved end treatments are those contained in table numb.num .
num .
prior to the purchase of any proprietary end treatment the details of the proposed system shall be provided to the superintendent for approval .
hold point num num not used fabrication num general num .
all steelwork shall be fabricated in accordance with the requirements of specification num minor steel items and as num except as varied by this specification .
steelwork num .
cut edges shall be finished as specified in as num .
the edge surface preparation shall conform to the requirements specified for galvanizing .
unless shown otherwise on the drawings all corners on cut edges shall be rounded to a radius of approximately nummm except where such edges are subsequently to be welded .
edge treatment num .
after fabrication all burrs weld splatter and slag shall be removed by suitable mechanical means and all sharp edges and rough welds rounded off .
burrs weld splatter num .
all elements shall be fabricated such that the final erected barrier complies with the tolerances specified .
tolerances num .
all bolt holes shall be to a diameter nummm larger than the diameter of the bolt unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
all holes shall be cylindrical and perpendicular to the face of the member .
holes shall be made by mechanical means .
bolt holes num .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings all steel components covered by this specification with the exception of reinforcement where the cover is nummm or greater shall be hot dip galvanized in accordance with specification num protective treatment of steelwork .
protective treatment num .
all galvanized andor painted surfaces shall be smooth to the touch and free from runs blisters and irregularities .
surface finish num .
any damage to galvanizing both before and after installation shall be repaired using zinc rich epoxy paint .
repairs shall be completed within num hours of the damage having occurred .
repairs to galvanizing num .
welding of or onto any steel barrier rail elements or any site welding shall not be permitted .
specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num wbeam and thriebeam barriers num .
where wbeam and thriebeam safety barriers are shown on the drawings to be installed at a radius of numm or smaller they shall be shop curved to form the required radius .
larger radius may be curved on site by forcing the rail against the posts .
the contractor shall use a method for curving the rails such as not to damage the posts or distort the rail or damage the material .
any posts that are damaged or pushed out of tolerance shall be rectified at no cost to the principal .
curved rails num .
not withstanding the requirements of clause num where the wbeam is used to form the parabolic flare of the wamelt end terminal the panel shall not be prebent but shall be forced against posts num to num to form a series of kinks in the panel at the post locations .
wamelt num .
the contractor shall only use one blockout type for the entire barrier system excluding the end treatment .
blockouts num .
on any wbeam system only one type of blockout shall be used i.e .
either steel or solid .
blockout types shall not be mixed .
num wire rope safety barrier systems num .
all fabrication of wire rope safety barrier systems shall comply with the requirements specified in the manufacturers published requirements .
num steel rail barriers num .
the contractor shall prepare shop drawings to show details of fabrication for steel rail barriers which are not explicit in the drawings .
details required include dimensions angles cambering profiles splice locations weld preparation details and any special requirements as detailed under contract specific requirements .
shop drawings num .
four copies of the shop drawings certified by the contractor as complying with the above requirements shall be submitted to the superintendent seven num working days before fabrication commences .
hold point num .
the contractor shall be responsible for the correctness of the shop drawings .
acceptance of the shop drawings by the superintendent shall not relieve the contractor of his responsibility .
num .
all posts shall be vertical as shown on the drawings .
the contractors attention is drawn to the need to detail individually angled brackets and joints to ensure that this requirement is met .
vertical posts num .
posts and rails shall not contain welded splices .
the location of any bolted splices required in the rails additional to those shown on the drawings shall be subject to approval by the superintendent .
post and rail splices num .
where the rails are shown on the drawings to be curved they shall be shop curved to form that shape without distorting the section or damaging the material .
curved rails specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
all welding shall be in accordance with as num .
all welds shall be category sp unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
all electrodes used for manual welding shall conform to as num .
flux cored electrodes used for semiautomatic welding shall conform to as num .
welding num transitions and end treatments num .
fabrication of nonproprietary end treatments shall be in accordance with the requirements of the specification .
num .
fabrication of proprietary end treatments shall be in accordance with the manufacturers published requirements and the appropriate standards .
num not used installation num general num .
prior to the installation of any road safety barrier system the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that all fabrication and surface protection of the barrier system has been completed in accordance with the specification .
hold point num .
the contractor shall supply to the superintendent for approval a process description for the installation of road safety barrier systems a minimum of seven num days prior to the installation of any road safety barrier .
this requirement does not apply for traffic barriers for structures .
hold point num .
prior to the installation of any road safety barrier system the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that all foundation preparation for the road safety barrier system has been completed in accordance with the specification .
this requirement does not apply for traffic barriers for structures .
hold point num .
prior to the installation of any road safety barrier system the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the setting out details for the road safety barrier system and end treatments conform to the details shown on the drawings and annexure numb .
hold point num .
permanent road safety barrier systems shall not be erected until after all earthworks pavement and backfill works have been completed .
num .
permanent road safety barrier systems other than concrete barriers shall be erected after all bituminised surfacing works have been completed .
the contractor shall ensure that the installation process of the barriers does not damage the bituminised surface .
num .
the visual appearance of the installed barrier system shall have a smooth profile free of kinks and abrupt changes .
smooth profiles specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
barriers shall generally be erected with their principal axes vertical .
however if the crossfall on the road is greater than num they shall be erected perpendicular to the pavement unless specified otherwise on the drawings .
verticality num .
when a road safety barrier system or traffic barriers for structures is being constructed adjacent to traffic the contractor shall make suitable arrangements to minimize the hazard to road users from the incomplete barrier particularly the exposed ends of barriers and particularly when leaving a partially constructed barrier at the end of a days work .
this may involve managing the sequence of construction such that the leading end treatments and any transitions between barrier systems are constructed first and barrier construction progresses in the direction of traffic flow in conjunction with the use of temporary safety barriers .
safety during installation num wbeam and thriebeam barriers num .
all laps in wbeam and thriebeam panels shall be arranged as shown on the drawings .
laps num .
during installation wbeam and thriebeam panels shall not be cut .
num .
posts shall be installed by driving provided there is no distortion or damage which may reduce their effectiveness .
num .
posts shall be installed to their full design depth .
if site conditions dictate that the posts can not be driven then the posts shall be installed in holes to the dimensions shown on drawing num .
the bottom of the holes shall be adequately compacted to achieve the same density as the surrounding soil .
the posts shall be supported to true line and level whilst the holes are backfilled with clean wellgraded noncementitious subbase or basecourse granular material and compacted to achieve the same density as the surrounding material .
posts num .
the foundation of any post shall be deemed complying when the displacement at ground level does not exceed nummm when a numkn force is applied nummm below the top of the post in any direction .
for any posts failing the test the contractor shall take remedial measures and retest the rectified post plus one other similar post at no cost to the principal .
testing posts num .
prior to the installation of any wbeam or thriebeam barrier system where non standard post lengths or other special measures are proposed to be used the contractor shall provide details of the measures proposed and evidence that the effectiveness of the barrier system will be maintained to the superintendent for approval .
special measures num .
during installation of cables in the end anchorages of wbeam railing the contractor shall ensure that no twisting of the cable occurs .
end terminals num .
when cable assemblies are used all nuts shall be tightened to a minimum torque of numnm on the assemblies .
cable assemblies num .
all bolts used in wbeam and thriebeam systems other than nuts on cables assemblies shall be tightened to a snugtight condition .
tightening of bolts specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
all bolt heads on the traffic side of wbeam and thriebeam safety barriers shall be flush with the rail .
num .
wbeam and thriebeam safety barriers shall be erected to the following tolerances tolerances a .
variation from true plan position of posts nummm b .
variation of line of rails from specified vertical profile nummm c. variation of line of rails from specified nummm horizontal alignment d. variation of posts from vertical num in num e. orientation of blockout and or post to rail nummm nummm measured at the point of greatest offset between the blockout or post to the rail f. dimensions of holes nummm nummm g. top of bolt head relative to rail nummm nummm num wire rope safety barrier systems num .
installation of wire rope safety barrier systems shall comply with the requirements specified in the manufacturers published requirements except where varied by this specification .
standard num .
all posts shall be installed in concrete footings with suitable sockets including covers to the sockets .
driven posts shall not be used .
posts num .
intermediate blocks or tension bays shall be installed at the dimensions recommended by the manufacturer .
num .
footings shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers published requirements .
footings shall be of a uniform shape and unless specified otherwise by the manufacturer shall not protrude above the finished surface level by more than nummm .
footings num .
anchor blocks shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
the maximum spacing between anchor blocks shall be no longer than num km .
anchor blocks num .
if the ground conditions are such that the required depth of footing can not be installed then it is acceptable to reduce the depth of the footing providing that the completed footing can resist a bending moment of numknm .
this shall be tested by placing a post into the completed concrete footing and using a lever hoist and load cell anchored to a truck .
a force of numkn shall be applied to the post at a height of nummm above ground level .
providing the footing withstands this with a movement of less than nummm at ground level then footing shall be considered acceptable .
reduced footing depth specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
prior to the reduction of any depth of footing the contractor shall notify the superintendent of the use of reduced footings and shall construct a sample footing and subject it to the testing requirements prior to its implementation in the works .
num .
in certain geotechnical conditions the superintendent may order testing of the footings to confirm that they can resist a bending moment of numknm .
for any footings failing the test the contractor shall take remedial measures and retest the rectified post plus one other similar post at no cost to the principal .
num .
excavations for concrete post foundations and anchor blocks must have vertical sides .
this shape shall be maintained up to and during pouring of the concrete .
where installed adjacent to or within bituminous surfacing the bituminous surfacing shall be protected so that no concrete spills onto the surfacing .
num .
all concrete for the post foundations and anchor blocks shall be in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations or otherwise shall be nnum and conform to the requirements of specification num concrete general works .
concrete num .
wire rope safety barrier systems shall be erected to tolerances specified in the manufacturers published requirements or if none available tolerances a .
variation from true plan position of posts nummm b .
variation in height above finished surface level from specified dimension nummm nummm c. variation from true plan position of barrier nummm d. footings length width and depth nummm e. anchor blocks length width and depth nummm f. position of post relative to centre of footing nummm num .
the contractor shall provide certification to the superintendent that the wire rope has been tensioned in accordance with the manufacturers published requirements .
the certificate shall include but not be limited to the date time ambient air temperature tension force and signature with printed name of the individual managing the work at the time of the complete installation of each wire rope .
tensioning num concrete barriers num .
construction shall be by placing concrete in fixed forms or by slip forming .
construction num .
formwork design and construction shall be in accordance with as num .
formwork num .
the contractor shall submit evidence to the superintendent that the proprietary extrusion machine to be used will extrude the barrier shape to the requirements of the specification and drawings prior to extruding any concrete safety barrier .
hold point specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the start and end of any barrier length installed in a continuous process during a day shall be at a construction joint .
num .
expansion joints shall be straight square to the line of the barrier and to the width and spacing specified on the drawings .
expansion joints num .
contraction joints shall be straight square to the line of the barrier and shall be num nummm deep .
contraction joints shall be spaced at a maximum of numm centres .
contraction joints num .
formed and extruded concrete surfaces shall conform to class num in accordance with as num .
formed surfaces num .
all unformed concrete surfaces shall conform to a unum finish in accordance with specification num concrete general works .
unformed surfaces num .
all welding of reinforcement bars including tack welds shall be in accordance with as num .
welding of stressing wire tendons and stress bars shall not be permitted .
all electrodes used for manual welding shall conform to as num .
flux cored electrodes used for semiautomatic welding shall conform to as num .
welding of reinforcement num .
the foundation of the barriers shall be finished to the levels detailed in the drawings .
the barrier construction process must avoid disturbing the material below foundation level and all loose material shall be removed prior to the placement of the concrete .
foundation num .
for road safety barrier systems but not for traffic barriers for structures the foundation for barriers shall be a minimum nummm thickness of pavement material compacted as a minimum to the density in accordance with the requirements for pavements as detailed in specification num pavements as shown on the drawings or unless otherwise detailed .
foundation compaction num .
the contractor shall construct trial sections for each proposed extruded concrete barrier system of at least num metres in length including contraction and construction joints in accordance to the requirements of the drawings and the specification for the superintendents inspection and testing as required .
the trial concrete barrier section shall be approved and accepted by the superintendent prior to the construction of the concrete barrier .
hold point num .
concrete shall be conveyed to its final position using methods which will prevent segregation andor loss of material .
all concrete shall be placed in its final position within num minutes of water having been added to the mix .
transport num .
concrete shall be placed in a continuous operation between construction joints and shall be thoroughly vibrated to remove all voids and air bubbles .
compaction num .
freshly placed concrete shall be protected from the elements and prevented from drying out too quickly .
all concrete surfaces shall be cured by one or a combination of the following methods for not less than five num days curing a .
continuous wetting .
specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name b. spraying with an approved curing compound complying with the requirements of as num .
such curing compound shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers published requirements .
c. wrapping with polythene or similar film to provide an airtight cover .
d. maintaining the formwork in position for the curing period .
the contractor shall ensure that the method of curing shall not result in any staining of exposed surfaces of concrete .
num .
constructed concrete barriers shall be protected from impact by general traffic for a period of seven num days .
protection from traffic num .
if contraction joints are not formed in the wet concrete they must be saw cut within num hours of the concrete barrier being cast .
contraction joints num .
concrete barriers shall be erected to the following tolerances tolerances a .
concrete cover to reinforcement nummm nummm b .
variation of crosssection dimensions except height nummm c. variation from vertical or specified batter num in num d. variation from grades indicated on drawings num in num e. departure from plan position nummm f. departure from vertical profile nummm the vertical profile of the top of the barrier is defined as the specified road profile the barrier height .
g. surface irregularities nil abrupt or nummm in a numm template num .
in addition to the above tolerances the contractor shall take every care to ensure that the barrier is erected to smooth curves which reflect the design profiles of the barrier .
num steel rail barriers num .
handling and temporary supports of the steel barrier and its components shall be in a manner that avoids damage to the surface finish .
any damage to the surface finish shall be rectified in accordance to specification num protective treatment of steelwork at no cost to the principal .
handling and temporary supports num .
all bolts shall be snug tightened to the requirements of as num unless otherwise noted on the drawings .
bolting num .
the finished steel rail barrier shall be erected to the tolerances set out below specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name a .
variation from true plan positions of posts nummm b .
variation between any three adjacent posts nummm c. variation of dimensions in elevation nummm d. variation of line of rails from specified vertical and horizontal profile nummm num .
in addition to the above tolerances the contractor shall take every care to ensure that the barrier is erected to smooth curves which reflect the design profiles of the barrier .
in particular the contractor shall ensure that a smooth profile is maintained in the top rail after all site connections have been completed .
num .
where barrier posts are installed in castin sockets and prior to pouring epoxy into post sockets the contractor shall certify in writing to the superintendent that the barrier has been installed to the correct lines and levels as shown on the drawings and to the tolerances specified in this specification .
hold point num .
prior to installing dry pack mortar under the base plates of barrier posts with bolted down connections the contractor shall certify in writing to the superintendent that the barrier has been installed to the correct lines and levels as shown on the drawings and to the tolerances specified in this specification .
hold point num .
all deleterious dust andor metal filings shall be removed from the surface of the barrier system to prevent staining andor pitting or corrosion of the surface finish .
any damage to the surface finish shall be rectified in accordance to specification num protective treatment of steelwork at no cost to the principal .
removal of deleterious material num transitions num .
transitions between barrier types shall be constructed as shown on the drawings to the tolerances specified .
transitions num .
where transitions consist of either wbeam or thriebeam components the tolerances given in clause num shall apply .
num end treatments num .
end treatments shall be constructed as shown on the drawings to the tolerances specified .
end treatments num .
proprietary end treatments shall be installed to the tolerances detailed in the manufacturers published requirements .
if no tolerances are specified in the manufacturers published requirements the tolerances stated in this specification shall apply .
num .
for proprietary crash attenuators the tolerances for the footing foundation shall be as manufacturers published requirements or if no tolerances are specified in the these requirements the following tolerances shall apply specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name a .
variation of foundation crosssection dimensions and length nummm b .
height of foundation relative to adjacent finished surface levels nummm num num not used as built and handover requirements num asbuilt information num .
the contractor shall provide the superintendent with the installation and maintenance manuals for all proprietary barrier and end treatment systems used in the works .
manuals num .
asbuilt drawings shall include the following information at all locations asbuilt drawings a .
proprietary safety barrier systems detail the system name and post spacing .
b .
proprietary end treatments other than crash attenuators detail the end treatment name installed on a flare or parallel to the roadway posts types used and where applicable model number .
in instances where no model number is available the length of the end treatment shall be provided .
c. non proprietary end treatments detail the end treatment name and posts types .
if timber posts are used then the timber species and stress grade shall also be shown .
d. crash attenuators detail the system name backup type and transitions used and where applicable model number .
in instances where no model number is available the length of the crash attenuator shall be provided .
num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa approved wire rope safety barrier systems the following wire rope safety barrier systems wrsb are approved for use in the works num .
brifen numwire rope safety barrier the brifen numwire rope safety barrier is approved for use in the following configuration a .
post spacing of numm apart .
b .
the two upper wire ropes located at a mean height of nummm above the ground .
c. the lower two ropes located at a height of nummm above the groundare crisscrossed between every post spacing .
d. num mm z posts nummm x nummm .
under test level tl num test conditions the dynamic deflection was numm .
num .
ingal flexfence numwire rope safety barrier the ingal flexfence numwire rope safety barrier is approved for use in the following configuration a. sigma posts b .
post spacing of numm apart .
c. wires mounted at num num num and nummm height from the ground .
under tl num and tlnum test conditions the dynamic deflection was numm .
num .
sentryline ii numwire rope safety barrier the sentryline ii numwire rope safety barrier is approved for use in the following configuration a .
flat sided oval posts .
b .
post spacing of numm apart .
c. wires mounted at num num num and nummm height from the ground .
under tl num test conditions the dynamic deflection was numm .
under tl num test conditions the dynamic deflection was numm .
for all wire rope safety barrier installations a mechanically swaged coupling system shall be used to join sections of wire rope .
specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numb road safety barrier systems requirements table numb.num wire rope safety barrier systems start chainage end chainage test level num max deflection m num radius m num ve concave ve convex note locations where crest sag k values num num reference line side offset details of position of leading end treatment num details of position of departure end treatment num notes num .
refer table num of as nzs num num .
this information controls the post spacing and the need for any special treatment .
specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
wire rope barriers are typically not used in these situations .
if k values are num then this column can be deleted .
num .
if relevant information is shown on the drawings then it can be deleted from the table e.g .
details of position of leading and end treatment and start chainage .
however it is critical that the design deflection be indicated as well as horizontal curvature .
notes num to num should be deleted from the final document as should the numbers in the table heading referring to the notes table numb.num road safety barrier system requirements other than wrsb start chainage end chainage barrier type reference line side offset type of leading end treatment setout for leading end treatment type of departure treatment setout for departure end treatment specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table numb.num specified end treatments chainage test level type side installation offset table numb.num acceptable end treatments configurations classification test level length m post details other requirements suppliers drawing number specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numc concrete class for concrete barriers barrier concrete class road nnum traffic barriers for structures snum note the above concrete classes are default classes .
refer guidance notes and delete this note specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numd approved solid blockouts the following solid blockouts are approved for use in road safety wbeam systems ingal block produced by ingal civil products as shown on ingal drawing cnum with nominal block dimensions of num x num x nummm .
the block is to be made from mnums high density polyethylene which is uv stabilised .
acp plastic blockout produced by australian construction products as shown on acp drawing bplasnum .
the block is nummm deep x nummm high x nummm wide and made from uv stabilised and fire retarded polypropylene with a product code of pcmnumb .
specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure nume principals storage area removed and reusable safety barrier components shall be transported unloaded and neatly stacked at the principals storage area nominated below specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numf principal supplied items description number location time of availability weeks after commencement of contract specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is principal design engineer .
num .
excavation of rock num if there is any likelihood that rock will be encountered in installing the barrier this should be brought to the contractors attention and if fill is being done as part of the works then restrictions may need to be placed on the use of oversize material within the area that barrier system foundations may be placed .
insert an appropriate clause in contract specific requirements to cover the situation .
num .
wbeam and thrie beam barriers clause num num if curved panels with a radii less then numm are required they should be measured separately and require a schedule of rates bill of quantities item .
note panels are not to be prebent for the wamelt .
num .
removal of existing barriers clause num num where removal of existing barriers and end treatments are required clause num should be added under contract specific requirements .
num annexure nume details the location of where any reuseable barrier sections or end treatments shall be delivered to .
if not required then delete and add the words not used to the annexure title .
num in considering if existing barriers or end treatments are to be salvaged and retained by mrwa the value of the components to be salvaged should be taken into account .
for example it may not be worth salvaging num wbeam rails but it would be worth salvaging a crash attenuator some of which cost in the order of num .
num appropriate schedule of rates bill of quantities items should be included to cover loading delivery and unloading of salvaged components to the principals storage area .
specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num when installing a road safety barrier system other than as part of a roadworks contract other clauses may be required to cover any clearing earthworks or other works required to install the barrier .
suitable pay items should be included accordingly discuss with main roads quantity surveyor .
num .
double sided rail barrier and two and three rail barriers clause num num these barriers are no longer accepted barrier types .
however it may be necessary to extend existing double sided andor two and three rail barriers .
if so include clause num under contract specific requirements .
num .
supply of materials by principal clause num num if as part of the works the principal is supplying materials clause num should be added .
num if the principal is not supplying any materials then delete the table in annexure num f and add the words not used to the annexure title .
num .
painting of steel rail barriers clause num num steel rail barriers on urban bridges are often painted as required by the asset manager .
if painting is required then clause num should be added under contract specific requirements .
num an appropriate pay item should also be added in the schedule of rates bill of quantities .
num .
annexure numa road safety system barrier requirements where guide posts would normally be required and a wire rope barrier system is to be installed instead of installing guide posts either in front or behind the barrier an alternative is for the posts or post caps of the systems to be marked with class numa reflective tape as suitable for each system .
the location of the markings shall be in accordance with the main roads guide to the design of guide posts .
in this case the following text shall be added beneath the list of approved barrier systems .
posts or post caps to be marked at suitable intervals based on post spacing to approximate num m intervals .
for brifen and flexfence post caps shall be marked with num mm wide x num mm high class numa reflective tape .
for sentryline ii posts shall be marked with num mm wide x num mm high class numa reflective tape .
the location and colouring of the markings shall be in accordance with the main roads guide to the design of guide posts .
num .
annexure numb road safety system barrier requirements num the designer must complete annexure numb as appropriate for the particular project .
table numb.num wire rope safety barriers systems wrsb come in a number of different post spacing .
the post spacing affects the amount of deflection where wire rope barrier is proposed .
the designer shall nominate in annexure numb the deflection that has been allowed for in the design the test level and if the barrier is to be installed on a curve the radius of the curve and identify it as concave or convex and if installed on a vertical curve if k num .
specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name more guidance on the design of wrsb can be found in the main roads guides to the design of road safety barriers .
table numb.num this is to be completed for barrier types other then wrsb e.g .
wbeam thriebeam barriers for structures etc .
they are typically specified to be installed in accordance with main roads standard drawings and therefore the test level is irrelevant .
likewise for the concrete barriers the test level is set by the height and foundation type of the concrete barriers if nominated on the drawings as it should be the test level is therefore not relevant .
barriers for structures are similarly treated .
some of these details may be shown on the drawings and therefore can be removed from table numb.num .
table numb.num end treatments for the leading and departure end treatments for barrier systems other than wire rope either proprietary or public domain end systems can be used .
the only public domain systems that are currently approved for use by mrwa are the wamelt refer to drawings num inclusive which is deemed to comply with tl num and the trailing terminal refer to figure fnum of as nzs num for limitations on the use of this .
the wa melt has to be installed on a flare and uses timber breakaway posts .
there have been issues associated with the supply of the timber posts in terms of quality and availability and the costs for the terminal has matched or exceeded the proprietary systems which use steel breakaway posts .
guidance on the use of the wa melt was amended in july num with the following statement being added the timber posts have associated supply and durability issues and the parabolic flare creates installation difficulties .
designers are advised to utilise the other approved crashworthy terminals available .
if a proprietary end treatment is to be used then the designer shall specify the test level and the type of end treatment i.e .
redirective gating if an extruder type end treatment is required e.g .
sktnum or et num plus then this should be identified in the table and any requirements such as install on a flare should be shown on the drawings or included in table numb.num or redirective nongating wire rope systems have their own end treatments which are deemed to comply with tlnum .
for wbeam barriers there are a number of acceptable end treatments that can be used .
the designer may have chosen a particular product but in many cases other products may be acceptable .
to ensure that no supplier is disadvantaged designers shall nominate in table numb.num the end treatment that has been used for the basis of the design and in table numb.num the accepted main roads configuration as well as other acceptable alternatives .
some of the proprietary end treatments have different configurations and not all of these are acceptable to main roads .
details of approved systems and their configurations can be found in the end treatment design sheets at appendix h of the guide to the design of road safety barriers .
specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name designers are to copy and paste the accepted configuration into table numb.num .
an example is given below .
either contained in the table or preferably shown on the drawings shall be details of how the end treatment shall be setout .
this is particularly relevant to the extruding gating end treatments which can be installed either on a flare or parallel to the road .
if the end treatment is public domain i.e .
wamelt or the trailing terminal no test level is required and configuration details are required as the standard drawings have all the necessary information .
specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name example of table numb.num classification extruder gating end treatment test level length m post details other requirements suppliers drawing et num plus num num post num steel hinged breakaway post post num steel yielding posts sytp sticker on the impact head which is num mm x num mm to be black bands on white class num reflective backgrounds with the width marker pattern as shown in australian standard sign dnum lr .
sktnumtlnumm date revision num skt num num num no num wnum x num bct steel post nummm long in solid foundation tube with modified groundline strut to post num .
no num wnum x num bct steel post nummm long in solid foundation tube with modified ground line strut and num x num xnum routered timber block .
no num wnum x crt steel posts nummm long wnum x num x num routered timber block .
the sticker on the impact head which is to be black bands on white class num reflective backgrounds with the width marker pattern as shown in australian standard sign dnum lr .
sktnumtlnumm date revision num specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name a similar approach is to be taken for crash attenuators .
below is an example .
some of this information may be shown on the drawings .
the designer also needs to specify foundation typically this would be shown on the drawings .
as with other end treatments main roads preferred configuration can be found in appendix h of the guide to the design of road safety barriers .
in place of the test level on some projects it may be more appropriate to specify the design speed .
name test level model no .
length m configuration backstop transition quadguard num num units are to have the yellow flexibelt nose tension strut backup end shoe connector tauii num num compact backstop na specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
annexure numc concrete class for concrete barriers the annexure contains default concrete strengths for concrete barriers .
in situations where road concrete barriers make up a small proportion of the total concrete barriers then to avoid having two classes on concrete on site the designer may elect to change to concrete class on the road barriers to match the concrete barrier on the structure .
annexure numc would need to be changed accordingly .
if the drawings indicate the class of concrete then the table in annexure numc can be deleted and the annexure marked as not used .
specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num removal of existing barriers and end treatments num .
where shown on the drawings existing road safety barrier systems and traffic barriers for structures including transitions and end treatments shall be removed .
num .
prior to the removal of a road barrier system or traffic barriers for structures the superintendent shall identify and nominate any components that shall be salvaged for reuse .
hold point num .
barriers shall be removed in such a manner as to minimise any damage .
any damage to the galvanising of the components of the barrier system that are proposed to be reused shall be repaired as approved by the superintendent .
num .
salvaged components in good condition which meet the requirements of the specification may be used by the contractor as part of the new barrier or end treatments .
alternatively they shall be delivered to the principals storage area if so nominated in annexure nume .
salvaged components num .
the contractor shall dispose of barrier components damaged or unusable barrier components to an offsite tip .
disposal num double sided rail barrier two and three rail barriers num .
materials fabrication and erection shall be in accordance with mrwa standard drawings numbers .
num num num for double sided rail barriers num num num for two rail barriers and num for three rail barriers .
num .
posts shall not be driven but shall be placed in holes excavated to the required depth with the bottom of the holes adequately compacted to achieve the same density as the surrounding soil .
the posts shall be supported to true line and level whilst the holes are backfilled and compacted .
num .
doubled sided rail barriers two and three rail barriers shall be erected to the following tolerances a .
variation from true plan position of posts nummm b .
variation of line of rails from specified vertical and horizontal profile nummm c. variation of posts from vertical num in num specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num supply of materials by principal num .
the principal will make available free of charge to the contractor materials as listed in annexure numf .
num .
the contractor shall provide for all cranage handling loading and transportation to the site for the items .
handling num .
the items will be available as nominated in annexure numf .
timing num .
the contractor shall supply all other material necessary for completing the works .
associated materials num painted traffic barriers for structures num .
where specified steel barriers shall be painted in accordance with specification num protective treatment of steelwork .
num .
the kerbside vertical face of all steel rails shall be painted upon completion of installation and shall receive one coat of an etch primer complying with government paint committee specification number gpcpnum .
this shall be followed by two coats of white acrylic paint complying with specification number gpccnuma .
painted rhs rails specification num safety and traffic barrier systems num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title safety traffic barrier systems revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num pavement marking copyright main roads western australia main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num pavement marking revision register date clause number description of revision authorised by num num num drg.num replaced with drgs.num num tesm num num painting over not to be used tesm num num num annexure numc added new standard for heavy metals in glass beads .
removed us type num beads for type d beads in as num psm num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contents clause page no general num num scopenum num referencesnum num num not usednum products and materials num num permanent road pavement markingsnum num longitudinal road marking paint technical specification.num num thermoplastic technical specification .. num num cold applied plastic technical specification.num num glass beads technical specificationnum num temporary road marking tape .. num num raised pavement markers technical specificationnum num num not used .. num application num num pavement marking application .. num num longitudinal permanent line markingnum num transverse lines other pavement markings.num num raised pavement markers .. num num repair to road surface .. num num temporary pavement markersnum num covering and removing existing road markingsnum num num not usednum maintenance num num maintenance of road pavement marking .. num performance criteria num num longitudinal lines transverse lines other markingsnum num raised retroreflective pavement markersnum num num not used .. num as built and handover requirements num num num not used.num contract specific requirements num num num not used.num annexure numa num hold pointsnum annexure numb num raised pavement markers.num annexure numc num road marking paint and glass bead application rates.num main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numd num standard pavement marking drawingsnum main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num pavement marking general num scope num .
the work under this specification provides the minimum requirements for the supply installation and maintenance of road pavement markings and raised pavement markers .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num manual of uniform traffic control devices .
as num retroreflective materials and devices for road traffic control purposes raised pavement markers retro reflective and nonretroreflective .
as num glass beads for pavement marking materials .
as num methods of testing bitumen and related roadmaking products as num colour standard for general purpose as num adhesives epoxy for raised pavement market installation .
as num paints and related materials road marking materials pt num solventborne paint for use with dropon beads .
as num paints and related materials road marking materials pt num thermoplastic road marking materials .
other standards australian paint approval scheme specification government paint committee pnum american society for testing and materials astm cnum fineness of hydraulic cement astm dnum penetration of bituminous materials astm dnum softening point of bitumen astm dnum flash fire points by cleveland open cup astm dnum viscosity of asphalts by vacuum capillary viscometer main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num astm dnum apparent viscosity of petroleum waxes compounded with additives hot melt astm dnum joint sealants hot poured for concrete asphalt pavements main roads standards num survey mapping standard num heavy metal concentration of glass beads main roads test methods wa num luminance of pavement markings main roads specifications specification num quality systems num num not used products and materials num permanent road pavement markings num general num .
road pavement marking shall consist of a painting longitudinal road markings using white andor yellow road marking paint .
painting b the installation of longitudinal lines transverse lines and other markings ie holding lines turn arrows chevron pavement markings using a long life thermoplastic or cold applied plastic material .
thermo plastic c the installation of raised retroreflective pavement markers .
pavement markers num .
the installation of longitudinal road markings and the installation of transverse lines and other markings shall include the application of dropon glass beads to the wet paint thermoplastic or cold applied plastic to provide night time retroreflectivity unless otherwise specified in the contract .
glass beads num .
the work shall also include spotting or setting out the alignment of the lines and markings to ensure that all road markings are applied to the road surface at their correct locations .
setting out num supply of materials num .
all materials required to complete the works shall be supplied and delivered by the contractor .
main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num longitudinal road marking paint technical specification num general num .
water borne road marking paint shall be used for all longitudinal road marking and shall be an apas approved product which complies with apas specification gpcpnum .
water borne paint num .
solvent based paint shall not be used for longitudinal road marking without the prior approval of main roads .
where approved and specified it shall be in accordance with as num .
solvent based paint num .
the paint shall be lead free .
lead free num .
the paint shall be suitable for application by air assisted and airless road pavement line marking machines without the addition of thinning liquids .
suitability num .
the paint shall be suitable for application to both unpainted and previously painted road surfaces consisting of aggregate chip seals and bituminous concrete asphalt .
num .
the paint shall be suitable for the receipt of reflective glass beads immediately after application to the road surface and shall be capable of retaining the glass beads under traffic .
num .
the contractor shall be responsible for the legal disposal of empty paint containers .
the contractor should note that some local government rubbish tips may not accept empty paint containers and other arrangements shall be made for disposal .
disposal of containers num thermoplastic technical specification num general num .
thermoplastic road marking material shall consist of aggregate pigment binder glass beads and extenders capable of being softened by heating and hardened by cooling .
constituent s num .
thermoplastic road marking material shall comply with as num .
num .
thermoplastic used for audio tactile pavement markings shall comply with as num but modified as follows audio tactile markings a softening point when determined in accordance with as num the softening point shall be not less than numc .
b cold flow when determined in accordance with as num appendix j the cold flow shall be no more than num at numc .
c skid resistance when tested in accordance with as num appendices l and m at any time up to num vehicle passes the skid resistance value of beaded unprofiled base material shall be not less than num .
main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num d retroreflectivity when tested in accordance with as num appendices l and n at any time up to num vehicle passes the retroreflectivity of a beaded line of the unprofiled base material shall be greater than nummcdluxmnum .
num cold applied plastic technical specification num road marking material num .
cold applied plastic road marking material shall be a road marking material conforming with the following requirements of as num a clause num colour b clause num luminance and c clause num field testing .
num nopickup time num .
the material shall have a maximum nopickup time of num minutes .
num glass beads technical specification num .
glass beads including intermix and larger sized beads shall conform to the requirements of as num and main roads standard num .
num temporary road marking tape num .
temporary retroreflective road marking tape shall be either numm scotchlane detour grade or visatech or a similar strippable type approved by the superintendent num raised pavement markers technical specification num raised pavement markers num .
retroflective raised pavement markers shall comply with as num .
retro reflective markers num adhesive for raised pavement markers num .
hot melt adhesive a the properties of hot melt adhesive and its constituent components shall be in accordance with table numbnum in annexure numb .
properties main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num b prior to application hot melt adhesive shall be heated to and maintained at a temperature within the range of numc numc .
hot melt adhesive heated above numc shall be rejected and replaced at the contractors expense .
temperature num .
epoxy adhesive a epoxy adhesive shall be in accordance with as num with the exception of the failure stress quoted for wet hardened concrete in table num section num of the standard .
num component properties num .
the asphalt properties of filler free material and filler properties shall be in accordance with table numbnum and table numbnum respectively in annexure numb .
num temporary pavement markers num .
temporary pavement markers shall be either swarovski mini star art.num or road marking supplies standup temporary raised pavement marker stimsonite temporary chipseal or similar as approved by the superintendent .
num num not used application num pavement marking application num general num .
the contractor shall be responsible for any costs for damage to property equipment or the road surface caused by the work including any costs associated with the repair of vehicles damaged as a result of driving on or close to newly applied road markings at no cost to the principal .
contractors responsibility num .
road marking materials shall not be applied during wet weather or when the road pavement is wet or when adverse weather conditions may prevail during the work .
adverse weather num .
the road surface shall be dry and air blasted prior to application of road marking material .
surface dry num .
foreign material such as parts of tyres rubbish and animal carcasses unable to be removed by air blasting shall also be removed from the road surface prior to application of road markings .
clean surface num .
the contractor shall take all necessary precautions to protect newly applied road markings until such time as the road markings are able to resist damage from traffic .
any road marking damaged by traffic prior to drying or setting shall be rectified by the contractor at no cost to the principal .
remedial works main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
where an error occurs in the placement of any road marking the error shall be corrected by the contractor at no cost to the principal .
errors num longitudinal permanent line marking num general num .
longitudinal line marking consists of applying paint or thermoplastic longitudinal road markings on roads using white and yellow road marking paint including the application of dropon glass beads to the wet paint or thermoplastic to provide night time retroreflectivity .
num spotting setting out num longitudinal line marking shall be set out in accordance with as num main roads standard drawings as listed in annexure numc and the contract drawings .
setting out num .
all spotting shall be undertaken in accordance with main roads survey mapping standard num titled spotting in preparation for longitudinal line marking of roads .
overtaking barriers shall be set out in accordance with as num .
spotting overtaking barriers num equipment for longitudinal line marking num .
longitudinal line marking machinery shall be capable of preparing the road surface applying the road marking paint or thermoplastic to achieve the required dry film thickness and applying the dropon glass beads in accordance with the requirements of this specification .
machinery num .
longitudinal line marking machinery shall be fitted with automatic pattern control and shall be capable of applying lines up to and adjacent to traffic islands and kerbing and of marking a set of two lines forming a oneway or twoway barrier line concurrently .
automatic pattern control num .
all road marking vehicles shall have been tested and calibrated to achieve the required rates of application of road marking materials .
tested calibrated num dangerous goods approved vehicles num .
the contractor shall obtain any required western australian dangerous goods approvals for its equipment prior to commencing work .
approvals num storage facilities num .
the contractor shall obtain appropriate western australian dangerous goods approvals where necessary for the proposed storage facilities for all road marking materials .
dangerous goods approvals main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num longitudinal road marking pattern and location num .
the longitudinal road marking pattern types and their locations shall be as shown in the drawings .
longitudinal line markings shall be set out in accordance with as num and the contract drawings .
main roads longitudinal line types and dimensions are as shown in drawing num .
patterns locations num location and pattern tolerances num .
the following tolerances shall be used for painting new road markings tolerances a maximum deviation from straightness nummm in nummm b maximum deviation from correct alignment or position nummm c width of road marking nummm nummm d longitudinal start painting position nummm e length of marking segment nummm f spacing between marking segments nummm g double line gap nummm nummm num application of road marking paint num .
the paint shall be uniformly applied to achieve the minimum dry film thickness as specified in the contract and as shown in the table at annexure numc .
paint thickness num .
all edges of the painted line shall be clean sharp cut free of dusting or splattering .
dusting is the when the paint vaporises before it reaches the road and forms a cloud of paint and splattering is when the paint bounces off the road surface as droplets .
paint edges num application of thermoplastic thermo plastic num .
thermoplastic shall be applied in accordance with as num and the manufacturers instructions and to the dimensions and thickness as shown in drawings num and num .
main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num glass beads num .
dropon glass beads shall be applied to the surface of the road marking paint as shown in the table at annexure numc .
application rate for paint num .
drop on glass beads shall be applied to all thermoplastic and cold applied plastic pavement markings at the rate of numgmsmnum application rate for thermo plastic num .
the dropon glass beads shall be applied immediately after the application of the paint using suitable equipment to ensure that the beads are adequately absorbed and spread evenly across the painted surface .
timing num transverse lines other pavement markings num general num .
holding lines turn arrows chevron road markings and others shall be applied using longlife thermoplastic road marking material or cold applied plastic material .
the material shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers specifications .
types num .
for markings where a long life material is not required the markings shall be applied using road marking paint in accordance with clause num .
num setting out num .
road markings shall be set out in accordance with as num main roads standard drawings listed at annexure num d and the contract drawings .
num .
setting out for reinstatement of obliterated markings shall be transitioned to tiein to existing markings without abrupt changes in direction .
num glass beads num .
dropon glass beads shall be applied to all thermoplastic and cold applied plastic pavement markings at the rate of numgmsmnum .
glass beads num thermoplastic num .
thermoplastic shall be applied in accordance with as num and the manufacturers specification .
thermo plastic num .
the applied dry film thickness of thermoplastic laid by spray screed or extrusion shall be nummm nummm .
application thickness main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num cold applied plastic num .
cold applied plastic shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers specifications .
cold applied plastic num .
the applied dry film thickness of cold plastic laid by trowelling screeding or extruding shall be nummm nummm .
application thickness num temporary road marking tape num .
temporary road marking tape shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers specifications including specifications for surface preparation .
road marking tape num stencils num .
the contractor shall supply and maintain all templates and stencils required to complete the works .
stencils num tolerances tolerances num .
the following tolerances shall apply to the application of road marking materials a length and spacing of holding lines arrows numerals and letters nummm b width and positioning of holding lines arrows numerals and letters nummm c length and spacing of longitudinal lines nummm d width and positioning of longitudinal lines nummm e spacing between marking segments nummm f double line gap nummm nummm num .
markings not meeting the above tolerances shall be rectified at no cost to the principal .
num raised pavement markers raised pavement markers num installation num .
adhesive shall be applied to the sealed surface such that the thickness of the applied adhesive is within nummm and nummm of the sealed road surface level .
raised pavement markers shall be fixed to the adhesive within five num seconds of the adhesive being applied .
adhesive num .
the lateral spread of adhesive after a raised pavement marker is fixed shall be within nummm and nummm of the outside extremities of the base of the marker .
raised pavement markers shall be aligned such that the retroreflective surfaces of the marker are angled between num to num to the direction of oncoming traffic .
spread of adhesive main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the type colour spacing and location of markers shall be as stated below and in accordance with the drawings and as shown in the drawings as listed in annexure numd .
type colour spacing a single sided white on lane lines b single sided red on left edge line c single sided yellow on right edge line d double sided yellow on barrier lines num .
the lateral divergence of raised pavement markers shall be within nummm .
the longitudinal spacing of raised pavement markers shall be within nummm .
lateral divergence num .
excess materials shall be disposed of at an authorised disposal site .
num removal num .
where required raised pavement markers shall be removed by breaking the bond between the adhesive the road surface and the base of the raised pavement marker .
breaking bond num .
excess materials shall be disposed of at an authorised disposal site .
num equipment for dispensing of hot melt adhesive num .
equipment to heat and dispense hot melt adhesive shall be fitted with a thermostatic temperature control device capable of maintaining the hot melt adhesive between the temperature range of numc numc .
temperature control num repair to road surface repairs to road surface num general num .
where damage to the road surface occurs during the raised pavement marker removal process the resulting divot shall be repaired by the contractor at no cost to the principal .
damage num .
all divots caused by the removal of the raised pavement markers on aggregate seal surfaces or greater than nummm deep on asphalt surfaces and no larger than the area of the raised pavement marker itself shall be filled with either hot melt adhesive or epoxy adhesive to the level of the surrounding pavement to a tolerance of or nummm .
divots shall only be filled when the surface of the divot is clean and completely dry .
air blasting equipment shall be used to clean every deep divot .
num .
any divots of greater size or depth than in clause num .
num above or where any disturbance of the pavement basecourse occurs shall be repaired as for potholes .
main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num temporary pavement markers temporary pavement markers num general num .
to assist the management of traffic temporary pavement markers shall be installed on all areas of cold planed asphalt or spray seal surfaced prior to the areas being temporarily opened to traffic .
traffic managemen t num .
temporary raised pavement markers shall be regarded as incidental to the control of traffic and shall be removed and replaced with permanent markers as soon as the final road surface is completed and ready to receive the permanent markers .
where temporary markers are used to delineate traffic lanes and directions pending installation of permanent markings they should be offset from the final alignment sufficiently to allow permanent markings to be installed without hindrance prior to the removal of the temporary markers .
temporary markers to be replaced num .
temporary markers shall be placed at numm centres and in accordance with the colours as specified at clause num .
placement colour num .
temporary pavement markers shall be aligned such that the retroreflective surfaces of the marker are angled between num to num degrees to the direction of oncoming traffic .
alignment num .
subject to clause num above the lateral divergence of temporary pavement markers shall be within nummm .
the longitudinal spacing of temporary pavement markers shall be within nummm .
lateral divergence num .
excess materials shall be disposed of at an authorised disposal site .
num covering and removing existing road markings num painting over paint over not permitted num .
this method shall not be used to cover road markings num overspray overspray num .
for aggregate seal pavement surfaces existing road line and pavement markings no longer required shall be concealed by the application of a cutback bitumen and num mm crushed aggregate overspray .
this method is not generally used for asphalt surfaces .
num .
for longitudinal line markings the overspray shall be sufficiently wide to cover the entire marking .
for other pavement markings the overspray area shall be the minimum rectangular area required to cover the existing marking .
the overspray shall be aligned parallel to the road centre line .
width alignment num .
the timing of this treatment shall be coordinated with the commissioning of the new works and application of new pavement markings to minimise the impact on road users .
timing main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the binder shall be a cutback bitumen blend comprising num class num bitumen and num medium curing cutting oil sprayed at an application rate of num litrem .
bitumen num .
the cover material shall be num mm crushed aggregate applied at a rate of num mm and should match as far as possible the colour of the surrounding pavement surface .
cover material num grinding grinding num .
road markings shall be removed by grinding such that the road marking is removed without damage to the underlying road pavement .
num .
damage to the seal surface shall be repaired by the contractor at no cost to the principal .
damage num .
road markings ground off shall not be discernable .
num .
ground off material shall be disposed of by the contractor at an authorised disposal site disposal of material num plane and reseal plane reseal num .
road marking designated in the contract shall be removed by planing and resurfacing of a predetermined area .
all such works shall be undertaken in accordance with main roads standards planing num and asphalt num .
num .
all loose material shall be disposed of by the contractor at an authorised disposal site .
num sandblasting sand blasting num .
road markings designated in the contract shall be removed by wet sandblasting such that the road marking is removed without damage to the underlying road pavement .
num .
if so directed by the superintendent the contractor shall apply paint to the discoloured surface in accordance with clause num above to make the treated area indiscernible to traffic num .
damage to the seal surface shall be repaired by the contractor at no cost to the principal .
num .
road markings ground off shall not be discernable .
num .
ground off material and blast sand shall be disposed of by the contractor at an authorised disposal site .
num .
in trafficked areas signs warning approaching traffic of the hazard and the need to close windows must be placed during work activities main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num temporary road marking tape and long life material temporary tape num .
temporary road marking tape and long life material whether of a preformed extruded spray or screeded type shall be removed in accordance with the manufacturer instructions .
where no manufacturer instructions exist the markings shall be removed in a manner agreed in prior consultation between the superintendent and the contractor .
removal num num not used maintenance num maintenance of road pavement marking num .
all materials and application processes used for the maintenance of existing road pavement markings shall comply with this specification .
num .
the level of service of longitudinal lines transverse lines other markings and retroreflective raised pavement markers shall not fall below the minimum performance criteria given in clauses num and num .
performance criteria num longitudinal lines transverse lines other markings num colour num .
white markings shall be whiter in appearance than the colour ynum off white as specified in as num .
num .
yellow markings shall be equivalent to ynum wattle or ynum golden yellow as specified in as num or any colour which falls between these colours .
num retroreflectivity num .
the retroreflectivity of any marking or numm segment of a longitudinal line must exceed the following when measured in dry conditions in accordance with as num or as num. a num mcdlx.mnum for white markings b num mcdlx.mnum for yellow markings main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num luminance num .
the luminance factor must exceed the following when measured in accordance with main roads test method wa num a num for white markings b num for yellow markings num skid resistance num .
the average skid resistance value srv must be greater than num when measured in accordance with as num .
num thickness num .
except where specified for tactile purposes the thickness of road marking material shall not exceed nummm .
num replacement of markings num .
in order to provide a uniform visual guide to the road user all longitudinal lines within a numm segment shall be replaced where the length of defective line exceeds a numm continuous or num of total on any numm lane length on curves and barrier lines or b numm continuous or num of total on any numm lane length on straights num .
for transverse lines and other markings the whole marking shall be replaced where more than num of the marking is defective .
num raised retroreflective pavement markers num safety num .
markers shall not shatter or detach in a manner which constitutes a hazard to the road user .
num retroreflectivity num .
when measured in accordance with as num num appendix a at an observation angle of numo and an entrance angle of numo the cil value for any marker shall be greater than a white markers nummcdlx b yellow markers nummcdlx c red markers nummcdlx main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num replacement of raised pavement markers num .
in order to provide a uniform visual guide to the road user all markers within a numm segment must be replaced where the length of defective markers exceeds a numm continuous or num of the total on any numm lane length on curves or barrier lines or b numm continuous or num of the total on any numm lane length on straights .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numa hold points num .
the following hold points shall apply to this contract desired action release of hold point by superintendent application of road markings after setting out and immediately prior to the application of road markings note add further hold points as necessary and delete this note main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numb raised pavement markers table num.bnum adhesive properties of hot melt adhesives property min .
max .
method softening point f num num astm d num penetration num num astm d num flow inches num astm d num heat stability flow inches num viscosity numf poises num astm d num flash point c.o.c .
f num astm d num recommended pouring temperature f num num shelf life years num table num.bnum asphalt properties of filler free material property min .
max .
method penetration num num astm d num viscosity numf num num astm d num viscosity ratio numf num table num.bnum filler properties property min .
max .
method filler content by weight num num filler fineness passing astm c num no num num no num num main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numc road marking paint and glass bead application rates paint type comments dry film thickness minimum glass bead type glass bead application rate solvent prior approval required maintain existing marking numm standard as num numgm numgm install new marking numm standard as num numgm numgm water borne maintain existing marking numm standard as num numgm numgm install new marking numm standard as num numgm numgm maintain existing marking numm type d as num numgm numgm install new marking asphalt numm type d as num numgm numgm install new marking aggregate numm type d as num numgm numgm notes num .
prior approval is required for the use of solvent based paints .
delete the paint types not required .
delete this note .
main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numd standard pavement marking drawings the following main roads standard pavement marking drawings are available on the main roads web site www.mainroads.wa.gov.au drawing no .
description num pavement arrows construction detail main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num guidance notes delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference all edits to downloaded tdp documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
deletions shall be struck through e.g .
example .
insertions shall be in italics e.g .
example .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted then the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
the custodian of this specification is the traffic engineering standards manager .
num .
hold points annexure numa all hold points for pavement marking shall be nominated in annexure numa in addition to the hold point after the setting out and prior to the application of the road marking .
num .
material types all material types shall be nominated in the contract i.e .
thermoplastic cold applied plastic etc .
notes num water borne paint shall be used for all longitudinal and other road marking .
num solvent based paint shall only be used in specific instances and with prior approval of the project manager .
delete the paint types not required .
num .
material compliance the contract quality plan shall make provision for verification of material compliance with this specification .
num .
response times the contract shall nominate minimum response times for the installation or modification to pavement markings .
main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
removal of existing pavement markings clause num where existing pavement markings are to be removed or covered the contract shall specify the required method to be used .
inapplicable methods should be deleted and marked not used .
notes num .
in all instances where removal or cover of existing pavement markings is required permanent removal by overlay of the road pavement is the preferred option as it provides a new surface for the new markings without compromising safety .
unless there is a concentration of pavement markings in one area i.e .
a marked pedestrian crossing it can be an expensive option however this must be assessed against the safety implications of an alternative method of removal .
other methods of removal or cover are listed in num .
when choosing an alternative method of pavement marking removal or cover the following points should be considered a is the removalcover temporary or permanent b will the chosen method achieve the desired result in both the short and long term without excessive maintenance c will the safety of road traffic be compromised i.e .
will the resultant surface still display old markings which could be misleading to traffic num .
it should be noted that the painting over of existing road markings is considered to be a very short term and temporary measure .
num .
the overspray method is generally used for aggregate seals only .
num .
spotting overtaking barriers num it is essential that prior to any longitudinal road marking taking place the road is spotted in accordance with the approved methodology as set out in clause num .
the marking of overtaking barriers must also be undertaken prior to any longitudinal road marking commencing .
it is essential that the overtaking barriers are marked out by a main roads accredited person .
main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contract specific requirements to add or delete the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
none at this time main roads western australia specification num pavement marking page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification amendment checklist specification name no num revision no ____________title pavement marking project manager name _____________signature _________date________ checked by name _____________signature _______________date________ contract no ________contract description _____________________________ item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked change mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materialsproductsclauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from mcp .
num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection testing parameters included in spec num test methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date _______________ specification num grab rails and bollards copyright main roads western australia specification num grab rails and bollards num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date guidance notes suppliers of energy absorbing bollards re num whole document reformatted sco num num part num num added pde num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num grab rails and bollards num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num grab rails num num steel bollards num num timber bollards num num num not used num installation num num pedestrian grab rails num num steel bollards num num timber bollards num num num not used num as built handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num specification num grab rails and bollards num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num grab rails and bollards general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and installation of grab rails and bollards .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num road signs specifications num num not used products and materials num grab rails num .
grab rails shall be formed from num nb painted galvanised pipe .
num .
insitu metal sleeve for grab rail shall be formed from num nb galvanised pipe .
sleeves num .
paint shall be as shown on the drawings .
paint num .
reflective tape shall be to as num class num .
reflective tape num .
concrete shall be class nnum .
concrete num steel bollards num .
steel bollards shall be formed from num mm nb painted galvanised pipe filled with class nnum concrete .
num .
insitu metal sleeves for steel bollards shall be formed from galvanised pipe .
sleeves num .
paint shall be as shown on the drawings .
paint num .
reflective tape shall be to as num class num .
reflective tape num .
concrete shall be class nnum .
concrete specification num grab rails and bollards num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num timber bollards num .
timber bollards shall be formed from nummm dia softwood treated with preservatives against termite and fungal attack .
num num not used installation num pedestrian grab rails num .
pedestrian grab rails shall be installed as shown on the drawings with the grab rails being wedged using metal wedges into the numnb galvanised pipes which are shall be cast insitu in the ramp concrete .
installation num .
grab rails shall be painted as shown on the drawings .
paint num .
reflective tape shall be affixed to grab rails as shown on the drawings .
reflective tape num .
installation tolerances shall be within num of the vertical and within nummm of specified height .
tolerances num steel bollards num .
steel bollards shall be installed as shown on the drawings and shall be wedged using metal wedges into the galvanised pipes which shall be cast insitu in concrete .
installation num .
steel bollards shall be painted as shown on the drawings .
paint num .
reflective tape shall be affixed to bollards as shown on the drawings .
num timber bollards num .
timber bollards shall be installed as shown on the drawings .
installation num .
timber bollards shall be painted if specified on the drawings .
num .
timber bollards unless specified on the drawings are to be nummm long units installed to a height nummm above the ground and nummm below the ground at numm spacing .
posts are not to be cemented in at the base as they are required to remain frangible .
num num not used as built handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num grab rails and bollards num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is road engineer .
num .
crashworthy bollards num the crashworthy bollard that is accepted for use on the main roads wa network is called the energy absorbing bollard which is marketed under licence by roadside services solutions or impact absorbing systems pty ltd. specification num grab rails and bollards num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp none at this time specification num grab rails and bollards num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title grab rails and bollards revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager contracts num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num tactile ground surface indicators copyright main roads western australia specification num tactile ground surface indicators num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted as per corporate guidelines sco num annexure numa eigen tactile included in the list tesm num first issue of specification tmd num specification num tactile ground surface indicators num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num product and materials num num general num num warranty of product num num material num num colour num num dimension shape and spacing num num slip resistance num num ceramic tactile ground surface indicators num num luminance contrast num num uv stability num num test reports and other documentation num num num not used num installation num num general num num method of installation num num inbuilt into substrate num num adhesive fixing num num mechanical fixing num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num as built information num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num approved tactile ground surface indicators num annexure numb num luminance reflectance value lrv ror common background material num specification num tactile ground surface indicators num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num tactile ground surface indicators general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and installation of tactile ground surface indicators tgsis for road infrastructure works implemented by main roads wa .
num references num .
australian or australiannew zealand standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num num methods of sampling and testing ceramic tiles determination of modulus of rupture and breaking strength as num num slip resistance classification of new pedestrian surface materials australian new zealand standards asnzs num num incorporating amendments no .
num and num design for access and mobility part num means to assist the orientation of people with vision impairment tactile ground surface indicators international organization for standardization standards iso num num ceramic tiles part num determination of water absorption apparent porosity apparent relative density and bulk density num definitions num .
the following definitions shall apply a .
back edge of warning indicator this refers to the edge of the area of warning indicators furthest from the crossing point or hazard .
b .
composite discrete tactile ground surface indicators composite discrete tgsis tactile ground surface indicators that are individually installed and which provide a differing luminance for the sloping sides and upper surface of the truncated cone specification num tactile ground surface indicators num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name c. cue any object within the environment which can be felt heard seen or smelt by a blind or vision impaired pedestrian d. depth measured along the direction of travel when encountering the tgsi e. directional indicators a directional indicator is a textured surface feature consisting of directional grooves built into or applied to walking surfaces to give directional orientation to blind and vision impaired people .
f. direction of travel the path a person travels along which may be a footpath passageway walkway ramp stairs landing or similar .
g. discrete tactile ground surface indicators discrete tgiss tactile ground surface indicators that are individually installed which provide the same luminance for the sloping sides and upper surface of the truncated cone .
h. front edge of warning indicator this refers to the edge of the area of warning indicators closest to the roadway .
i .
height distance measured above the finished floor or ground surface j .
integrated tactile ground surface indicators integrated tgsis tactile ground surface indicators that are in a defined pattern and which are of the same luminance and material as the base surface .
k. luminance contrast the light reflected from one surface or component compared to the light reflected from another surface of component .
l. luminance factor the ratio of luminance of a surface to that of a perfect reflector identically illuminated m. lrv luminance reflectance value n. orientation orientation is a persons awareness of where they are in relation to their environment .
o. tactile ground surface indicators tgsis tgsis are truncated cones or bars installed on the ground or floor surface designed to provide pedestrians who are blind or vision impaired with warning or directional orientation information .
p. vision impaired this is a general term covering all vision difficulties that can not be adequately corrected by spectacles or contact lenses .
blindness implies severe impairment including a total or near total loss of the ability to perceive form .
therefore to cover total range of visual impairment it is referred as blind and vision impaired and when mentioned vision impaired it implies the person has sufficient residual vision for the user to benefit from the bold high contrast visual cues etc .
specification num tactile ground surface indicators num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name q .
warning indicators a warning indicator is a textured surface feature consisting of truncated domes built into or applied to walking surfaces to warn blind and vision impaired people of a nearby hazard .
r. width the distance measured at right angles to the direction of travel .
num num not used product and materials num general num .
tgsis are designed to provide pedestrians with visual and sensory information .
the two types of tgsis used by main roads wa are warning indicators and directional indicators .
num .
warning indicators alert pedestrians to hazards in the continuous accessible path of travel indicating that they should stop to determine the nature of the hazard before proceeding further .
num .
directional indicators give directional orientation to blind and vision impaired people and designate the continuous accessible path of travel when other tactile or environmental cues are insufficient .
num .
the visual contrast between the walking surface and surrounding environment are critical for visionimpaired people who are using their limited residual vision for orientation distinguishing the limits of the footpath recognising hazards and gathering information .
therefore contrast is especially important in the provision of tgsis to warn users of hazards .
tgsis shall provide a high visual contrast to the adjoining walking surface .
num .
tgsis shall be installed so that there is no likelihood of the edges lifting .
for this reason main roads wa does not approve the use of surface stick on type tgsis unless additional mechanical fastenings eg .
screws are used .
num .
discrete tgsis are not to be used on main roads wa projects unless there are contract specific requirements .
num .
main roads wa does not recommend any specific tgsi for particular applications .
the contractor will need to assess which type or style of tgsi is most suitable for the particular application taking into account substrate aesthetics contrast availability consistency with the surrounding area and cost .
num .
an approved list of tgsi manufacturers and available colours that can be used based on luminous contrast for typical background materials in road infrastructure works is in annexure numa .
specification num tactile ground surface indicators num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num warranty of product num .
the product tgsis including uv resistance and installation shall be backed with a minimum warranty of five years .
the warranty must be in writing naming main roads western australia principal as the product owner warranty num .
during the period of the warranty the supplier shall without delay and at no cost to main roads western australia correct all defects and omissions covered by the warranty by way of repair replacement or modification or other means .
when the product fails any of the requirements of this specification during the warranty period the supplier is required to replace the product at no cost to main roads western australia .
num .
refer to main roads special conditions of contract warranties from third parties warranties from third parties a .
upon the termination of the contract the contractor must use all reasonable endeavours to ensure that any warranties in favour of the contractor relating to the works are assigned to the principal .
b .
if a particular warranty can not be assigned to the principal the contractor holds the benefit of the warranty in trust for the principal and appoints the principal as the contractors agent for the purposes of obtaining the benefit of the warranty and enforcing its terms .
num .
installation of tgsis shall not proceed until the principal has acknowledged receipt of the certification referred to in subclause num item num in writing .
in addition installation of tgsis shall not proceed unless the product is included in annexure numa approved tgsis or the principal has been advised by the traffic engineering standards manager that the product meets the approval requirements specified in clause num .
hold point num material num .
tgsis can be manufactured from any material as long as they comply with relevant standards relating to dimensional and spacing requirements and meet the requirements of the specification once installed for a minimum of the warranty period .
durable materials suitable for tgsis include but are not limited to corrosion resistant metals such as stainless steel brass and aluminium high strength concrete and ceramic and hard wearing rubbers and plastics .
num colour num .
the choice of colour is dependent upon the colour of the background substrate surface .
the colours may vary to achieve the luminance contrast as specified in clause num .
num .
indicative contrasting colours for various substrate surfaces is provided in annexure numa .
specification num tactile ground surface indicators num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num dimension shape and spacing num .
the design and arrangement of warning tgsis shall comply with figure num of asnzs num .
num .
warning indicators shall be installed as per clause num of asnzs num .
num .
directional indicators shall be installed as per clause num of asnzs num .
num .
the design and arrangement of directional tgsis shall comply with figure num of asnzs num .
num slip resistance num .
tgsis shall be tested for slip resistance in accordance with as num and satisfy the minimum requirement slip resistance testing a .
wet pendulum test classification class w or better b .
oil wet ramp test classification class rnum or better num .
the manufacturer shall submit the results with confirmation that the product resistance classification remains current and that the product and process have not changed .
num ceramic tactile ground surface indicators num .
ceramic tgsis shall comply with the following ceramic tgsi testing a .
minimum breaking strength of numn tested in accordance with as num. b .
water absorption e num measured in accordance with iso num .
num luminance contrast num .
the luminance contrast of tgsis is the difference in the amount of light reflected from the tgsis compared to the amount of light reflected from the background or adjacent path of travel .
luminance contrast testing num .
luminance contrast shall be measured in accordance with asnzs num appendix e section enum and shall meet the following requirements luminance contrast a .
where the tgsi is an integrated unit it shall have a minimum luminance contrast of num compared to the amount of light reflected from the surface of the adjacent path of travel .
b .
where the tgsis are discrete units having the same luminance for the sloping sides and upper surface of the truncated cones the units shall have a minimum luminance contrast of num compared to the amount of light reflected from the surface of the adjacent path of travel .
specification num tactile ground surface indicators num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name c. where the tgsis are composite discrete units having differing luminance for the sloping side and upper surface of the truncated cones the unit shall have a minimum luminance contrast of num compared to the amount of light reflected from the surface of the adjacent path of travel .
num uv stability num .
tgsi material and colours that are likely to degrade in sunlight eg .
plastic and rubber shall be uv stabilised .
num test reports and other documentation num .
the manufacturer shall provide certificates and test results for laboratory testing carried out by a nata approved testing authority for test reports a. tgsi design size and spacing compliant with asnum b. luminance contrast asnzs num appendix e calculated luminance contrast values shall be submitted together with the laboratory test values of mean luminance reflectance values for the products and common background materials .
luminance reflectance values lrv for some typical common background materials used in road works is given in annexure numb c. slip resistance abrasion resistance i .
wet pendulum test as num appendix a ii .
oil wet ramp test method as num appendix d d. for ceramic tgsi products water absorption iso num e. for ceramic tgsi products breaking strength as num f. uv stability evidence of the use of uv stabilization compounds or accelerated weathering tests if applicable .
num .
in the case of stickon type tgsis the manufacturer shall demonstrate that there is no likelihood of the edges lifting through the additional use of mechanical means eg .
screws into readyformed holes .
num .
the manufacturer shall provide the installation and product manuals for all tgsis .
num num not used installation num general num .
in western australia on main roads wa projects main roads wa standard drawings supersede those shown in as num for the following typical treatments a .
drawing no.num ramps type a and type b specification num tactile ground surface indicators num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name b .
drawing no.num modified cut through corner treatment c. drawing no.num median gaps num method of installation num .
in the absence of any other documents approved by main roads western australia all components of a tgsi as well as the installation methodology shall conform to the manufacturers requirements .
num .
the methods of installation shall include a. inbuilt into substrate integrated tgsi tile b. adhesive fixing integrated tgsi tile num inbuilt into substrate num .
mrwas preferred method of installation for integrated tgsi tiles is inbuilt into the substrate .
for new surfacing the tgsis shall be inbuilt at the time of substrate construction in order to avoid the likelihood of the tgsis coming off due to weak adhesionbonding between the substrate and tiles .
num .
specific attention should be given to ensuring that the tgsis are installed flush with the surrounding surface so as not create a trip hazard .
num adhesive fixing num .
to ensure satisfactory bonding of tgsis to the surface it is a main roads wa requirement that this method of fixing be supplemented by mechanical means eg .
use of screws into the substrate .
num .
tgsis shall be installed with high strength adhesive recommended by the manufacturer on a smooth flat and dry surface to ensure the adhesive has maximum surface area contact .
num .
for integrated tgsis the edge of the base surface shall not be more than nummm above the surrounding surface and have all exposed external edges chamfered .
num mechanical fixing num .
in mechanical fixing tgsis with a stem or spigot that protrudes into the substrate are used instead of tgsis with a flat base .
this method is ideal to retrofit discrete tgsis after the substrate has been laid or on an existing substrate .
the mechanical fixing mechanism may be supplemented through the use of an adhesive .
num .
for mechanical fixing drilling templates shall be used as a guide and correct diameter holes drilled into the substrate to the minimum depth specified by the manufacturer .
num .
metal tgsis must be thoroughly cleaned with a suitable cleaning agent eg acetone prior to installation .
any additional adhesive material used shall be recommended by the manufacturer .
specification num tactile ground surface indicators num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used as built and handover requirements num as built information num .
the installation and product manuals for all tactile ground surface indicators shall be provided .
num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num tactile ground surface indicators num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa approved tactile ground surface indicators indicative contrasting colours indicative contrasting colours are set out below refer to individual suppliers for specific details .
background material white line marking sealed surface old red laterite asphalt new concrete new nummm or nummm dense grade asphalt contrast colours blue medium grey charcoal black terracotta grey mustard yellow warning yellow ivory white grey mustard yellow warning yellow ivory white blue medium grey charcoal black terracotta grey blue mustard yellow warning yellow terracotta ivory white approved suppliers num .
affirmative group location num dellamarta road wangara wa num tel num num num material fibre reinforced polymer cement tiles type integrated size nummm x nummm nummm x nummm background material white line marking sealed surface old red laterite asphalt new concrete new nummm dense grade asphalt new nummm dense grade asphalt contrast colours bnum blue dnum charcoal anum mustard cnum ivory anum mustard cnum ivory bnum blue dnum charcoal bnum blue dnum charcoal cnum ivory bnum blue dnum charcoal cnum ivory specification num tactile ground surface indicators num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
esp australia pty .
ltd location num ceylon street nunawading vic num tel num num num material fibre reinforced polymer tiles type integrated size nummm x nummm nummm w x nummm nummm x nummm background material white line marking sealed surface old red laterite asphalt new concrete new nummm dense grade asphalt new nummm dense grade asphalt contrast colours blue black yellow white yellow white black blue yellow white blue yellow white num .
tacpav australia location po box num inglewood wa num mobile num num num material fibre reinforced polymer cement tiles type integrated size nummm x nummm nummmw x nummm background material white line marking sealed surface old red laterite asphalt new concrete new nummm dense grade asphalt new nummm dense grade asphalt contrast colours bnum blue dnum charcoal anum mustard cnum ivory anum mustard cnum ivory bnum blue dnum charcoal bnum blue dnum charcoal cnum ivory bnum blue dnum charcoal cnum ivory specification num tactile ground surface indicators num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
italpro tiles location num mills road braeside vic num tel num num num mobile num num num material ceramic tiles type integrated size nummm x nummm background material white line marking sealed surface old red laterite asphalt new concrete new nummm dense grade asphalt new nummm dense grade asphalt contrast colours charcoal terracotta grey yellow ivory grey yellow ivory charcoal terracotta grey yellow terracotta ivory grey yellow terracotta ivory num .
guardian tactile systems pty .
ltd .
location unit num erindale road balcatta wa num tel num num num mobile num num num material bayer desmopan polyurethane tiles type integrated size nummm x nummm nummm x nummm background material white line marking sealed surface old red laterite asphalt new concrete new nummm dense grade asphalt new nummm dense grade asphalt contrast colours terracotta medium grey black ivory warning yellow colorado grey ivory warning yellow colorado grey terracotta medium grey black ivory warning yellow colorado grey ivory warning yellow colorado grey specification num tactile ground surface indicators num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
tactile indicators pty .
ltd .
location po box num midland wa num mobile num num num material fibre reinforced polymer concrete tiles pavers type integrated size nummm x nummm background material white line marking sealed surface old red laterite asphalt new concrete new nummm dense grade asphalt new nummm dense grade asphalt contrast colours charcoal black terracotta yellow ivory yellow ivory charcoal black yellow ivory yellow ivory num .
eigen tactile location po box num burwood vic num tel num num material fibre reinforced resin polymer tiles fibretac size nummm x nummm nummm x nummm background material white line marking sealed surface old red laterite asphalt new concrete new nummm dense grade asphalt new nummm dense grade asphalt contrast colours black white yellow white yellow black white yellow white yellow specification num tactile ground surface indicators num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numb luminance reflectance value lrv for common background material note lrv values are indicative and in case the colour of background material varies significantly the manufacturer shall perform a field test to determine the luminance contrast .
background material white line marking sealed surface old red laterite asphalt new concrete new nummm dense grade asphalt black new nummm dense grade asphalt black lrv for dry surface num num num num num num lrv for wet surface num num num num num specification num tactile ground surface indicators num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is traffic engineering standards manager .
although not recommended for main roads projects should a project require the use of discrete tactile surface indicators the following contract specific clause may be used specification num tactile ground surface indicators num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num tactile ground surface indicators num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title tactile ground surface indicators revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num roadway lighting copyright main roads western australia specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date num num num num num num editorial and amendment to clauses num num and num .
clauses num num and num added .
eetse num num bolt torque changed from num nm to num nm .
ee num num num amendment to single and double door switchboard bolts and nuts of slip base pole editorial ee num num amendments to bolt torque and lock nut details ee num num num num amendments to clauses to allow for rigid conduit and change holding screws ee num num num clarified and corrected items num and num respectively ee num num num num num num removed dates on standards added pit gaskets rcds flush pit installation pit location precast surrounds and amended testing ee num num item num deleted tesm num num deleted item num to the clause referring to residual current devices ee num num added item num to the clause referring to residual current devices ee num num amendment to item num ee num num major amendments have been made to all parts of this clause ee num num num changed drawing no .
reference atesm num num references amendments to asnzs standards ee num specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num electricity regulations and authorities num num contractors drawings num num staged construction works num num num not used num products and materials num num general num num cable pits num num conduits num num wiring and colours num num switchboards num num roadway lighting poles design manufacture num num roadway lighting luminaires num num control gear ballast capacitors and ignitor num num num not used num installation num num poles and luminaires num num electrical installation num num testing num num impact absorbent light pole num num switchboard documentation and switching num num removal of pole mounted lighting num num pedestrian shared path lighting num num installation of underpass lighting num num retrofitting of underpass lighting num num bridge mounted installation num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num as built drawings num num maintenance during defects liability period num num maintenance and handover num num num not used num contract specific requirements num specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used num annexure numa num supply of electrical materials num specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num roadway lighting general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of all work standards materials and workmanship required for the supply installation removal andor replacement of lighting and related equipment power connection focusing testing and maintenance of roadway lighting .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below acts and regulations govt .
of western australia office of energy wa electrical requirements australian standards as num degrees of protection provided by enclosures for electrical equipment australiannew zealand standards asnzs num road lighting vehicular traffic category v lightingguide to design installation operation and maintenance asnzs num lighting for roads and public spaces luminaires asnzs num structural design actions wind actions asnzs num retroreflective materials and devices for road traffic control purposes retroreflective sheeting asnzs num conduits and fittings for electrical installation parts num to num including all amendments asnzs num australian new zealand wiring rules including amendments asnzs num polyethylene pe pipes for pressure applications asnzs num steel reinforcing materials asnzs num structural design requirements for utility services poles asnzs num steel utility services poles asnzs num hotdip galvanised zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name asnzs num luminaires general requirements and tests asnzs num auxiliaries for lamps ballasts for discharge lamps excluding tubular fluorescent lamps general and safety requirements asnzs num auxiliaries for lamps ballasts for discharge lamps excluding tubular fluorescent lamps performance requirements other standards iec num ed .
num b highpressure sodium vapour lamps main roads standards num guidelines for the design of road bridge and footpath lighting num utility providers code of practice for western australia main roads specifications specification num concrete general works specification num antigraffiti specification num pavements num electricity regulations and authorities num .
the works shall be carried out in accordance with the office of energy wa electrical requirements asnzs num australiannew zealand wiring rules the requirements of western power synergy horizon or any other authority having jurisdiction over the installation power supply authority .
electricity act num .
the contractor shall submit all notices and applications required by the power supply authority and pay any fees required .
notices num .
the power supply is as detailed on design drawings .
the contractor shall ensure all equipment is designed to operate at the correct voltages prior to installation .
the contractor shall ensure all equipment installed is suitable for the maximum prospective short circuit current found at the point of installation .
power supply voltage supply num contractors drawings num manufacturing drawings num .
pole fabrication drawings assembly and erection instructions shall be prepared in accordance with asnzs num clause num prior to commencing manufacture .
pole fabrication drawings num .
switchboard design drawings showing elevation and section details equipment layout materials schedule and label details shall be prepared prior to commencing manufacture .
the switch boards design drawings shall comply with the main roads design drawing presentation and typical standard drawings for switchboards .
switchboard drawings specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
drawings shall be prepared on the principals standard drawing templates for borders and title blocks and shall comply with main roads numbering system .
drawing number num staged construction works num .
the contractor shall advise main roads if they intend to stage the construction phase where affecting existing lighting asset .
num num not used products and materials num general num .
a summary of required electrical material requirements is provided at annexure numa .
num cable pits num .
cable pits shall be plastic and fitted with heavyduty wellfitting concrete lids with mrwa electrical cable moulded into the surface in accordance with drawing no .
num .
pit type num .
to ensure that the lid can not be easily removed without the aid of tools only one lifting hole shall be cast into the lid .
pit lids num .
an industrystandard plastic plug shall be used to plug the lifting hole when lifting is not required to alleviate most water and sand ingress .
plastic plug num .
an industrystandard gasket shall be fitted to the pit lid to alleviate water and sand ingress .
gasket num .
concrete surround to cable pits shall comply with the requirements of standard drawing no .
num .
the concrete surround may be pre cast .
concrete surround num conduits num .
all conduits whether rigid or flexible shall be in accordance with asnzs num series .
asnzs num num .
all rigid electrical conduits shall be heavy duty suitable for underground use and shall be orange in colour .
conduit type num .
only rigid pvc fittings shall be used .
all joints shall be cemented .
where a thread is required on a conduit a suitable adaptor shall be cemented to the conduit .
jointing num .
conduits for casting within bridge decks shall be rigid with the use of sweep bends where necessary .
right angled bends are not to be used .
bridge decks specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
all necessary precautions shall be taken during construction to protect conduits from damage ingress of water and dirt or movement from position due to any other work processes .
if conduits are found to be damaged contain water or dirt they shall be replaced .
precautions num .
all external conduits and fittings shall have adequate protection against external influences .
their classification should be as per asnzs num series .
external influences num wiring and colours num .
all cables shall have copper conductors and double insulated pvc with an insulation rating of numkv .
colour coding shall be colour coding a .
active conductors red white blue as specified on the drawings active b .
neutral conductors black neutral c. earth conductors yellowgreen earth d. the colour of insulation tape shall match the colour of the cable insulation .
insulation num .
all multistrand conductors shall be terminated with crimp lugs .
joints with or without connectors shall not be accepted except within cable pits .
termination num switchboards num .
there are two types of single or double door switchboards to be installed based on the application and roadway lighting design requirements .
double and single door switchboards num .
for general arrangement and internal wiring lay out refer to mrwa standard drawings for each type .
num accessibility num .
the arrangement and layout of all equipment shall provide adequate and safe means of access and working space for installation and maintenance purposes .
access num .
all equipment shall be installed such that removal replacement or repair of each and every component may be carried out with standard electrical trade tools .
standard tools num .
particular attention shall be given to the location and clearance of handles levers switches etc .
in respect to the safety of personnel operating the equipment .
location clearances num .
to allow for ease of maintenance in darkness a fluorescent light shall be installed in the top front of the singledoor switchboard that is automatically operated when the door is opened .
the light shall adequately illuminate all internal components of the singledoor switchboards .
lighting for maintenance single door num .
two or more fluorescent lights shall be installed in the top front of the doubledoor switchboard that is automatically operated when the door is opened in such a manner that provides adequate illumination for all internal components of the doubledoor switchboard .
lighting for maintenance double door specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num material num .
the cubicle and escutcheon shall be fabricated from marine grade aluminium sheet of not less than num mm thickness .
cubicle num fabrication and welding num .
the cubicle dimensions shall be as shown on the design drawings .
dimensions num .
all joints shall be full length welded and ground to a smooth square finish .
the exterior of the cabinet shall present a smooth surface without any bolt heads or the like projecting outside the cubicle .
joints num .
doors and escutcheon panels shall be fitted with suitable internal stiffeners .
horizontal escutcheon edges shall be folded through a right angle to offer rigidity .
stiffeners num .
escutcheon fixing bolts shall be made captive to the escutcheon and shall be num mm plated steel with nylon washers .
in addition four fixed guide pins per escutcheon shall be fitted to the cubicle to locate the escutcheon .
fixings num .
a pocket for keeping drawings or other documents shall be fitted to each switchboard door .
the document pocket shall be of minimum size num mm wide x num mm high x num mm capacity .
pocket num weatherproofing num .
neoprene door seals shall be fitted to ensure that water moisture and dust can not enter the interior of the cubicle giving ipnum degree of protection .
the seals shall be such that new seals can be fitted at a later date without the necessity of removing any equipment other than the old seals .
neoprene seals num door locks and hinges num .
each of the doors shall be fitted with two flush mounted lockwood series num night latches .
the locks on the door shall be capable of being operated by both western power nominated key mkl lock and main roads western australia electrical master lighting key no num available from harry armstrong pty ltd locksmith num queen street perth .
lock num .
any keys held by the contractor as a result of purchasing the latches shall be provided to the superintendent .
keys num .
a locking arm shall be fitted to each of the doors to hold it firmly in the num or more open position .
locking arm num .
each of the doors shall be fitted with two night latches one fitted near the top and another near the bottom of the opening side of the door to provide four adequate fixing points with the three hinges for the door .
the doors shall only be capable of being lifted off the hinges when in the open position .
door num .
the doors shall close positively against the gasket with no slack movement .
specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num cutouts num .
particular care shall be taken to provide stressfree panels where cutouts are required so that no distortion of the cutouts will occur .
rough edges shall be removed and all cutouts shall be accurate to num mm .
stressfree panels num earthing num .
a drilled copper bar providing a separate hole for each connected earth conductor shall be fitted near the bottom of the cubicle .
each hole shall have two num fixing screws .
earthing bar num residual current device num .
a num msdelayed type residualcurrent device rcd shall be installed with the appropriate overcurrent protection .
these shall be clipsal numrcnumgnum or similar and shall comply with asnzs num .
rcd num wiring num .
all insulated wiring within the cubicle shall be run in horizontal and vertical lines .
each group of wiring shall be strapped at short intervals with black nylon cable ties .
wiring runs num .
each wire shall be terminated by crimp type terminal lugs fitted by the lug manufacturers recommended crimping tool .
terminations num .
all conductors shall be standard sizes with pvc insulation minimum voltage rating num kv and temperature rating vnum .
conductors num .
internal conductor sizes shall be of adequate crosssection .
the minimum size permissible shall match the full current rating capacity of the connected equipment .
conductor sizes num .
where more than one item is connected to a common feed such as fuses or circuit breakers the minimum conductor size of the common feed shall match the arithmetic sum of the connecting equipment full current rating capacities .
in any case the smallest conductor shall be not less than num mm .
common feed num name plates and labels num .
all equipment labels shall be manufactured from whiteblackwhite traffolite with engraved black letters on a white background or redwhite red with white letters on a red background .
letters num .
as far as practicable all labels shall be of the same overall dimensions with identical mounting holes .
the minimum size of letters shall be num mm upper case .
sizes num .
all final subcircuit circuit breakersfuses shall be labelled with industrial products australia ipa coloured and numbered markers .
labelling specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the switchboard number shall be clearly shown on the outside of the door of each cabinet .
the switchboard number shall be made up of num mm black characters on a num mm x num mm background of adhesive class num yellow retroreflective material as per asnzs num part num .
a further label of the same material consisting of num lines of num mm black characters shall be placed num mm below the switchboard number .
line num shall read num num and line num main roads wa .
numbers num .
manufacturers name plates shall not be affixed to the switchboards housings .
manufacturers name plates num finish num .
all internal and external panel surfaces shall have an orbital sanded finish with a clear antigraffiti coating applied in accordance with specification num antigraffiti .
orbital sanded finish num mounting num .
metering shall be as per the design drawing and in accordance with western power requirements .
meter height num .
the plinthcable pit shall be as shown on the drawings .
mounting bolts shall not be accessible from outside the switchboard .
plinth mounting num .
the finished top surface of the concrete plinth shall be graded away from the switchboard to prevent water accumulating on the plinth .
plinth num control equipment num .
each switchboard shall have a selector switch to enable selection of the type of control to be used to operate the lights .
selector switch num .
each switchboard shall have a selectable hpmpe num or similar light sensing relay for the control of lighting fixed to an external panel using a minimum of four concealed bolts .
the sensing unit shall be fixed with suitable nonferrous screws to the south side of the panel where possible using nutserts and sealed with rtv silicon sealant .
control switch num .
each switchboard shall have a connection for a western power pilot signal where such a pilot is accessible from the switchboard location .
western power pilot num .
each switchboard shall have a selectable digital electronic timer for control of lighting where a western power pilot signal is not provided .
digital timer num .
all equipment shall be hard fixed to the enclosure via screws or other mechanical fixings .
specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num roadway lighting poles design manufacture num shape of pole num .
the pole with outreach arm shall conform to the shape shown in the standard drawing nos .
num and num with a vertical continuously tapered pole with or without a continuously tapered outreach arm .
poles shall be fitted with pole caps and bird guards .
shape num cross section of pole num .
tubular cross section of the pole and outreach arm shall be octagonal shape in cross section with equal sides in accordance with main roads standard drawing nos .
num and num .
cross section num structural design of poles num .
the structural design of the poles shall be in accordance with asnzs num .
asnzs num num .
under the design wind speed loading the horizontal displacement of the luminaire resulting from any combination of flexural and torsional deflection shall not be greater than num of the mounting height .
horizontal displacement num .
the vertical pole and outreach structure shall be constructed and pre cambered in such a manner as to ensure that in the erected position with the luminaire installed the outreach spigot is at an angle above the horizontal of num num degrees and such that the outreach is at right angles to the true road delineation num degree .
angle of outreach spigot num fabrication num .
poles shall be fabricated in accordance with asnzs num .
fabrication of slip base pole shall include slip base fixing system .
asnzs num num .
the column shall be sufficiently sealed to ensure that moisture running down the side of the column or vermin can not enter the column .
sealing num .
the column of the pole shall be fabricated in no more than three num lengths .
the outreach arm section of the pole shall be fabricated in a single length .
number of pieces num .
the vertical section shall be structurally and mechanically capable of accepting any outreach arm of sizes num num num num and num metres .
any outreach arm must fit onto the top of the vertical section of the pole .
outreach size num .
any two column sections shall telescope together with a lap length not less than num times the column section dimension as measured at the lap joint .
the minimum and maximum overlap required for the lap joint shall be painted or otherwise clearly marked on the pole prior to assembly .
lap length num galvanising num .
steel poles and outreach arms shall be hot dip galvanised in accordance with asnzs num .
steel poles outreach arms specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the complete holding down bolt and slip base assembly but excluding the mesh cage shall be galvanised .
galvanising is to be carried out after all fabrication welding and cleaning have been completed .
num outreach arm num .
the outreach arm shall be continuously tapered and fitted with a num od x num chs tube spigot .
the spigot shall be nummm long and have a luminaire lock welded to the end as shown in the standard drawing numbers num num and num .
tapered arms num .
the outreach arms may be fixed to the vertical pole by bolts as shown in the drawings .
the outreach arm shall have an uplift of num degrees .
uplift angle num .
the outreach arms may be bolted or welded to a short upper section of vertical pole which is fixed to the vertical section using the functional fit due to taper .
if this method is used the requirements specified under clause num apply .
fixing num .
if the outreach arm is made from a material of a thickness different to the vertical section of the pole the vertical section shall be reinforced .
reinforcing num .
the opening between the outreach arm and the vertical section of the pole shall be such that if any restriction exists the restriction will not impede the installation of a cable from the luminaire end of the outreach arm .
all sharp edges shall be removed to prevent damage to the cable .
restrictions num door num .
the pole access door opening shall be a minimum size of nummm by nummm with one captive door fastening bolt located at the top of the door .
dimensions num .
doors shall be interchangeable and in accordance with standard drawing no .
num .
above the door and external to the pole a weather strip shall be welded to reduce the possibility of water entering the pole at the door .
weather strip num general finish and appearance num .
all holes and surfaces shall be free of burrs and sharp edges to allow the installation of electrical cables into the pole without damage .
all sections shall be smooth and free of kinks ripples and galvanising defects .
surface surfaces num .
when the pole is installed vertical sections of the pole shall not deviate from the straight by more than nummm in any num metre length .
verticality num slip base num .
a slip base complete with slip joint washer bolts nuts and washers as per the drawings shall be considered as part of the pole .
slip base components num .
the slip joint washer flat washers and the load bearing faces of the bolt head and nut shall be flat and even .
any excessive warping or uneven galvanising shall be rectified at no cost to the principal .
flat even surfaces specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
prior to delivery on site the pole shall be attached to the slip base with mnum slip base bolts tightened to a torque of num nm .
bolt torque num fixing bolts num .
apart from the footing holding down bolts and slip base bolts all fixings and bolts shall be stainless steel grade mnum in accordance with as num .
stainless steel num holding down bolt assembly num .
the holding down bolt assembly shall include the mesh cage and shall be complete with eight num nuts and eight num washers per assembly as per standard drawing no .
num .
mesh cage and bolt assembly num .
all bolts shall be the same length with respect to the vertical axis of the assembly .
bolt length num .
the bolt arrangement shall be such that the pole may be mounted with the access door in any of four positions which are num apart .
bolt arrangement num .
the bolts shall be nummm threaded rod and have a minimum fy nummpa .
bolt grade num .
all fittings shall be of a material which does not promote electrolytic corrosion .
electrolytic corrosion num impact absorbant light pole and footing num .
an impact absorbent light pole and its footing shall be designed and installed as per clause num and standard typical drawing num .
impact absorbent light pole num .
the design of impact absorbent light pole shall be reviewed and approved by mrwa structure branch prior to fabrication and procurement .
approval num .
the detail of footing for impact absorbent light pole to be reviewed and approved by mrwa structure branch prior to issue of drawings for construction ifc .
impact absorbent light footing num localised widening num .
mrwa typical standard drawing num and num provide guidance for localised widening .
localised widening num roadway lighting luminaires num general num .
luminaire details make and model shall be as shown on the design drawings .
luminaire details specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
alternative luminaires other than those specified on design drawings may be used subject to the principals prior approval .
the granting of this approval is at the absolute discretion of the principal .
the contractor shall at its cost submit revised design drawings as per the roadway lighting design guidelines .
the contractor shall provide complete revised photometric data manufacturers detail drawings and sample luminaire to the superintendent for evaluation by the principal .
the new design shall conform to the requirements of main roads roadway lighting design guidelines .
hold point num .
luminaires shall comply with main roads roadway lighting policy .
lighting policy num construction and finish num .
the luminaire shall be type tested and demonstrated to comply with type tests a. asnzs num b. asnzs num c. asnzs num num .
the luminaire shall be provided with a positive long life seal between reflectorrefractor and socketreflector junctures to prevent the entry of moisture and foreign matter giving at least ipnum degree of protection .
seal housing ring num .
the housing and the refractor ring shall each be a one piece aluminium casting .
the refractor holder assembly shall hinge open at least num to give easy access to the optical system .
holder assembly num .
access to the terminals shall be by a hinged one piece cast aluminium door .
any hinged parts shall be secured such that they will withstand high velocity wind in the open position .
door num .
the luminaire shall consist of housing slipfitter reflector refractor holder lamp socket and mounting pipe stop .
luminaire num .
all catches cotter pins clamps adjustment screws and accessories shall be made of corrosion resistant metals equal to stainless steel grade mnum .
accessories num .
all other external metal parts shall be protected with a baked enamel finish .
finish num .
the slipfitter shall have provision to be adjusted between five num degrees up and three num degrees down from the horizontal plane .
adjustment num reflector num .
the reflector shall be of aluminium sheet of such grade and quality as to meet the following requirements reflector requirements a .
the reflecting surface shall be specular and contour designed .
reflecting surface b .
the reflection factor as determined by a suitable reflectometer shall not be less than num .
reflection factor c. the reflecting surface shall have a protective coating of oxide no less than one num milligram per square centimetre .
oxide coating specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name d. the reflector shall be given a sealing treatment such that there will be no staining when subjected to a water solution num gmnumcc of anthraquinone violet r at room temperature .
one drop of the solution shall be allowed to remain in contact with the surface for five num minutes and washed away with running water .
sealing treatment num refractor num .
the refractor shall be of clear heatresisting borosilicate glass having prisms to redirect the light from the lamp and reflector into the required light distribution .
refractor specification num lamp holder num .
the lamp holder shall be ges type porcelain enclosed fitted with lamp grips and be suitable for use with high pressure sodium lamps .
type num weight and sail area num .
the weight of the luminaire complete with lamp shall not exceed numkg .
the sail area shall not exceed numm .
sail limits num bird guard num .
a bird guard shall be provided with each luminaire to prevent birds entering the housing when the luminaire is installed on the outreach arm .
bird guard num lamps num .
the high pressure sodium hps lamp shall comply with iec num high pressure sodium vapour lamps .
lamp requirements num .
the lamp base shall be date coded for easy recording of installation date .
date coding num control gear ballast capacitors and ignitor num general num .
all control gear components shall be suitable for operation on either numvolt phase to phase or numvolt phase to neutral numhz as applicable and conform to the requirements of asnzs num .
operating voltage num .
the control gear shall be quiet in operation and suitable in every aspect for mounting in the base of the pole .
the control gear shall be mounted on a base plate .
ballast capacitors and igniter shall be adequately sealed against the ingress of moisture and vermin .
mounting num .
for roadway column mounted luminaires the dimensions and form shall be suitable for mounting on the gear tray as detailed on drawing num num .
specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num ballast num .
ballasts shall be designed and constructed so as to comply with the requirements of asnzs num asnzs num and asnzs num .
all ballasts are to be twnum winding temperature rated and class h insulation and have the following minimum specification compliance num watt lamp num watt lamp num watt lamp num watt lamp supply voltage numv numhz numv numhz numv numhz numv numhz lamp voltage numv numv numv numv lamp current numa numa numa numa lamp start current numa numa numa numa circuit power factor num num num num terminals flying leads numamp nummmnum numamp nummmnum numamp nummmnum total losses hot numwatt numwatt numwatt numwatt num .
windings shall be weather proof so as to inhibit the effects of moisture and humidity .
num autotransformer num .
autotransformers are used where a two phase supply with no neutral is provided as the electrical connection to the luminaire .
design and construction shall generally comply with asnzs num as far as is applicable .
autotransformers shall have the following minimum specification minimum specification specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num watt lamp num watt lamp primary voltage numv numhz numv numhz secondary voltage numv numv rating min numva continuous numva continuous shock protection class num class num regulation max num num insulation class h h terminals numamp nummmnum numamp nummmnum total losses hot numwatt numwatt num .
windings shall be weather proof so as to inhibit the effects of moisture and humidity .
num igniter num .
igniters shall be designed and constructed so as to comply with the requirements of asnzs num .
the igniter shall be the superimposed type suitable for igniting a lamp up to num metres from the igniter and shall cease to pulse on lamp ignition .
num .
should the lamp fail to ignite the igniter shall time out after approximately num seconds and not restart until the power has been turned off and then on again .
time out num .
the igniter must supply a voltage range of num to numv numhz and be suitable for use with standard nontapped ballasts and connection via flying leads supply voltage num capacitor num .
capacitors shall be metallised polypropylene designed and constructed so as to comply with the requirements of as num .
features required a. voltage rating numv numhz b .
temperature rating to numc c. discharge resistor inbuilt d. connection via flying leads e. stud mounting num .
capacitors shall be used to correct the control gear lamp circuit power factor to a minimum of num lagging .
power factor specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
capacitors shall be used to ensure that the emission radiated and conducted of ratio frequency disturbances from the control gear lamp circuit is within the limits required by asnzs cispr num interference suppression num fuse holder and fuse num .
fuses of correct rating shall be fitted for protection and isolation purposes .
generally the fuses are complete with red spot type fuse holders fitted to the gear tray except where street light cutouts are used details for which are given in clause num .
fuses and fuse holders shall comply with the requirements of asnzs num features required a. voltage rating numv numhz b .
type nit fuse class gg c. black flame retardant thermoplastic fuse holder d. fuse holder rating numa e. insulating terminal shrouds f. terminal capacity nummmnum num street light cutout num .
where column mounted luminaires are fitted with integral control gear a street light cutout shall be mounted in the column base as detailed on drawing num .
where the luminaires is fused the cutout shall be fitted with a copper link otherwise a fuse of the correct rating shall be fitted .
fuses shall comply with the requirements of asnzs num .
features required a. voltage rating numv numhz b .
current rating numa c. type lst fuse class gg d. moulded grp body with detachable fuse holder and terminal cover e. insulating terminal shrouds f. tin plated brass tunnel with nummmnum conductor capacity .
separate loop in out terminals .
num temperature num .
the control gear shall operate satisfactorily between the ambient temperatures of numc and numc when installed in the base of the pole with relative humidity up to num .
ambient temperature num terminals num .
terminals shall be provided for the incoming conductors and the lamp socket connections .
the terminals shall be of adequate size for wire sizes up to nummm and must be of the type which does not provide connection directly between the terminal screw and the conductor .
terminal type specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name features required a. voltage rating numv numhz b .
current rating numa c. temperature rating numc d. captive chromate plated steel screws acting on shielding plate to protect conductor .
e. tinplated brass tunnel with nummmnum conductor capacity f. dead front construction with both screws and tunnel contacts recessed in the housing .
num control gear mounting num .
the ballast power factor capacitors igniter terminal strips and gec rsnum red spot fuses complete with num amp cartridge shall be fixed to the control gear mounting plate for installation in the base of the pole .
mounting details num .
all control gear shall be mounted on purpose made nummm thick mild steel plate as detailed on drawing num .
gear plate to be zinc plated chrome passivation after fabrication .
num cable clamp num .
a suitable cable clamp shall be provided as part of the control gear mounting plate to securely clamp the nummm incoming cables to ensure that terminal connection are not duly stressed .
cable clamp num circuit diagram num .
a schematic circuit diagram shall be firmly attached to each set of control gear and each item of equipment shall be clearly labelled as to its function .
circuit diagram num .
the circuit diagram and labelling shall be such that they do not deteriorate with age .
long term durability num num not used installation num poles and luminaires num pole base footing num .
the light pole footing shall be located as shown on the design drawings .
where the pole footing is to be located at embankments pole setback and location to be as per design drawings and asnzs num series and drawings num and num .
location num .
the pole footing size shall be in accordance with the dimensions shown on drawing nos .
num num and num for terrain category num and winds in region a to asnzs num .
where other conditions exist alternative designs shall be produced by the designer for the approval of the superintendent .
size specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
each pole base shall be within nummm of its location and nummm of its final level as shown on the design drawings .
the slip joint washer shall be num nummm above the finished ground level .
the ground level would depend on the pole location and pole setback as identified on the design drawings .
tolerance num .
a circular hole nummm in diameter and nummm deep for single outreach or nummm in depth for double outreach shall be excavated to accommodate the pole base footing .
depth num .
prior to the installation of the pole base footing the excavated hole shall be presented to the superintendent for approval to proceed .
hold point num .
the holding down bolt assembly shall be orientated so that when erected the outreach arm is at right angles to the kerb or edge of seal .
orientation num .
concrete shall be class nnum in accordance with specification num concrete general works .
concrete num .
footing reinforcement shall be slnum mesh in accordance with asnzs num .
reinforcement num .
should the water table be such that the concrete can not be placed in a dry hole it shall be placed by tremie .
water shall not be allowed to flow through the space in which the concrete is to be cast .
should the walls of the hole be likely to collapse before pouring the concrete a simple sheet metal spirolock or plastic sleeve shall be inserted to prevent the collapse .
the tremie shall consist of a sheet metal hopper with a metal pipe leading out of the bottom that has a simple outlet valve at its lower end .
it shall be water tight with a minimum diameter of nummm .
the tremie shall be kept filled with concrete at all times during placing .
should the concrete charge be lost the tremie shall be withdrawn and refilled .
the tremie shall be operated in such a manner as to discharge below the surface of the fresh concrete and to maintain as nearly as practicable uniform flow .
concrete shall not be dropped through water .
no agitation or vibration of the concrete shall be permitted during placing .
compaction shall take place after concrete pouring has been completed and the water displaced .
tremie num .
prior to the drilling of any bridge or other structural element the contractor shall accurately identify to the superintendent all locations sizes and depths of the penetrations and of any reinforcement likely to be affected by the drilling operations for approval by the superintendent to proceed .
hold point num pole assembly num .
the access door shall face away from the carriageway for slip base mounted poles and shall face the carriageway for bridge mounted poles .
access door specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the slip base shall be removed from the pole and firmly bolted to the footing then levelled using a spirit level with a minimum of two levels taken at right angles to each other .
all electrical connections for the cable between the cable pit and the anderson connectors shall be made prior to installing the pole on the slip base .
the placement of the slip base assembly shall be as shown on the standard drawing nos .
num and num to achieve correct orientation of the pole on the upper slip base flange .
slip base num .
after the installation of the slip base and prior to the erection of the pole the contractor shall present the slip base plate slip base washer and pole base plate to the superintendent for inspection to ensure that they are clean flat and free from deformation and for approval to proceed with the pole erection .
hold point num .
poles shall be erected in accordance with the manufacturers published procedures .
poles shall be lifted using a sling or chain formed into a noose at approximately two thirds column height from the base .
to prevent poles from falling andor the dislodgement of pole segments lift poles into position using a temporary attachment between the poles lifting lug located at the poles base and noose preventing the noose from slipping up the pole while also transferring the lifting force via the lifting lug back to the pole base .
care must be taken when handling the poles so that the galvanising is not damaged .
metal slings if used shall have adequate protection so that metal to metal contact does not occur .
pole erection procedure num .
the bolts used to attach the pole to the slip base shall be fitted with the nuts uppermost .
bolt torque num .
each slip base bolt shall initially be tensioned to num nm upon installation of the pole to remove any minor deformation in the slip joint base washer with the full sized nut .
one nut at a time shall be removed and a thin nut shall be installed and tensioned to num nm .
the full sized nut shall be installed on top of the thin nut and tensioned to num nm whilst the thin nut is held in place with an open ended spanner .
num .
bolts shall be tensioned with a calibrated torque wrench in the presence of the superintendent .
hold point num .
each slip pole shall be bolted truly vertical on its footing .
verticality num .
the luminaire lamp holders shall be adjusted to the nominated distribution .
luminaire num .
the luminaire spigot clamp shall be set to the correct angle .
spigot clamp num .
the lamp bases shall be date coded .
date coding num grouting of the slip base pole .
num .
the holding down nuts and bolts shall be covered with bituminous paint .
bituminous paint num .
a drain shall be installed at the base of the slip base as shown on drawing no .
num .
drain num .
a num mortar dry pack mix shall be forced under the slip base .
mortar pack specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
a num concrete mix shall be poured around the holding down bolt assembly as shown on drawing no .
num .
concrete mix num focusing of luminaires num .
after the poles have been plumbed each luminaire shall be focused using a digital spirit level to the correct angle in accordance with the requirements of the pole schedule .
focusing luminaire num .
the top of the luminaire shall be horizontal .
horizontality num pole numbers num .
numbers as per the design drawings shall be attached to each pole .
the numbers shall be made up of nummm black characters on a nummm x nummm background of adhesive class num yellow retroreflective material as per asnzs num part num .
pole numbers num .
the numbers shall be fixed vertically to the pole be read from top to bottom and be at a height of approximately num metres from the ground .
the numbers shall be placed in such a position that they can be readily seen from a vehicle travelling along the carriageway .
fixing num electrical installation num switchboard installation num .
the switchboard shall be installed on a concrete base as detailed on drawing no .
num such that the doors open away from the roadway and that adequate and safe access is provided for removal replacement and repair .
the switchboard base shall be located so that the photoelectric cell is on the south facing side of the switchboard .
location num .
concrete for the base shall be class nnum in accordance with specification num concrete general works .
concrete num conduits num .
all conduits shall be installed at a depth not less than numm below finished surface level at the locations shown in the drawings .
installation location num .
conduits shall be run to enable cables to be drawnin after installation with sufficient accessible cable pits to be used for this purpose .
draw in cables num .
the conduits shall be installed such that water which may enter the conduits always drains into the cable pits .
drainage num .
conduits with foreign material inside shall be deemed to be nonconforming and conduits shall be thoroughly cleaned or removed and replaced with new conduit .
non conforming num .
a numcore polyethylene or polypropylene cable haul rope with nummm nominal diameter and blueyellowblue in colour shall be installed in each conduit and suitably anchored at each end .
draw rope specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num conflict with drainage pipes and other services num .
in the areas where drainage pipes and other services are in close proximity to conduit and pole foundations manual excavation shall be undertaken .
manual excavation num existing conduits num .
care must be taken not to damage existing conduits that are to remain in service .
where necessary manual excavation shall be carried out to avoid damage .
damage num road crossings num .
road crossings shall terminate in a cable pit at each end of the conduit on either side of the roadway .
the cable pits shall be installed a minimum of numm measured from the rear face of the kerb or from the edge of the seal on unkerbed roads such that their lids are flush with the surrounding finished surface level .
road crossing details num .
where a crossing is under the road pavement the crossing shall be installed by directional drilling .
under no circumstances shall the pavement or surfacing be cut to install the crossing .
directional drilled crossings num .
the road crossing conduits shall be installed as per the design drawings .
the crossings shall comprise either a single nummm diameter pvc conduit run between respective cable pits or a single nummm diameter rcp or nummm diameter pvc pipe .
one or more nummm diameter conduits shall be installed in the nummm and nummm diameter crossings as detailed in the design drawings .
conduits for crossings by trenching num cable pits num .
each cable pit shall be located behind the light pole as shown in polecable pit orientation on standard drawing no .
num .
location num .
the cable pits shall be installed such that their lids are flush with the surrounding finished surface level .
flush installation num .
where the conduits enter the cable pits a neat hole shall be cut in the pit using a hole cutter or similar tool .
pits with holes knocked in with a hammer or similar tool will be rejected .
conduit entry num .
all cable pits shall have a preformed or drilled hole of minimum nummm diameter in the bottom to facilitate drainage .
drainage num .
the conduit shall be sealed at the point of entry through the cable pit wall with silastic .
only one hole for each conduit entering the cable pit shall be cut .
a bellmouth shall be fitted to the end of each conduit within the cable pit except the conduit to the pole .
sealing num .
a nummm wide x nummm deep concrete surround with a reinforcement bar as per standard drawing num shall be cast and trowelled to a neat finish around each cable pit .
alternatively a precast surround may be used .
concrete surround specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
all cables in the pit whether joined or not shall be taken over the conduit wedged into and across the top of the pit and securely fixed with a nylon cable tie to the conduit as detailed in drawing no .
num .
cable ties num .
all foreign material shall be removed and sand and dirt vacuumed from the pit after all electrical connections have been made .
cleaning num .
the pit gasket shall be installed directly under the lid and rest on the pit lip .
gasket num cable route markers and orange danger tape num .
the location of all underground cables shall be indicated by means of cable route markers set securely in the concrete surround to the cable pits .
the markers shall be set flush in the concrete surround of the cable pits .
cable route markers num .
the nummm diameter aluminium cable markers with the words electric cable mrwa embossed into the disk and num x nummm long hooks for casting into concrete shall be cast into the concrete surround using the embossed arrow to identify the direction of all conduit runs in accordance with standard drawing no .
num .
dimensions num .
the contractor shall install nummm wide orange danger tape in accordance with asnzs num nummm above all installed cables and conduits .
orange danger tape num pole conduits num .
one nummm heavy duty corrugated flexible pvc conduit shall be run between the pole base and the cable pit .
the conduit shall finish a minimum of nummm above final ground level .
num pole connections num .
single core nummm stranded copperpvc insulated pvc sheathed numkv cables in the appropriate colours shall be run between the control gear in the base of the pole and the cable pit .
cables num .
in the base of the pole the cables shall be cut and fitted with anderson power pole modular connectors .
the correct crimping tool as specified by the manufacturer shall be used for the anderson connectors .
connectors num .
between the main cables and the connectors the earth cable shall be at least one metre longer than the supply cables which shall be cut to equal lengths .
between the connectors and the control equipment base gear plate the earth cable shall be at least as long as the incoming supply cables .
earth cable num .
the incoming supply cables shall be securely clamped to the control equipment base gear plate and the earth firmly attached to earth studs on the plate and the support bar in the pole .
the incoming supply cables shall be securely fixed to the support bar in the slip base with nylon cable ties or similar so that in the event the pole is hit by a vehicle the anderson connectors disconnect leaving the incoming supply cables and the bottom connectors below the top of the slip base .
incoming supply cables specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the excess earth cable shall be loosely coiled up .
the anderson connectors for the supply cables shall be assembled together with a dummy connector separating the two supply connectors .
the earth connector shall be left free .
cables connectors num .
it is essential for the safe operation of the slip base in a crash that the pole connections shall be carried out strictly in accordance with drawing nos .
num and num including installing the correct length of the cables in accordance with drawing no .
num and the design drawings .
safety considerations num tee connections slip base poles num .
tee connections in the cable pits shall be made by carefully stripping sufficient insulation from the main cables to use a split bolt clamp or a rising main tee off connector .
tee connection num .
the joint shall then be completely covered with gechenley yellow or green plastic compound minimum thickness nummm .
joints num .
the covered joint shall then be wrapped with scotch num high voltage splicing tape taking care to eliminate air spaces .
the tape shall be wrapped far enough to completely enclose the ends of the cable sheath .
the outer layer of tape shall have the same colour as the cable insulation so as not to confuse with the cable sleeve colour .
splicing tape num .
finally the joint shall be wrapped with scotch num insulation tape of the same colour as the cable .
wrapping num .
the cable joint shall then be securely fixed with a nylon cable tie to a conduit wedged into the top of the pit so as to be held above the level of any water that may accumulate in the pit .
cable fixing num internal pole wiring num .
generally a three num core num mm stranded copperpvc insulated pvc sheathed num kv tps cable shall be provided from the base of the pole to the luminaire .
however cable selection shall suit the temperature rating required by the luminaire terminal temperature .
at the top of the pole a loop shall be formed in the cable using a nylon cable tie as shown on drawing no .
num .
the cable shall then be attached to the pole cap using this loop .
cable num .
the control gear plate complete with all necessary equipment shall be installed at the base of the pole .
the cables from the pole base shall be connected to the terminal strip and firmly clamped to the plate .
control gear plate num .
earth studs shall be fitted to the slip base the control gear plate and on one of the mounting straps for bonding the plate the pole and slip base support bar to earth .
the luminaire shall also have an earth stud and be earthed .
earth studs specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num cable runs num .
although it is desirable for the main cables to be continuous this is not always practical .
when joints are necessary they shall be made adjacent to a tee off joint using the appropriate crimp link .
the joint shall then be insulated and supported at the top of the cable pit .
under no circumstances shall cable joints in conduits be permitted .
joints num .
when pulling cables through the conduits extreme care must be exercised to ensure that the cable is not damaged by the bellmouth at the ends of the conduits .
where there is evidence of excessive wear on the bellmouth caused by the pulling of the cables into the conduit the cables shall be removed made available for inspection by the superintendent and replaced with new cable if the insulation is damaged or otherwise replaced .
cable damage num cable identification num .
all cables shall be clearly identified with permanent water resistant cable markers showing each outgoing cable in the switchboards in each cable pit and in the base of each pole .
the markers shall identify each circuit for example lnum lnum etc .
in the cable pits one marker for each circuit is acceptable providing the circuit cables are firmly tied together where the marker is attached .
cable markers num earthing num .
the installation shall be earthed in accordance with section num of asanz num and the requirements of the power supply authority and office of energy .
earthing num residual current devices num .
residual current devices rcds shall be installed in accordance with asnzs num .
rcds num point of attachment of supply authority mains num .
underground power is the preferred method of mains supply from the power supply authority to the switchboards .
underground power num .
where used the point of attachment pole shall be hot dip galvanised in accordance with asnzs num after all fabrication drilling and welding has been completed .
all cables shall be run inside the pole .
exterior conduits shall not be permitted .
overhead mains num testing num electrical installation num .
after cables have been installed and connected the contractor shall carry out an insulation test of all cables using a num volt insulation tester .
the test voltage shall be applied for a minimum of num seconds .
prior to carrying out the tests all fuses shall be removed circuit breakers opened and neutrals disconnected .
insulation test specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
in accordance with asnzs num section num the following tests shall be made asnzs num mandated tests a. continuity of the earthing system earth resistance b .
insulation resistance between all live conductors and earth c. polarity d. correct circuit connections e. verification of earth faultloop impedance f. correct operation of rcds num .
all control circuits and devices shall be functionally checked to verify correct operation .
function checks num .
prior to and as a prerequisite to obtaining practical completion all new or modified installations shall be inspected and tested in accordance with section num of asnzs num and a copy of the test results shall be submitted to the superintendent .
hold point num .
any part of the installation found to be nonconforming shall be replaced with new materials andor components or corrected to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
street lighting circuits with an insulation resistance lower than num m shall have the faulty cable sections replaced and retested to confirm that acceptable insulation resistance values have been attained .
faulty sections num .
prior to the power supply authoritys approval of the installation and connection to the supply mains the contractor shall have completed all tests to the superintendents satisfaction .
hold point num impact absorbent light pole num impact absorbant light pole num .
impact absorbent light pole shall be designed and manufactured as per clauses num and num and typical standard drawing num .
drawing num num tee connections num .
the tee connections for impact absorbing light poles shall be as per clause num items num to num .
num internal frangible pole wiring num .
generally a three core nummm stranded copperpvc insulated pvc sheathed numkv tps cable shall be provided from the base of the pole to the luminaire .
however cable selection shall suit the temperature rating required by the luminaire terminal temperature .
at the top of the pole a loop shall be formed in the cable using a nylon cable tie as shown on drawing no .
num .
the cable shall then be attached to the pole cap using this loop .
specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the control gear plate with drip shield and complete with all necessary equipment shall be installed at the base of the pole .
the cables from the tee connection shall be connected to the terminal strip and firmly clamped to the plate .
num .
brass or stainless steel mnum earth studs shall be fitted to the control gear plate and on the support strap for bonding the plate and the pole to earth .
num switchboard documentation and switching num .
upon commissioning the installation the contractor shall place in each switchboard document pocket a copy of the relevant as constructed drawings and a copy of all tests required under this specification in a durable sealable plastic document holder .
documentation num .
when work under this specification involves modification work to an existing installation the contractor shall at the conclusion of each day leave in the switchboard a log of the pertinent activities undertaken for the day and the details of any circuits isolated and the reasons for this to prevent electrocution .
log sheet num .
when work under this specification involves modification work to an existing installation the contractor shall keep to a necessary minimum the time that it requires to switch the installation or any part of it off .
switching off num .
when work under this specification involves modification work to an existing installation the contractor shall contact the maintenance contractor prior to switching the installation or any part of it on or off for a significant period .
significant periods include all overnight periods .
details of the maintenance contract can be provided by the superintendent .
maintenance contractor num .
for the purposes of this clause existing installations includes new ones after the date of commissioning .
definition of existing installations num removal of pole mounted lighting num .
poles shall be removed from the site and disposed off site by the contractor unless otherwise directed by the superintendent .
num .
poles that are to be reused shall be properly handled and stored during transit and upon delivery .
luminaires shall be removed from the pole and disposed off site by the contractor unless otherwise directed by the superintendent .
num .
light pole bases and foundations shall be removed and disposed off site by the contractor unless otherwise directed by the superintendent .
light pole base removal num .
if light pole bases foundations andor luminaires are to be reused the contractor shall ensure that all luminaires poles control gear switchboards and any other material is properly packaged stored and handled during dismantling transit storage and upon delivery .
specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num pedestrian shared path lighting num pole installation num .
the design drawings details specific location of all pedestrian shared path lighting poles .
num .
where hinged lighting poles are required by the design care shall be taken to ensure that the alignment of the pole is such that it can be hinged down to a suitable position for maintenance purposes .
each pole base shall be within nummm of its location and nummm nummm of its final level .
pole installation num .
the pole shall be orientated so that when erected the pole is true and vertical and the outreach arm is at right angles to the path carriageway or edge of seal .
num .
the pole access door shall face towards the path .
num .
the luminaire lamp holders shall be adjusted to the nominated distribution and the luminaire spigot clamp shall be set to the correct angle .
num pole assembly num .
poles shall be erected according to the manufacturers published procedures and drawing no .
num .
care shall be taken when handling the poles so that the galvanising is not damaged .
metal slings if used shall have adequate protection so that metal to metal contact is not possible .
num .
a circular hole nummm minimum diameter shall be augured to accommodate the pole base .
poles shall be lowered into position using a crane or other lifting device poles shall not be slid into their foundation excavation .
num pole numbers num .
numbers as detailed in the design drawings shall be affixed to each pole .
the numbers shall be made up of nummm black characters on a nummm x nummm background of adhesive class num yellow retroreflective material as per asnzs num .
num .
the numbers shall be fixed vertically to the pole be read from top to bottom at a height of approximately num metres from the ground and face towards the path .
num pole conduit num .
one incoming and one outgoing nummm heavy duty corrugated flexible pvc conduit shall be installed to a height of nummm above ground level inside the lighting pole .
couplings shall be used to attach the corrugated conduits to the in ground nummm heavy duty rigid conduits .
num focusing of luminaires num .
each luminaire shall be focused with a digital spirit level to the correct angle in accordance with the requirements of the pole schedule .
specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num bird guard num .
a bird guard shall be provided with each luminaire to prevent birds entering the housing when the luminaire is installed on the outreach arm .
num installation of underpass lighting num .
prior to any modification or attachment to any bridge andor other structure the contractor shall notify and receive approval for the proposal from the superintendent before commencing any such work .
hold point num .
luminaires shall be thorn panther fvc numdnumb or similar approved by the superintendent and shall be installed in accordance with the psp underpass lighting drawing no .
num .
num .
luminaires shall be fixed to the concrete structure using four size num x nummm stainless steel mushroom headed screws into plastic masonry plugs .
luminaire fixing num .
each luminaire shall be protected against vandalism by a nummm thick sheet of general electric lexan mrac sheet or similar approved by the superintendent drilled with nummm diameter holes as indicated on drawing no .
num .
vandal resistant cover num .
a moisture and insect resistant gasket shall be fabricated from nummm x nummm cross section selfadhesive dense grade neoprene foam rubber strip and affixed to the rear side of the lexan mrac sheet .
num .
the lexan mrac sheet shall be fixed in place by eight num gauge nummm long pan head hex socket selftapping stainless steel screws complete with stainless steel washers to suit .
num .
the concrete rebate shall be accurately drilled to a diameter of nummm and a depth of nummm to align with the lexan mrac sheet fixing screws and to suit the nummm plastic masonry plugs that shall be installed to accept the lexan mrac fixing screws .
num .
circuit wiring shall be single core stranded copperpvc insulated pvc sheathed numkv sdi cables that shall not be looped into the luminaires .
wiring num .
conduit cabling shall be teed off at the junction box behind the luminaire to flexible three core copper double insulated cable using blue point connectors of suitable size taped with pvc insulating tape of a similar colour .
num .
the flexible cable shall be brought into the luminaire through the base of the luminaire and sealed with rtvnum silicone sealant so as to maintain ipnum rating .
num retrofitting of underpass lighting num .
prior to any modification or attachment to any bridge andor other structure the contractor shall notify and receive approval for the proposal from the superintendent before commencing any such work .
hold point specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
where underpass lighting is to be installed in a structure where no previous allowance for such lighting has been allowed for then installation shall generally be in accordance with this specification .
num .
thorn db bulkhead luminaires or similar approved by the superintendent complete with proprietary wire guards shall be installed at the locations shown on the design drawings .
num .
luminaires shall be fixed to the concrete structure using four size num x nummm stainless steel mushroom headed screws into plastic masonry plugs .
the four screws shall be accessed from within the luminaire .
luminaire fixing num .
cabling shall be completely contained within a conduit system complying with this specification .
num .
circuit wiring shall be single core stranded copperpvc insulated pvc sheathed numkv sdi cables .
wiring num .
cabling may be looped through the luminaire where cabling size and temperature rating is compatible with the luminaire terminals .
where this is not possible junction boxes shall be installed adjacent to the luminaires and these shall be used to tee off flexible three core copper double insulated cable and this shall be taken to the luminaire inside conduit .
num .
tee terminations shall be made using blue point connectors of suitable size .
num bridge mounted installation num .
prior to any modification or attachment to any bridge andor other structure the contractor shall notify and receive approval for the proposal from the superintendent before commencing any such work .
hold point num .
bridge mounted poles and underbridge lighting shall be in accordance with drawing nos .
num num num num num and num and shall generally be installed according to the requirements of this specification .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num as built drawings num .
the contractor shall make an accurate record of all changes where the actual installation differs from that shown in the design drawings and specification .
record changes num .
the contractor shall record the results of all testing and include the test results on the design drawings .
num .
as built drawings shall comply with main roads as constructed drawing presentation requirements .
amendments num .
the contractor will sign the as built drawings certifying that the drawings accurately depict the installation as constructed .
certify asbuilt specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall submit as built drawings to the superintendent within two weeks from completion of all construction works on site .
submission to superintendent num maintenance during defects liability period num .
during the defects liability period the contractor shall inspect the installation fortnightly at night and record all defects .
night inspections num .
the contractor shall provide the superintendent with a report detailing such defects together with actions taken to remedy the defect at regular intervals not exceeding one fortnight .
all defects shall be repaired in accordance with main roads repair time .
defect repair num .
the superintendent shall provide the contractor a copy of main roads repair time .
main roads repair time num .
incidence of graffiti attack shall be dealt with in accordance with specification num antigraffiti .
graffiti num maintenance and handover num .
the contractor shall liaise as required with the maintenance contractor to ensure a smooth handover at the conclusion of the defects liability period with no outstanding defects left unresolved .
num .
all records logs and other documents relative to the operation of the installation shall be provided to the maintenance contractor through the superintendent or direct to the maintenance contractor if agreed with the superintendent prior to the issue of a certificate of practical completion .
num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa supply of electrical materials the following is a summary of electrical materials required for the works .
the list shall be completed and amended in accordance with the design drawings .
component descriptiontypemodel etc .
cable pits conduits wiring switchboards lighting poles luminaires control gear ballast control gear capacitors control gear igniter note completeexpand the above table as necessary and delete this note specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the electrical engineer .
contract specific requirements to add or delete the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
num .
scope num this specification primarily covers the requirements for new street lighting installations on controlled access highways cahs using slipbased lighting poles .
num where modifications to existing cah lighting is proposed then the scope clause num will need careful editing to clearly outline the extent of the works .
num this specification is not suitable for street lighting installations undertaken by western power corporation .
in such cases the project manager should define the contractors obligations under the terms of the contract .
a common arrangement is that such lighting installations can be organised by the contractor in liaison with western power using sub contractors accredited by western power .
payment is then made from a provisional sum provided in the contract for the purpose .
num .
supply of electrical materials annexure numa num annexure numa represents a summary of electrical materials required to be supplied by the contractor .
complete as necessary .
num .
roadway lighting contracts num where this specification is used in a contract that is solely or predominantly for the installation of roadway lighting inclusion of and crossreferencing to other relevant specifications is likely to be required such as specification num general requirements specification num earthworks specification num concrete general works specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num roadway lighting num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title roadway lighting revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num roadside help phones copyright main roads western australia main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num roadside help phones revision register date clause number description of revision authorised by num oct num whole document document review ee num nov num whole document document review ee num jul num guidance note change of specification custodian tesm num oct num num num num delete reference to drawing num tesm num aug num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format .
stork electrical updated to downer edi engineering .
mcp main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contents clause page no .
general num num scope num num references num num definitions and mode of operation num num num not used num products and materials num num pillar design and manufacture num num pillar dimensions and weight num num frangibility num num pillar materials and colour num num ip rating num num vibration and shock num num wind num num temperature num num humidity num num lightning protection for pstn help phones num num vermin ingress num num vandalism num num pillar identification num num concrete num num steelwork num num num not used num help phone compatibility num num compatibility of roadside help phones num num radio frequency interference num num antenna num num programming num num call initiation num num call establishment num num call duration num num diagnostics num num performance num num num not used num power supply num num power supply num num battery num num battery charging num num solar panel num num num not used num installation num num foundation num num concrete pad num num anchor bolt assembly num num pillar mounted phone num num grouting of pillar base num num commissioning of phones num num as constructed drawings num main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num fees and charges num num sign and lables num num procedures for commissioning removal andrelocation of a help phone num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num roadside help phone network num annexure numb num roadside help phone commissioning notice num annexure c num c.num commissioning of phones num c.num commissioning stages num cnum relocation procedure .
num num relocation of existing roadside help phones num num removal of existing roadside help phones num main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num roadside help phones general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of a the supply and installation of roadside help phones including the anchor bolt assembly the reinforced concrete pad and final grouting of the phone pillar base .
b the testing of roadside help phones in the field .
c the configuration of roadside help phones to main roads existing mrwa help phone tester at main roads maintenance contractors workshop as per annexure a. d the commissioning of the installation .
e the forwarding of the phone configuration schedule and a copy of the design location drawings to the main roads western australia f the forwarding of the phone commissioning and post commissioning notices to the main roads western australia contract num downer edi engineering and a copy to main roads customer contact centre .
g all other works required to commission help phones as per projects specifics and design requirements .
num references this specification references the following australiannew zealand standards main roads specifications for convenience the full titles are given below main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num australian standards as num design for access and mobility enhanced and additional requirements .
as numset manual of traffic control devices as num lighting poles and brackets and preferred dimensions .
as num guide to the installation maintenance testing and replacement of secondary batteries in buildings vented cells as nums bnum colours standards for general purposesrich blue .
as num environmental testing tests test eh hammer tests as num environmental testing tests test cab damp heat steady state as num hearing aids magnetic field strength in audio frequency induction loops for hearing aid purposes as num degrees of protection provided by enclosures ip code asacif snum analogue inter working and noninterference requirements for customer equipment for connection to the public switched telephone network asacif snum voice frequency performance requirements for customer equipment australiannew zealand standards asnzs num wiring rules including amendments asnzs num electrical installations extralow voltage d.c. power supplies and service earthing within public telecommunications networks asnzs num stationary batterieslead acidvalve regulated type asnzs num zinczincaluminium alloy coatings on steel wire including amendment number num num asnzs num structural design requirements for utility services poles asnzs num hotdip galvanised zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles .
asnzs num structural design requirements for utility services poles main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num asnzs num hotdip galvanised zinc coatings on ferrous hollow sections applied by a continuous or specialized process .
asnzs num information technology equipment safety general requirements asnzs num electromagnetic compatibility emc generic standards immunity for residential commercial and lightindustrial environments other standards international electrotechnical commission iec iecnum environmental testing main roads specifications specification num concrete general works num definitions and mode of operation num glossary of terms num .
refer to main roads glossary of terms for its for full list of terms and definitions .
glossary of terms its num description of helphelp phone operation num .
the principle of this operation is that when a call is initiated in the field the help roadside phone automatically calls the phone number unique to that particular phone .
this unique called number is known as the voice call number .
principle of operation num .
the voice call number is connected to main roads customer information centre cic at the don aitken centre .
num .
the mrwa cic is programmed to display on a screen the pillar id number of the calling roadside help phone the pillar location and any other information as required .
num .
from the pillar number and other information programmed into the pabx the cic operator answering the call is able to identify the location of the phone being used including which side of the carriageway without the caller giving any details .
num .
the cic operators and the caller are able to communicate clearly in a two way duplex manner .
num .
in the event of a failure the roadside help phone can detect the listed defects and will automatically initiate a call to the help programmed phone manager number and log the details of the defect .
automated fault detection and reporting main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the roadside help phone must have facilities for it to be called remotely to perform the listed selfdiagnostics and report the results accordingly .
num liaison with others num .
the contractor must liaise with all parties involved in the operation of the help phone system .
liaison a mrwa maintenance contractor b main roads maintenance contract manager c customer information centre clause num d mrwa asset manager e network provider .
num supply of network facilities and equipment num network supplier num .
selection of a provider for telecommunications services is governed by whole of government common use agreements cuas .
num .
at the time of initial publishing of this specification these cuas are known as basic telecommunications carriage services for voice and data .
mobile telecommunications services and equipment for mobile services .
under these cua arrangements gsm optusmobile network operation pstn services are provided by telstrafixed line operation .
it is mandatory that these providers be used for the services .
num phone configuration schedule num .
each help roadside phone is to have a unique series of numbers unique numbers a pillar id number .
b the voice call number programmed to call main roads customer contact centre phone number c wayphone manager phone number main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num d phone service number sim card e serial number .
f a fourdigit pin number as the identification number id .
num .
the pillar number shall be allocated based on main roads guidelines for design of help phones which is available on main roads website .
in accordance with instructions contained in annexure numa the contractor shall complete part num of the configuration schedule listing pillar numbers .
the schedule together with copies of relevant design location drawings shall be forwarded to main roads maintenance electrical contractor and main roads electrical maintenance contract manager .
pillar number num .
the phone supplier will forward the individual phone id number serial number and pin number with the completed schedule to the main roads electrical maintenance contractor .
id serial and pin numbers num maintenance of roadside help phones num .
subject to the defect liability provisions of this contract and suitable equipment handover arrangements the roadside help phones will be maintained by main roads electrical maintenance contractor .
phone maintenance num .
main roads project manager should provide the latest contact details to the contractor .
contact details num monitoring of roadside help phones num .
calls from the roadside help phones are handled and monitored by main roads cic call monitoring main roads customer information centre cic contact details main roads western australia don aitken centre waterloo crescent east perth num phone num num facsimile num num num tty num num num num emails enquiriesmainroads.wa.gov.au num num not used main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num products and materials num pillar design and manufacture num .
the roadside help phone shall be handsfree vandal resistant and weather resistant .
handsfree num .
the roadside help phone shall be housed in a pillar with only the solar cell being pole mounted .
num .
the roadside help phone shall be housed in a plinth mounted pillar of dimensions described in clause num .
num .
the roadside help phone shall have as a minimum the following features a button to initiate a call to main roads customer contact centre .
button initiated b button to annunciate recorded information .
c a speaker to clearly broadcast the ring tone and voice communications .
speaker d one or preferably two microphones to clearly record and monitor voice communication respectively .
two micro phones e irda interface with infrared port for programming the phone features in the vicinity of the unit optional requirements .
irda interface f two num locks to secure the help roadside phone module to the enclosure pillar .
keying must be keyed alike across the manufacturers phones .
lockskeye d alike num pillar dimensions and weight num .
the pillar dimensions shall be maximum size a height nummm nummm b width nummm nummm c depth nummm nummm num .
the pillar weight including the phone equipment shall be less than num kg .
main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num frangibility num .
the pillar and solar cell support combination shall be so designed as to be frangible in the event that it is hit by an errant vehicle .
the frangibility requirements must comply with the requirements of design documents .
frangibility num pillar materials and colour num .
the pillar shall be constructed from marine grade aluminium with a minimum thickness num mm or extruded aluminium with a minimum thickness nummm .
materials num .
the pillar shall be polyester powder coated to as nums num rich blue bnum excluding the area containing the phone buttons and speakers .
colour num ip rating num .
the pillar shall be designed to ipnum asnum .
as num num .
the electronics enclosure shall be designed to ipnum as num .
electronics to ipnum num vibration and shock num .
the help phone must remain operable under the following conditions of vibration three axes to nummm numhz andnumg num numhz tested to asnum num vibration asnum num wind num .
the help phone must remain operable after withstanding wind speeds of up to numkmh .
wind num temperature num .
the help phone shall comply with the following temperature requirements a storage temperatures range numc to numc .
as num b a minimum start up temperature of numc .
as num c an operating temperature range numc to numc continuous .
asnum tests ab bb nb operating temperature d storage temperature shock changes up to numc numc per minute .
asnum main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num e the internal temperature of the housing could reach num degrees of celsius hence the all internal parts shall be capable of operating within this temperature .
num humidity num .
the help phone shall operate in relative humidity in the range num to num noncondensing asnum test ca .
humidity asnum num lightning protection for pstn help phones num .
primary protection shall be provided using fitted gas arrestors .
pstn lightning num .
secondary protection shall be provided using fitted metal oxide varistors .
acif snum num .
earth stake shall be fitted with a conductor no less than num mmnum bonding the earth stake to the base of the phone pole and to an earth point within the electronics enclosure asnzs num and asnzs num .
earth stake num vermin ingress num .
the pillar shall be pest insects and vermin proof including termites ants bees rats and mice .
vermin num vandalism num .
the pillar shall be vandal and impact resistant to prevent unauthorised access to the internal equipment .
vandal and impact resistant can be defined as being able to remain functional while withstanding moderate to severe blows by hand held objects in most circumstances without suffering more than cosmetic damage .
vandalism num .
the pillar shall be fitted with an automatic tiltvandalism alert feature with configurable sensitivity settings with provision for the roadside help phone to make maintenance call and log its location and condition .
vandalism alert num .
access to the fixing bolts attaching the phone to the concrete pad shall only be obtained from inside the help phone pillar .
access num pillar identification num. international phone symbols and pillar numbers shall be installed on each side of the pillar as per drawing num num .
pillar identification main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the international phone symbols and help phone pillar number shall be manufactured using australian standard class num reflective white adhesive vinyl sheeting .
material num .
the phone symbol shall be nummm in height with a spacing of nummm from the top of the pillar to the top of the phone symbol .
spacing num .
the pillar number shall consist of num d n numerals installed vertically down the pillar with a spacing of nummm from the bottom of the phone symbol to the top of the first pillar numeral .
the legend shall be class num numm and the background shall be class num num numm sheet .
dimensions num concrete num .
all concrete and reinforcement for the bases and anchor bolt assemblies shall be class nnum concrete supplied and placed in accordance with specification num concrete general works .
concrete class num steelwork num .
all steelwork for the anchor bolt assemblies shall be hot dipped galvanised in accordance with asnzs num asnzs num and asnzs num .
galvanising num num not used help phone compatibility num compatibility of roadside help phones num .
help phones shall be fully compatible with gsm numg pstn and pabx .
gsm pstn and pabx num .
help phones shall be compatible with all networks providers phone manager and main roads existing wayphone manager .
telstra wayphone manager num .
diagnostic tests as described in clause num shall be compatible as per annexure a. diagnostics num .
help phones shall be compatible with asnum for inductive loop device for hearing aid requirements .
inductive loops asnum num radio frequency interference num .
the effects of radio frequency interference rfi shall be reduced to a minimum and shall comply with acma atick rfi atick main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num antenna num .
an antenna suitable for operating the cellular phone shall be firmly attached to the top of the solar cell mounting .
antenna num .
the antenna shall be attached to the mounting such that it can not be removed without special tools supplied by the manufacturer .
num .
the cable from the antenna to the help phone shall be installed within the support and only be exposed near the base of the antenna and is not accessible by the public .
cable connection num programming num .
the help phone shall be capable of being programmed in all of the following methods programming a in the field using an infraredbased handheld programming device via an irda interface .
optional b from any dtmf capable phone using a four digit pin number .
c from the phone manager .
d in the factory or workshop using a laptop with suitable connection cable and software .
num call initiation num .
the help phone must have two num buttons with one num being for call initiation and the second for instructions on how to use the help phone .
call initiation num .
each button shall be clearly marked as to its function .
num .
the buttons shall have the following properties button details a minimum diameter nummm .
b minimum travel nummm .
c minimum ipnum protection .
d minimum operating force of numkgf .
e withstand a maximum operating force of numkgf without damage .
num .
the maximum height of the operating buttons shall be num mm as per asnum .
the minimum height of the operating buttons shall be num mm .
button height asnum num the help phone shall automatically test for the occurrence of stuck buttons .
stuck buttons main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num call establishment num .
during the period of call establishment the user must be provided with all the standard call progress tones i.e .
dial tone ring tone dialling tones and busy tone call progress tone num .
a green indicator light emitting diode led shall be illuminated upon initialisation remain illuminated for the duration of the call and extinguish at the end of the call .
num a recorded message shall be played to the user on pressing the second button or information button and shall be the standard main roads western australia message as provided by the principal .
recorded message num call duration num .
provision shall be provided to vary the maximum duration of any one call from num minute to num minutes .
num .
the default call duration shall be set to num minutes .
call duration num diagnostics num .
the help phone shall be capable of maintaining and providing diagnostics including the following diagnostics a battery status b voltage rails c memory validity d indicator status e tilt status of pillar f speakermicrophone status g electronics enclosure temperature h stuck in buttons i operational status j pin status k answer status l call number status m identification status main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
roadside help phones shall be able to be remotely tested by an automatic tester using standard voice communication .
num .
the tester shall be compatible with a standard pclaptop running the windows operating system .
num .
the first batch of any phone shall be supplied with the tester free of charge when further phones are delivered and the existing tester can not be configured for these phones another tester shall be supplied if this tester can not coexist with the original tester a suitable pclaptop will also have to be provided .
num .
the tester shall log the results of each test and display a summary so a faulty phone can be easily identified .
num performance num .
the help phone shall be provided with adaptive fullduplex speech operation .
the help phone shall be able to clearly discriminate the callers speech from background noise roadside of up to num db .
full duplex operation num .
a maximum voice output of at least numdb spl peak as measured at the ear reference point erp with the erp located hard against the help phone speaker grille is required .
output num num not used power supply num power supply num .
the help phone shall operate from either of the following a powered by a num vac mains available from the nearest light pole where possible .
mains b a fitted solar panel and battery combination .
solar panel and battery to be supplied by the contractor .
solar panel num .
over current protection shall be provided .
num battery num .
the battery shall have the following characteristics a operating temperature range num c num c battery operating temperature b sealed lead acid rechargeable main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num c sealed and operational in any orientation d maintenance free e minimum num years float service life .
service life f recyclable g no memory effect no memory h to provide a minimum of num days normal operation under a primary source failure condition .
normal operation is based on numcall per day at num minutes per call for num days the remaining time being idle time .
num battery charging num .
the battery shall be charged with a solar cell or from a numvac mains supply .
solar cell charging num .
thermal management of the battery charging to prevent thermal runaway of the battery shall be incorporated .
thermal management num .
the power supply and charging system shall incorporate battery management to monitor the status of the battery charge and maintain it at its rated float voltage .
monitor charging num .
should the battery voltage fall below num of its nominal float voltage an alarm shall be raised .
num solar panel num .
the solar panel shall be of sufficient size and wattage to ensure the battery receives sufficient charge under all weather conditions and is fully charged within num days in winter .
wattage num .
a bird guard shall be fitted to the solar cell to discourage birds from sitting on the cell .
bird guard num .
the solar cell support shall provide a minimum of num meters clearance between the ground and the solar cell such that the solar cell is not accessible without a ladder .
not accessible num .
the solar cell shall be vandal resistant and attached to the mounting such that it can not be removed without special tools as specified by the supplier .
vandal resistant num .
the solar panel shall be installed facing north and be angled towards the sun with the angle being dependant on the latitude of the location and optimised the angle for winter months .
num num not used main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num installation num foundation num .
drawings num and num all incorporating latest amendments applicable at the time of installation shall be used or referenced to as part of this specification .
drawings num .
the standard drawings provide general help phone arrangements .
the help phone footing shall comply with the manufacturers recommendation and standards .
footing num .
the new footing shall be such that the new help phones and existing ones are interchangeable without the need for new footing to be replaced .
num concrete pad num .
a concrete pad complete with anchor bolt assembly and steel mesh shall be installed as detailed in drawing num at each help phone location .
concrete pad num anchor bolt assembly num .
the anchor bolt assembly shall include four num nuts and four num washers per assembly nuts washers num .
sufficient thread shall be provided on each bolt to allow for the levelling of the pillar when installed .
this shall be not less than twice the sum of the nut washer and pillar base plate thickness .
bolt thread num .
all bolts shall be the same length with respect to the vertical axis of the assembly .
the anchor bolt assembly shall be such that the pillar may be mounted parallel to the road centre line .
bolt length alignment num pillar mounted phone num .
a help phone shall be installed on each concrete pad at the locations indicated on the drawings .
installation num .
each pillar shall be installed on the anchor bolt assembly and adjusted so as to be vertical .
the pillar shall comply with the requirements of asnzs num for stability .
adjustment num .
the help phone shall be installed such that the buttons speaker and microphones are facing away from the direction of traffic flow such that a person using the help phone is facing the phone and oncoming traffic in the closest lanes .
phone orientation num .
the pole for the solar cell shall be installed on the side of the pillar further away from the kerb such that it does not obstruct the view of the pillar number when viewed by drivers approaching the pillar .
num grouting of pillar base num .
after the installation of the help phones the contractor shall impact mortar grout under the pillar base as shown on drawing num .
grouting main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num commissioning of phones num .
the contractor shall arrange for the main roads cic pabx to be programmed to accept calls from the roadside help phones .
pabx num .
the contractor must follow stages of commissioning of roadside help phones as per annexure c. annexure c num .
the contractor shall arrange the testing and commissioning of the help roadside phones by liaising direct with main roads cic network provider and downer edi engineering .
commissio ning num .
test calls are not to be made during main roads cic peak times to be established prior to testing .
a complete list of tests scheduled for commissioning of each help phone to be submitted to the superintendent .
test calls num .
the contractor shall within num hours of commissioning each help phone forward a copy of the commissioning notice contained in annexure numb to the main roads electrical maintenance contractor downer edi engineering and main roads cic .
commissio ning notice num as constructed drawings num .
the contractor shall provide asconstructed drawings showing the location of the roadside help phones in the latest autocad format .
as constructed drawings num .
the drawings shall be in the format in accordance with main roads drawing num help phone locations for the mitchell and kwinana freeways .
format num fees and charges num .
the contractor shall pay all charges and fees for equipment installation and commissioning including any network provider charges excluding call charges .
fees num .
the ongoing access and call charges will be debited by the network provider to the main roads account ongoing charges num .
any network provider fees excluding any monthly network access fees shall be paid by the contractor .
network provider costs num .
the cost of test calls during defects liability period one call per phone per week and commissioning all test calls required to ensure each phone is fully operational as agreed under the contract carried out by the contractor will be paid by the principal .
test calls num .
the contractor shall pay all costs involved in the programming of main roads cic .. payment of programming costs num sign and lables num .
signs and labels shall be installed as per design drawing and in accordance with mrwa standard drawing num .
signs and labels main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num procedures for commissioning removal andrelocation of a help phone num .
the contractor shall follow the steps and procedures specified in annexure c when commissioning removing or relocating each help phone .
annexure c num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numa roadside help phone network providing programmable information to phone supplier num .
background main roads in the perth metropolitan area operates a roadside help phone network that includes both cable connected pstn and cellular gsm phones maintained by an electronic management system .
the specification for additions to the network requires management compatibility with the existing installed system .
the electronic maintenance and management system involves programming sets of key data into each phone facia by the supplier .
as data custodianship exists at separate locations it needs to be picked up and eventually dropped off with the supplier to use .
an electronic shuttle system shuttlesked has been developed to pick up data at various stops and convey it ahead to various necessary destinations .
the shuttle itself essentially is an excel spreadsheet titled configuration schedule .
note under the contract downer edi engineering and ghd pty ltd are service providers to main roads for electrical design and asset inventory custodianship and electrical infrastructure maintenance respectively including metropolitan roadside help phones .
num .
shuttle route num contractor collects a blank configuration schedule shuttle from its depot and completes the shuttle identification information of informs mrwa maintenance contractor of the following information for each help phone a contract no .
b site location drawing no this can be shown as the first drawing then add on c name of licensed firm installing phones this licence will be checked by main roads at shuttlestop num before authorisation to continue is given separate shuttles are made up for separate phone suppliers if more than one is involved .
from information provided in contract documents the columns of location details are to be completed .
note a if some pillar nos are to be provided with cableconnected pstn phones rather than cellular phones in the optustelstra details area the sim pin column in line with those pillars should show pstn to prevent inadvertent sim card issue note b if gsm phones are involved then sim cards issued by optus will be sent by courier service to the phone supplier num .
hence the contractors electronic note accompanying the configuration schedule shuttle must provide a delivery address .
note c it is assumed that at this point the contractor has already sourced a phone supplier and placed a formal order .
the suppliers name and email address must also be conveyed in the contractors transmittal note .
main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num when this data has boarded upon the configuration schedule it must be shuttled forward to the next stop along with a copy of relevant design location drawings .
this is the main roads electrical inventory custodian ghd pty ltd at the following address mailtoaclunesghd.com.au num downer edi engineeringghd pty ltd forward the service details to the configuration schedule then transmit it to main roads representative for authorising optustelstra to allocate phone service numbers loc.map to main roads customer contact centre as well as sim cards for any cellular phones involved .
mrwa the principals representative to be contacted .
ghd pty ltd to provide main roads with a copy of the updated locality drawings showing location and pillar numbers of proposed new phones .
confirmation to contractor num main roads transmits the configuration schedule forwards the roadside help phone details to optustelstra authorising it to provide gsmpstn services as listed and to issue sim cards as necessary .
the transmittal note should additionally highlight the delivery address for sim cards highlight email address of phone supplier provide relevant main roadsoptus or main roadstelstra account no .
on which charges for allocated pstngsm phone services are to be invoiced .
the optus address is wa.governmentoptus.com.au the telstra address is bosich rochelle a rochelle.bosichteam.telstra.com confirmation to contractor num optustelstra allocates phone service numbers as requested and arranges for requested sim cards to be delivered .
the allocated phone service numbers and relevant sim pin numbers are listed on the configuration schedule and shuttled to the phone supplier .
optustelstras transmittal note also confirms sim card courier details to the phone supplier .
confirmation to contractor and main roads the supplier name and address are obtained via the main roads transmittal note highlights .
main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num the supplier uses data from the configuration schedule for programming phones to be supplied to the contractor .
the suppliers equipment details are also programmed into the phones and this data also is added by the supplier to the configuration schedule .
note any unused sim cards received must be returned to the superintendent .
the completed configuration schedule is then shuttled forwarded to downer edi engineering .
if any unused sim cards are also being returned to the principals representative then mailcourier details should be included in the suppliers transmittal note .
copies of the completed configuration schedule must not be given to anybody else including the contractor .
confirmation of delivery of programmed phones to the contractor or contractors representative should be by separate notification .
num contractor receives completed configuration schedule and provides the following notifications to downer edi engineering ghd pty ltd abbreviated configuration schedule i.e .
excluding phone equipment details to main roads answering service provider abbreviated configuration schedule i.e .
excluding phone equipment details to main roads abbreviated configuration schedule i.e .
excluding phone equipment details note it is the responsibility of the contractor or phone installing agent to contact main roads customer contact centre and downer edi engineering when planning to test the operation of installed phones .
main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numb roadside help phone commissioning notice a copy to be sent to each of the following within num hours of commissioning num downer edi engineering .
num main roads customer contact centre contract no contractor nominated officer name signature title date phone location as per drawing attached showing location number .
route section drawing phone make type location pillar no commissioning date location pillar no commissioning date location pillar no commissioni ng date project manager copies shall be sent to the superintendent of the main roads western australia electrical term maintenance contract for updating the mrwa electrical asset inventory and to the regional office to arrange updating of billing records .
main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure c c.num commissioning of phones the commissioning of the phones has to be done in stages .
it is important that each stage is completed prior to the next stage is commenced .
if certain stages are missed or completed in the wrong order it could result in phone being installed that do not work or have no location assigned so it is not known where the help call is coming from .
in the past a paper based shuttlesked system was used but this became unworkable due to the changing roles of the parties involved in the installation process .
this process was abandoned and replaced with a process of stages that have to be completed in the correct order to ensure the phone becomes correctly operational .
c.num commissioning stages to ensure the phones are commissioned and become operational in a proper way the following stages have to be strictly adhered to num .
obtain sim card and pillar number from mrwa .
num .
inform mrwa cic of details of each phone to be commissioned .
num .
prior to the phones being installed check with the mrwa cic that mrwa cic phone system is programmed .
num .
install help phone in its intended location and make a test call to mrwa cic .
num .
inform mrwa tcic maintenance contractor that a phone has been installed .
num .
provide as built and handover documentation .
the mrwa help phones are normally installed by one party but up to num parties work together to keep the system operational .
therefore information has to be shared by all the parties in a controlled environment to ensure that the correct information is available at the right time to each party .
c.num obtain sim card and pillar number from mrwa num .
five num weeks before a contractor is planning to commission a roadside help phone mrwa is to be contacted and a request is to be made for the supply of an phone id and sim card for each phone to be commissioned .
num .
mrwa should issue the sim card and phone id within num to num weeks .
main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num c.num inform mrwa cic of details of each phone to be commissioned .
num .
three num weeks before the phone is to be commissioned the contractor informs the mrwa cic of the following phone id sim card number site location consisting of name of road the phone is installed on nearest other road and direction of carriageway .
anticipated installation and commissioning date is required to program the mrwa cic phone system and mrwa is aware of its urgency .
num .
check to be carried out prior to the phone being installed and commissioned .
about num week before the phone is to be installed and commissioned the mrwa cic will have to be contacted to confirm the mrwa cic phone system is programmed with each phones particulars .
num .
install and commissioning procedure .
on the installation day when each help phone is installed the contractor shall immediately apply the pillar id .
a test call to the mrwa cic shall also be made to confirm the mrwa cic phone system is programmed correctly .
test calls shall not be made during cic peak times of num to num am num to num pm and num to num pm .
if the mrwa cic phone system is not programmed correctly or the pillar id can not be installed the phone shall be temporarily removed or marked with an out of service tag until the programming is rectified .
the out of service tag shall as a minimum cover the speaker and microphone as well as the button area of the fascia .
due to the often unexpected nature it is acceptable to make the tag out of printed white photocopy paper installed with cling wrap to the fascia .
the tag shall therefore be white in colour with large black lettering .
num .
post installation and commissioning procedure .
the contractor shall within num days of commissioning a roadside help phone forward a copy of the commissioning notice contained in annexure a to both the mrwa tcic electrical maintenance contractor and mrwa cic .
it is important that the mrwa tcic electrical maintenance contractor is informed as to the location sim number phone id and other relevant data so the phone tester can be programmed and the periodic testing can commence .
if not all phones on each drawing are commissioned within a num day period the commissioning notice shall be forwarded within num days of the first phone on each main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num drawing being commissioned a note shall be provided to indicate which phones have not been commissioned and their expected commissioning date .
when all phones on each drawing have been commissioned a final commissioning notice shall be issued .
num .
providing the as built and handover documentation .
the contractor shall provide asconstructed drawings showing the location of the roadside help phones in the latest autocad format within num days of the phone commissioning to the mrwa tcic document custodian ghd .
the drawings shall be in a format in accordance with main roads drawing num help phone locations for the mitchell and kwinana freeways .
cnum removal or relocation of roadside help phones under no circumstances are roadside help phones to be removed and stored or otherwise disposed of unless specified in the contract .
if a roadside help phone is left not operating for any period an out of service label shall be attached to the fascia until the facility has been returned to the operational status .
it is acceptable to make the tag out of printed white photocopy paper installed with cling wrap to the fascia if the tag is going to be in place for weeks the tag has to be inspected periodically and replaced if not legible .
cnum relocation procedure .
when relocating a roadside help phone the following stages shall be adhered to num .
one week prior to relocation of the help phones the contractor shall inform main roads customer call centre and the mrwa tcic maintenance contractor of the intention to relocate the phone giving details of the old and new location and intended date of the relocation .
num .
the original phone complete with concrete pad and phone base shall be removed .
under no circumstances shall the footing be pulled out by pulling on the help phone .
num .
the verge at the original phone location shall be reinstated to match the surrounding verge .
num .
if a temporary location is used this location shall be kept as close to the original or new location as possible .
num .
whilst the phone is in a temporary location it shall be kept operational .
if possible wheelchair access shall be maintained .
num .
the original phone shall be installed at the new location following the roadside help phone installation specification .
main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the location of the phone distance signs are to be adjusted to reflect the new phone location .
cnum removal procedure when removing a roadside help phone the following stages shall be adhered to num .
one week prior to the removal of the help phones the contractor shall inform main roads customer call centre and the mrwa tcic maintenance contractor .
num .
where help phone removals are specified in the contract the contractor shall forward to the principals representative all asset data advice using the commissioning notice at annexure a num .
the original phone complete with concrete pad and phone base shall be removed under no circumstances shall the footing be pulled out by pulling on the help phone .
num .
the verge shall be reinstated to match the surrounding verge .
num .
the phone signs associated with the phone that has been removed shall also be removed .
num .
mrwa and its roadside help phone contractors shall be informed in writing that the phone has been removed within num hours of the removal .
num .
the phone sim card shall be returned to mrwa within num days .
num .
the phone shall be disposed in line with the contractual instructions main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num guidance notes delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference all edits to downloaded tdp documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
deletions shall be struck through e.g .
example .
insertions shall be in italics e.g .
example .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted then the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
the custodian of this specification is the electrical engineer .
num .
scope num this specification covers the installation of new help roadside phones on the road network using solar powered cellular phones operating on the mobile network .
num where the works involve additions deletions or modifications to an existing cable connected help phone network this specification should include in the section contract specific requirements the particular modifications required to suit the works .
in such cases discuss the contract requirements with the regional asset manager and incorporate appropriate modifications .
num .
phone design requirements num some background to pillar design requirements include a weather resistant part of nassra requirements b solar cell polemounted less wiring minimizes power consumption c locks keyed alike prevents unauthorised access d antenna mounting top of solar cell mounting minimizes vandalism num .
relocation of help phones clause num num where existing help roadside phones are required to be relocated due to road works for example clause num or an appropriate version of this clause shall be used .
main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
help roadside phone responsibilities num project manager a at the completion of the project all infrastructure changes such as as constructed drawings and any change to the configuration schedule shall be sent to the superintendent tcic num traffic control infrastructure contract using form d. b the project manager shall be aware of the requirements of main roads document appendix num changes made to the infrastructure by a concurrent contractor prior to completing form d. num mrwa asset manager a main roads asset manager shall issue to ghd a list of spare indial phone numbers and request new numbers from optustelstra when existing numbers are used .
b the asset manager shall order indial numbers from optustelstra when less than ten num spare numbers remain or when it is known the number of numbers required in the short term exceed the number remaining .
c optustelstra allocates indial numbers in num number blocks .
num .
main roads electrical inventory custodian ghd pty ltd a ghd pty ltd maintains a register of pillar and indial numbers and will issue to the designer or the project manager on request a pillar number and indial number for each help roadside phone to be installed in the field .
b the indial numbers are not being included on design drawings .
c ghd pty ltd to advise main roads asset manager when less than ten num spare indial numbers remain .
main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contract specific requirements to add or delete the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
num relocation of existing help roadside num .
where help roadside phones shall be removed from existing locations because of road works the help phones shall be relocated and kept operational at all times .
num .
temporary relocations shall be kept as close to the original location as possible .
the phone shall be kept operational and if possible wheelchair access shall be maintained .
num .
for short term relocations it may not be possible to maintain wheel chair access across road works at all times .
however every effort shall be made to keep such restrictions to a minimum .
num .
under no circumstances are help roadside phones to be removed and stored or otherwise disposed of unless specified otherwise in the contract .
num .
under no circumstances are help phones to be pulled from their footings .
num .
one week prior to relocation or removal of the help phones the contractor shall inform main roads customer centre and downer edi engineering .
refer to subclause num liaison with others num .
where help phone removals are specified in the contract the contractor shall forward to the principals representative asset data advice using the commissioning notice at annexure numb .
num .
if help phone has been relocated and left inoperational for any period an out of service label shall be attached to the fascia until the facility has been returned to the operational status .
num .
the verge at the original phone locations shall be reinstated to match the surroundings verge .
num .
the location of all help phone signs to be adjusted as per design drawings and new help phones locations .
num .
the original phone shall be installed at the new location in accordance with this specification .
main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num removal of existing roadside help phones num .
one week prior to the removal of the help phones the contractor shall inform main roads customer call centre and the mrwa tcic maintenance contractor .
num .
where help phone removals are specified in the contract the contractor shall forward to the principals representative all asset data advice using the commissioning notice at annexure b .
num .
the original phone complete with concrete pad and phone base shall be removed under no circumstances shall the footing be pulled out by pulling on the help phone .
num .
the verge shall be reinstated to match the surrounding verge .
num .
the phone signs associated with the phone that has been removed shall also be removed .
num .
mrwa and its roadside help phone contractors shall be informed in writing that the phone has been removed within num hours of the removal .
num .
the phone sim card shall be returned to mrwa within num days .
num .
the phone shall be disposed in line with the contractual instructions main roads western australia specification num roadside help phones page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification amendment checklist specification name no num revision no ____title help roadside phones project manager name _______________signature ____________date________ checked by name _______________signature _______________date________ contract no ___________contract description _____________________________ item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked change mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materialsproductsclauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from mcp .
num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection testing parameters included in spec num test methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date_______________ main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num closed circuit television cctv monitoring cameras copyright main roads western australia main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num closed circuit television monitoring cameras revision register date clause number description of revision authorised by num annexure numa and various clauses all num added .
joint use cctv and signal poles drawings added .
references to tcic removed and isa added .
clause added to refer to design requirements for joint use cctv and traffic signal poles .
amtsee num whole document drawing reference changed amts num whole document complete revision of issue to new format amts main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definition of terms num num contractor resources num num order of precedence num num num not used num products materials and workmanship num num products and materials num num workmanship num num num not used num functional and performance requirements num num general num num web cameras num num num not used num technical requirements num num general num num poles brackets pole hardware num num camera housing pan tilt zoom facility num num camera lens num num camera control num num camera communications num num power surge lightning protection num num camera screen wash wipe facility num num spare parts tools num num num not used num civil requirements num num conflict with drainage pipes and other services num num trenching and backfill num num reinstatement and cleanup num num road crossings num num num not used num installation num num general num num camera and pole installation num num installation of communications cabinet or tophat for signals controller cabinet num num mains connection num num electrical installation num num integration with toc dvtel camera system num num installation of safety barriers num num num not used num main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num acceptance and test criteria num num acceptance testing num num inspection and test plan num num num not used num documentation num num cctv design documents num num equipment specifications num num cctv inspection and test plan num num infrastructure information num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num asbuilt information num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa main roads standard drawings num contract specific requirements to add or delete num specification num guidance notes num delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference num main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num closed circuit television monitoring cameras general num scope num .
this specification defines the requirements for the supply installation testing and commissioning of closed circuit television cctv cameras including web cameras for interfacing into the existing main roads western australia mrwa traffic operations centre toc the scope of work covered by this specification includes a the supply and installation of the camera housing and camera pole .
b the supply and installation of the communications cabinet or traffic signals tophat extension .
c the supply installation and testing of all communications and associated equipment .
d the interfacing of all camera sites into the existing mrwa toc cctv system .
e the supply of asconstructed documentation and any relevant training information .
num .
cctv tilt pole drawings provided by main roads wa are based on existing cctv site installations .
these drawings are not intended to be design drawings for new installations .
the supply of these drawings is to enable performance features required by the main roads specifications to be included in new cctv installations .
some elements of the drawings such as mounting spigot detail and lock box detail allow for compatibility with existing infrastructure and provide for required operational features .
note the reference to the tilt pole drawings are not intended to imply any intellectual property ownership by main roads of the tilt pole design .
actual construction details of the cctv pole and footing will need to be designed to meet the performance criteria specified and to meet any conditions specific to each site such as soil conditions likely maximum wind speed etc .. cctv tilt pole drawings main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below acts and regulations govt .
of western australia office of energy wa electrical requirements electricity act num and associated amendments and regulations and electrical safety act num and associated amendments regulations and codes of practice australian standards as num technical drawings as num graphical symbols for general engineering welding and nondestructive examination as num structural steel hollow sections as num fnum soil strength and consolidation tests as num welding of steel structures as num arc stud welding as num degrees of protection provided by enclosure for electrical equipment ip code as num guide to the protection of structural steel against atmospheric corrosion by the use of protective coatings .
as num traffic signal controllers as num general requirements for electrical equipment as num hot rolled structural steel plates as num hot rolled structural steel bars as num software test documentation as num steel structures as num electromagnetic compatibility generic emission standard part numresidential commercial and light industry as num telecommunications over voltages part num protection of persons as num telecommunications over voltages part num protection of equipment asnum closed circuit television cctv application guidelines as num degrees of protection provided by enclosures for electrical equipment ip code australian and new zealand standards asnzs num structural design actions saa loading code asnzs num minimum design loads on structures wind loads asnzs num structural steel welding welding of steel structures asnzs num lightning protection asnzs num electrical installations buildings structures and premises saa wiring rules asnzs num electrical installations extra low voltage d.c. power supplies and services earthing within public telecommunications networks main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num asnzs num telecommunications installations administration of communications cabling systems basic requirements asnzs num road safety barrier systems asnzs num surge protection devices to telecommunication applications asnzs num structural design requirements for utility services poles asnzs num hotdip galvanized zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles asnzs num information technology equipment safety general requirements asnzs iso num quality management and quality assurance standards model for quality assurance in production installation and servicing other standards acma technical planning guidelines appendix num emission standard for the australian analog terrestrial television service video characteristics asacif snum installation requirements for customer cabling austel technical standard num installation requirements for customer cabling main roads specifications and documents guideline num intelligent transport systems its specification num traffic specification num clearing specification num earthworks specification num culverts specification num cable conduits pits for intelligent transport systems its specification num anti graffiti coatings materials specifications various num definition of terms acma australian communications and media authority agc automatic gain control as australian standard asnzs australian and new zealand standard austel australian telecommunication cif common intermediate format num horizontal x num vertical pixels cctv camera closed circuit television camera used for traffic monitoring main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num ccd charge coupled device elv extra low voltage as defined in asnzs num isa integrated services arrangement mrwa main roads western australia pal phase alternating line pm project manager ptz pan tilt zoom rhs right hand side tcs traffic control signals toc traffic operations centre top hat upwards extension module for controller cabinet used to mount communications and other equipment .
web camera camera used for streaming traffic footage to main roads website .
num contractor resources num .
the contractor shall ensure that all work is performed by technically competent persons and that all electrical work shall be performed by licensed electricians .
technical competence num .
the contractor shall provide all equipment necessary to perform the required work .
contractor equipment num .
the contractor shall have a temporary facility for testing the operation visibility and range of motion of cameras at the nominated sites to accurately determine the final exact pole position and height .
these shall be verified and approved by the main roads project manager prior to the ordering of any camera poles .
testing facility num order of precedence the following order of precedence in descending order of precedence will apply to resolve any ambiguity or discrepancy in the referenced documents and standards to the extent necessary to resolve the conflict ambiguity or discrepancy .
precedence num main roads project specific documentation .
main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num this specification .
num main roads standards specifications and guidelines .
num australian standards specifications and guidelines .
num relevant general arrangement drawings and other supplementary standards and specifications .
num num not used products materials and workmanship num products and materials num .
all materials provided by the contractor shall be new .
all materials shall be new num .
all materials provided by the contractor shall satisfy the requirements of this specification .
where it is unclear that an item will fully satisfy these requirements or the item does not satisfy the requirements the contractor shall submit details of the item to the project manager for approval inclusive of manufacturers data and information sheets and how the item does not meet the required specifications .
substitution and conformance num .
the contractor shall demonstrate conformance to the requirements of this specification and project drawings when using materials and equipment different to that specified .
no loss of performance num workmanship num .
all work shall conform to the requirements of the mrwa specifications and standards referenced in section num as a minimum .
conformance to mrwa specifications num .
all electrical work relating to cabling and cabling conduits shall be carried out in accordance with asnzs num .
asnzs num num .
the requirements of the power supply authority and any other body or bodies having jurisdiction over such works in western australia shall also be satisfied .
power supply authority num .
the contractor shall lodge all notices required by the power supply and communications authorities and any other authority having jurisdiction over the installation and pay any fees required .
contractor to lodge all notices num num not used functional and performance requirements main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num general all equipment installed using this specification forms part of the traffic management system at the toc .
as a result all hardware and software must be fully compatible with mrwas existing traffic management system and must not interfere in any way with any other system already installed .
non interference with existing systems num image quality num .
images shall be captured transmitted and displayed at the highest quality and refresh rate permitted by the capacity of the communications network and the imaging equipment system .
images transmitted in high quality num .
cctv video and control signals for each camera shall be transmitted digitally over the same telecommunications channel .
images shall be transmitted to the mrwa toc and shall be compatible with the currently used dvtel cctv control system .
cctv video control signals compatibility num .
digital imaging technology may be used however the imaging equipment and images provided by this equipment shall be interoperable with the control systems in use at the toc .
in addition imaging equipment shall utilise proven industry standards that are current at the time of the provision of the equipment .
digital imaging technology num .
during daylight hours all cctv cameras shall allow vehicle characteristics such as colour and shape to be easily discerned in the traffic stream at all visible points up to numm from the cctv camera installation excluding geographic limitations such as road curves .
numm visibility num .
cameras shall provide high sensitivity for operating at night under low light conditions .
low light operation should have a minimum sensitivity of no less than num lux at num sec shutter speed for a colour image .
low light operation num web cameras num .
the image quality and resolution of web cameras shall ensure that the internet displayed images are reliable and accurate .
the cameras shall have the following features web cameras main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num a num inch ccd high resolution dual stream h.num dnum mpegnum day night camera with wide dynamic range .
e.g .
dvtel pro elite altitude cfnum series fixed camera .
b multi video resolutions up to dnum .
c up to num x num frames per second .
d with sd slot available .
e two alarm inputs one relay output .
f unicast or multicast operation .
g num vdcnum vdc and power over ethernet poe options .
h available web interface for viewing configuration and control .
i ruggedized corrosion resistant outdoor housing ip num nema num with sunshield thermostat controlled heater demister .
j manually adjustable pan tilt mounting .
num .
the fixed web cameras shall provide a moderately wide view of traffic to adequately capture traffic flows over the covered range .
wide viewing angle num .
all images broadcast onto the internet must comply with the western australian government privacy policies .
to ensure that the images are suitable for public display sensitive areas such as residential and housing should not be viewable .
in addition all images displayed must not allow identification of people or vehicles .
privacy policy compliance num .
all web cameras shall provide a num baset hub sensing halffull duplex capable rjnum ethernet communications port .
ethernet port required num num not used technical requirements num general num .
due to the rapid advancements in technology only the minimum requirements of hardware selection and technical requirements are included in this specification .
specific projects may need to have some of this information updated to include current requirements .
minimum standard requirements main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
imaging equipment shall include motorized zoom lens camera housing pantilt unit mounts pole field cabinets hardware camera controls encoders associated cabling and surge protection and any other equipment and works necessary to operate as intended .
nodefield cabinets will be provided by others .
imaging equipment num .
all camera locations are detailed in the project documentation .
camera locations num .
cameras lenses mounting support control heads enclosures and associated facilities shall be designed and installed to provide for the optimum quality of the road network images for each location .
camera equipment num .
numv ac and numv ac num hz power shall be available from the nearest fieldnode cabinet as shown in the relevant drawings .
the preferred operating power for cameras is numv ac .
power num poles brackets pole hardware num .
poles brackets and all associated hardware shall be supplied to support cctv cameras for traffic monitoring .
all cctv cameras shall have a full pan tilt and zoom capability as outlined in this specification .
general num .
all poles shall be fabricated in accordance with asnzs num .
asnzs num num .
all poles shall be sufficiently sealed to ensure that moisture running down the side of the column or vermin can not enter the column .
sealing num .
all fastenings shall be stainless steel num or num grade .
fastenings num tilt pole requirements num .
cctv cameras shall be mounted on poles to provide a secure and stable platform for cameras and pan tilt heads .
each pole associated assemblies and all parts and accessories shall be corrosion resistant material suitable for salt atmosphere i.e .
zinc galvanised steel or marine grade stainless steel .
pole platforms num .
typically poles for cctv cameras shall be numm or numm in height however some cameras may need to be a specific height based on a location .
in any case the final pole details shall be confirmed by the project manager in consultation with the mrwa systems development manager .
pole height num .
each pole shall be a midhinged tiltdown arrangement and supplied with appropriate counterweight compatible with the weight of the top of pole installation to provide rotational balance .
the structural design of the poles shall be in accordance with asnzs num .
pole structural design asnzs num main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
poles shall be tapered with a polygonal section with a minimum of eight sides .
the pole shall be base plate mounted and supplied with a matching foundation rag bolt assembly and associated fixing template .
the top of the pole shall have a width of no less than num mm af to minimise wind caused vibration at the top of the pole .
pole profile num .
an access door shall be provided near the base of the pole .
the opening shall be minimum num mm wide by num mm high .
the bottom of the opening shall be minimum numm above the pole bottom .
the door shall provide weatherproof resistance to ipnum or better .
pole access panel num .
the pole shall be designed such that it is not possible for the camera equipment to touch the lower section of the pole and the ground when lowered .
pulling eyes shall be located on the flap and at the pole base so that a rope may be used to raise the hinged section and regulate the lowering speed of the hinged section .
pole design num .
the pole shall have two independent latching systems to hold the hinged section in place .
the first latching system shall comprise a tamper proof stainless steel bolt of appropriate strength to fix the hinged top section rigidly to bottom section .
the second latching system shall comprise a lug welded to the inside face of the hinged top section and protruding through a hole in the lower pole section when in the upright position .
it shall be possible to install a padlock through the lug on the inside of the pole via the hatchway .
latching system num .
a lock box shall be welded to the pole surrounding the hole in the hinged top section .
the lock box limits unwanted access to the lug and locking mechanism .
it shall be fitted symmetrically over the hole .
when the pole is in an upright position with the lug protruding through the hole the lower edge of the lock box shall be num mm below the lower edge of the hole in the lug .
the general dimensions of the lock box shall be num mm wide num mm height num mm depth and num mm minimum thickness galvanised steel .
only the lower side of the lock box shall be open to enable fitting the padlock .
lock box num .
the base plate shall allow the protrusion of num x nummm underground plastic conduit into the base of the pole .
if necessary a tapped hole shall be provided in the side of the pole near the top to accept screwed nummm conduit fittings .
the hole shall be within nummm of the top .
threads shall be cleaned after galvanising .
base plate upper conduit connection num .
the foundation bolts shall be provided in a single assembly .
the assembly will be made from the appropriate grade of steel commensurate with this specification .
the assembly shall be galvanised in accordance with asnum and minimum coating thickness shall be num microns with no pitting or protrusions .
strength of the assembly shall be commensurate with the pole for which it is intended and a numyear life in the perth region according to asnum parts num and num .
for cameras installed in other areas e.g .
cyclone prone areas the design shall meet the area requirements .
two nuts and two flat washers per foundation bolt for fixing each pole to its foundation shall be provided .
they shall be galvanised to asnum .
spacing between the bolts shall allow the passage of num x nummm underground plastic conduit sweep bend num mm minimum radius .
foundation bolts main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
fixing templates shall be provided for each of the different assemblies to allow the correct orientation and placing of the assembly in the concrete foundation .
the template shall accurately reflect the shape of the pole base to nummm .
the template shall be made of strong waterproof material to prevent movement of the assembly as the concrete is poured .
base fixing templates num .
deflection from wind loading with the camera pan tilt head and enclosure mounted shall be less than num degrees for numm sec .
wind speed .
pole camera deflection num fixed tcs pole requirements num .
generally for cameras at traffic signals sites a dual use camera pole fixed shall be installed .
this pole is also likely to be used for mounting traffic signal aspects and as such there will be specific installation requirements .
dual use camera poles num .
any work involving traffic signals infrastructure must be carried out in coordination with isa contractor .
work involving signals num .
the column shaft and base shall comply with australian standards of grade and thickness determined in the guideline drawings as listed in annexure numaany other camera column must be authorised by the project manager in consultation with the mrwa asset manager traffic systems .
tcs pole num .
the construction of the column shall be from steel square in shape with four equal sides numxnum shs num cut to length conforming to australian standards .
pole design num .
the steel plate sections shall be seam welded by a continuous automatic gas shielded electric arc process in accordance with australian standard num .num num .
pole construction num .
the column shall be fully hot dip galvanised in accordance with australian standard num num following completion of the fabrication .
galvanising num .
the general finish of all columns shall be of a high quality with all holes and surfaces free from burrs and sharp edges to allow the installation without damage of electrical cables into the pole .
the surface shall be free of kinks ripples and galvanising defects .
finish quality num .
the tcs camera column shall be finished in a polyester powder coat golden yellow according to the manufacturers specification .
the bottom nummm of the column shall be treated with dupont napgard or similar corrosion protection that conforms to australian standards asnzs num .
finish appearance num fixed tcs pole infrasatructure main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num where tcs camera poles are to be used a terminal box and terminal block assembly shall be provided and installed .
the terminal box shall be heavy duty vandal resistant and constructed from marine grade aluminium sheeting not less than nummm thickness .
it should be finished in a powder coat bluegrey according to the manufacturers specifications and fitted to the tcscamera pole using the screw mounting points provided .
a waterproof sealant shall be used between the post and the terminal box cable entry and screw mounting points to prevent the ingress of moisture .
terminal box details are available from the main roads web site .
tcs terminal box num camera housing pan tilt zoom facility num general num .
camera housings shall be robust aluminium construction weatherproof with baked enamel finish and able to tolerate a corrosive atmosphere .
camera housing num .
the viewing window shall be an optically clear free of distortion tempered glass sheet of at least num mm thickness .
the housing shall be fitted with a with a screen wiper for nondome camera .
viewing window num .
pan and tilt units shall be robust and able to give trouble free service in harsh environments .
the camera housing and pantilt unit may constitute a single assembly e.g .
pelco esprit .
integrated dome housings may be used where a dome camera is allowed or specified .
pantilt unit num camera housing requirements num .
each camera shall be enclosed in a housing which protects it from external climate weather effects without degradation of picture lucidity .
all housings shall meet the following minimum requirements minimum requirement s a provide protection for the camera from driving rain moisture and dust ipnum or better .
b housings shall be corrosion resistant structurally rigid aluminium in construction weatherproof with baked enamel finish .
external fastenings and lock attachments shall be stainless steel num grades or better .
coatings and fittings shall tolerate exposures to salt atmosphere and motor vehicle fumes .
c a sunshield shall be fitted which shall be corrosion resistant aluminium in construction with baked enamel finish and resistant to corrosion in salt atmosphere .
d ease of access for maintenance shall be provided .
main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num e cable entries shall be provided which are able to accept all cables required to enter the housing .
the cable entries shall be weatherproof to ipnum as a minimum .
f internal free space shall be provided such that the camera lens and cables do not interfere with the housing itself .
the fan shall not intrude into this space .
g the camera housing window shall not introduce any distortion to the video picture .
h a thermostat controlled heater shall be included as required to prevent misting .
num pantilt requirements num .
the pan and tilt unit shall be robust and able to give trouble free service in a harsh environment .
the pan and tilt unit shall conform to the following as a minimum requirement pantilt minimum requirement a the pantilt head shall be a heavy duty unit with a mtbf rating of better than num hours on a num duty cycle .
b panning arc of travel shall be num degrees continuous rotation .
panning speed shall be variable between num and num degrees per second or greater .
c tilting minimum arc of travel to be infinitely variable between plus num degrees and minus num degrees of the horizontal datum .
tilting speed shall be variable from num to num degrees per second or greater .
d pan and tilt mechanisms shall permit aiming of the camera within num degree of arc .
total backlash of the mechanism shall be less than num degree .
e position feedback shall be fitted for both pan and tilt mechanisms .
where potentiometers are used they shall have a maximum resistance of num kilohms and a minimum electrical and mechanical life of num rotations .
feedback resolution shall be better than num degrees .
f the weight of the unit should be less than numkg .
g the unit will operate from extra low voltage numv ac power supply .
h the pantilt head shall function to this specification over the free air temperature range numc to numc i if the pan and tilt unit is not part of an integrated dome camera housing then it shall be weatherproof to ipnum and resistant to corrosion from salt air and motor vehicle fumes .
main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num camera lens num general num .
cameras are to be pal colour semiconductor imager chargecoupled device ccd type which shall be sensitive for nighttime use and resistant to blooming and vertical smear .
camera specification num .
all cameras except web cameras shall be provided with ptz facilities .
cameras shall be available for testing by main roads wa on request prior to installation .
cameras available on request num camera requirements num .
all cctv cameras shall meet the following minimum requirements a cameras are to be pal colour semiconductor imager ccd type providing day and night operating modes .
b the camera output shall conform to the acma technical planning guidelines num lines interlaced at least num frames per second with a composite pal video signal output of numv peak to peak negative sync .
c ccd shall consist of num horizontal by num vertical effective pixels minimum .
there shall be no more than two defective pixels over the area of a central circle whose diameter is equal to the picture height with no cluster and no column defects .
d the imager chip shall be num inch format minimum .
e high sensitivity cameras shall be used for a usable picture that is unenhanced by averaging techniques .
f signal to noise ratio shall be as specified on the project possibly better than numdb for num lux faceplate illumination or no agc and no gamma correction .
transfer smear blooming and streaking induced by highlights shall be almost zero eg headlights at night g agc shall be included as well as an autoiris output of num vpp .
light range adaption for agc autoiris lens combination shall exceed num. h cameras shall include automatic white balance to compensate for colour temperature of the scene illumination and shall be compatible with the incident street lighting .
i lens mount shall be standard c or cs lens mount type and lockable .
a simple form of back focus adjustment shall be provided .
main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num j the camera shall perform to this specification from numv ac power supply .
k the camera must be capable of continuous normal operation over the free air temperature range between numc to numc and relative humidity up to num percent as per as num section num general requirements .
l preference will be given to those cameras which include noise reduction and sensitivity enhancement techniques such as frame averaging and dynamic range adjustment .
num .
lenses shall be motorised zoom minimum num optical zoom with auto iris and position feedback and shall meet the following minimum requirements lens minimum requirement a zoom lenses shall be compatible with the cameras installed .
b focus tracking shall be such that the lens will not require focus adjustment for an object at infinity numm over the entire zoom range .
c minimum focal length shall be num mm or less and maximum focal length shall be num mm or greater .
d maximum aperture number shall be at least fnum .
in combination with the camera agc the auto iris shall provide a light adaption range of at least num. e focus range shall be at least num m to infinity .
f focus tracking shall be such that the lens will not require focus adjustment for an object at infinity numm over the entire num zoom range at night .
there shall be no visible distortion or lens artefacts to the image over the entire zoom range .
g both zoom and focus shall be fitted with position feedback .
h both the zoom and auto iris control shall be compatible with the camera and the extra low voltage numv ac supply .
the auto iris servo shall also accept a video signal numv pp or composite video num v pp with a minimum num kilohm input impedance .
i the iris shall close if power is lost from the lens iris control .
num camera control num general num .
camera control shall be compatible with the existing dvtel cctv system currently in use at the toc .
camera control shall include preset positions which encompass both the pan and tilt angles and zoom settings .
operators shall be able to set and recall positions from the toc .
all cameras shall meet the following general requirements as a minimum camera control main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num a for each pan tilt and zoom camera site the camera control system shall be capable of setting configurable preset camera positions .
b the presets for pan and tilt shall be able to be set within num degree of arc while zoom and focus shall be able to be set for at least eight distinct focal lengths .
c on returning to a preset the pan and tilt repeatability shall be within num degrees and zoom and focus repeatability shall be within num. d the camera control shall be compatible with the dvtel control system used at toc .
e at each pan tilt and zoom camera site the control receiver shall receive and decode information from the toc without error for ambient free air temperatures in the range numc to numc and humidity range of num to num percent .
num camera communications num general num .
the roadside ipethernet based transmission system shall be used to transmit video and control data between the camera and the toc .
video transmission system num .
the video transmission system shall provide a bidirectional data channel for camera selection and control .
pictures shall be transmitted in full motion and colour .
the video transmission system shall meet or exceed in quality the specifications set out in this section .
bidirectional data channel a a minimum resolution of num horizontal times num vertical pixels cif times num at a minimum frame rate of num frames per second with minimal artefacts and compression effects for each of the camera images .
b full motion colour video shall be provided and the total time lag between the scene and the corresponding displayed image at any monitor at the toc shall be less than one second subject to any limitations of the communications system proposed .
e.g .
use of numg communications .
any such limitations shall be taken into consideration and the project stakeholders advised by the project manager .
c video terminations at the encoderdecoder shall be bnc socket .
d video bandwidth of any analogue interface of the completed link shall be num hz to num mhz plus or minus numdb .
main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num power surge lightning protection num general num .
the contractor shall provide all required cabling between the fieldnode cabinet and the camera pole installation .
the contractor shall provide multistage surge protection devices in the fieldnode cabinet to protect each metallic core for all cctv power video and data lines at the fieldnode cabinet .
cabling num .
the protection provided for each circuit shall be by way of a din rail mounted device providing primary secondary and tertiary protection .
the devices shall be mounted on the communications cabinet num rack din rail to be included or in the top hat cabinet extension where utilised .
the three stage protection consists of a clamping of transient excessive voltages diverting the bulk of the current to neutral or ground at input end .
b filtering of the clamped waveform reducing the rate of residual voltage rise .
c provision for the final stage diversion of surge currents to provide protection from surge currents induced onto the output cables or caused by the load itself .
this includes high frequency filtering .
three stage protection num .
the protective device on each circuit shall include a means for indicating visually when it has been tripped and is no longer providing protection to the circuit .
tripping indication num .
each device shall connect to an approved earthing system at the site in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and sound engineering practices .
earthing num .
all surge protection devices shall be multistage devices complying with asnzs num with the following minimum characteristics ref waveforms in figure fnum table fnum appendix f of asnzs num and as num standards a power line protection maximum discharge current nums numka b video and signal line protection maximum discharge current nums numka .
num protection video circuits num .
each camera video circuit shall be surge lightning protected using a din rail mounted multistage protection device .
num .
video coaxial cables shall first terminate at the surge lightning protection devices before connection to the video patch panel .
termination main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
each protective device shall as a minimum meet the protective characteristics of a novaris technologies combined surge protector type sfnumdinclb .
device type num protection power supply circuits num .
each camera power supply circuit shall be surge lightning protected using a din rail mounted multistage protection device .
num .
camera power supply cables shall first terminate at the surge lightning protection devices before connection to the camera power supply output terminals .
termination num .
each device shall meet or exceed the protective characteristics of a novaris technologies combined surge protector type sfnumdinclb .
type num protection data circuits num .
each wire of each camera ptz control circuit shall be surge lightning protected using a din rail mounted multistage protection device .
num .
the ptz camera control cables shall first terminate at the surelightning protection devices before connecting to the camera control circuit distribution equipment .
termination num .
for rs num control circuits the device shall provide similar functionality and performance to a novaris technologies surge protector as specified in item num above .
type num camera screen wash wipe facility num .
all cctv cameras except were dome cameras are specified shall be provided with a screen wash wiper facility .
wash wipe facility num .
the screen wash reservoir shall store a minimum of five num litres and be contained in proximity to the camera unit .
when utilising dual use tcs camera poles the water storage container would normally be located in a pit close to the signal pole .
the contractor shall install the pit container pump and associated controlling equipment for control from the toc .
water storage container num spare parts tools num .
the contractor shall maintain sufficient spares where a device or component is known to have a high fault rate or a high ordering delay time .
spares num .
where operation maintenance dismantling reassembling adjusting or aligning requires special tools or instruments these are to be supplied with the equipment .
specialist tools instruments main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num num not used main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num civil requirements num conflict with drainage pipes and other services num .
before commencing any work the contractor shall make all enquiries and inspections as may be necessary to become fully conversant with the type and location of surface and underground utility services at the site of works .
the contractor shall ensure that care is taken during the progress of the work to avoid any possibility of damage to any public utility .
underground utility services num .
any trenching near services shall be carried out manually .
damage caused by the activities of the contractor shall be made good by the contractor .
if made good by others the cost of repair shall be recoverable from the contractor .
work by others note all drawings supplied showing existing main roads services equipment and structures including existing conduits are provided for information purposes only and may not be accurate in every detail .
the contractor shall verify the exact location of services and structures that are to be utilised modified or in any way affected by the proposed installations .
utilisation of any existing services or structures for installation purposes shall be subject to verification and approval by the main roads project manager .
num trenching and backfill num .
all the excavations necessary for the installation of cable pits and conduits shall be backfilled and any surface disturbance that may have been necessary during the course of installation made good .
all excavations backfilled num .
the backfill shall be compacted to match the surrounding soil density and graded to match surrounding surface level .
the top nummm layer above the top of the conduits shall be clean sand .
backfill to match surrounding surface num .
the contractor shall gain verbal approval from the main roads project manager prior to initiating any backfilling as the project manager may elect to inspect trenches or excavations including the pits and conduits prior to authorisation .
mrwa pm authorisation prior to backfilling num reinstatement and cleanup num .
disturbed pavement surfaces for nonmotorised traffic such as concrete or brick paved areas and pathways shall be reinstated to original condition to the satisfaction of the main roads project manager .
reinstate pavement surfaces main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
any surplus or waste materials such as unused conduits offcuts packaging etc .
shall be removed from the site by the contractor who shall also be responsible for all cartage and tipping charges .
contractor responsible for cartage num road crossings num .
where a crossing is under the road pavement the crossing shall be installed by directional drilling .
under no circumstances shall the pavement or surfacing be cut to install the crossing .
bored crossings num num not used installation num general num notices num .
the contractor shall lodge all notices required by the power supply authority and any other authority having jurisdiction over the installation and pay any fees required .
notices and fees num public safety num .
the contractor shall progress the works such that the length of open trench is kept to a minimum .
no open trenches shall be left unattended or accessible by the public .
open trenches kept to minimum num .
where necessary control of traffic including pedestrians and cyclists shall be undertaken by the contractor in accordance with specification num traffic .
traffic control num clearing num .
clearing shall be undertaken in accordance with specification num .
clearing num antigraffiti coatings num .
antigraffiti coating shall be applied in accordance with the mrwa specification for antigraffiti coatings .
antigraffiti coating num provision for traffic num .
any work which may disrupt vehicular traffic shall not be carried out during morning and evening peak periods between the hours of num am num am and num pm num pm monday to friday and on saturday from num am num pm .
work hours disrupting traffic main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the contractor shall notify the project manager in writing of any scheduled works which require lane closures or is likely to cause significant disruptions to traffic at least seven num working days prior to commencement .
lane closures num .
where lane closures are required to perform the work the contractor shall submit a detailed traffic management plan to the project manager at least seven num working days prior to the commencement of work .
the plan shall include traffic management plan a proposed working hours .
b traffic volume data .
c sequence of work .
d type and placement of signs and other traffic control devices .
e plan of work area including all approach roads .
f details of work vehicles and other large plant .
num locations num .
camera installations shall be installed in accordance with this specification in locations indicated by the project specific documentation .
camera locations num .
the contractor shall undertake testing at each camera site using temporary facilities to test the operation suitability of image and range of the camera in the nominated position including at the proposed height to accurately determine the final camera type position mounting equipment and final pole installation height details .
the main roads project manager will verify these details prior to the ordering of equipment .
finalisation of exact location num .
camera locations must consider occlusion from vegetation and other objects such as signs and existing structures in order to minimise visual obstructions in the cctv imagery .
minimise visual obstructions num .
all cctv camera poles and associated roadside equipment shall be easily and safely accessible for maintenance purposes .
safely accessible equipment num camera and pole installation num camera installation num .
each camera and associated housing shall be securely mounted on the column via the ptz platform in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
secure mounting num .
the camera shall be mounted at a height nominated in the specific design documentation for the project within nummm .
this will incorporate the final decisions based on the onsite tests required by this specification .
camera mounted at specified height main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the camera shall be wired to operate the heater where fitted screen wash and wipe facility pan tilt zoom remotely from the monitoring location .
all supporting functions operational num .
the field of view of each camera shall be in accordance with what is agreed to by the main roads project manager through the preliminary testing process as outlined in section num .
camera field of view num .
if installing in a cyclone prone area cyclone installation requirements shall be adhered to .
num camera pole installation num .
the following camera poles are approved for installation and mounting of cameras provided they meet the requirements of this specification tapered tilting galvanised steel pole height and performance details as specified .
joint use tcscamera pole approved camera poles num .
each camera pole shall be fully hot dip galvanised in accordance with australian standard num following completion of the fabrication .
hot dip galvanised poles num .
tcs camera poles shall be base plate mounted .
base plate mounting num .
the preparation details for installing the steel reinforced slab type cctv pole base shall include removal of loose soil and material placement of crushed limestone in layers not exceeding num mm and compaction of each layer to produce a total thickness of num mm .
the compaction shall be tested with a standard perth falling weight penetrometer in accordance with as num fnum num .
the minimum acceptable blow count is num blows per num mm for the whole of the num mm depth below the footing .
a num mm thick blinding concrete layer shall be placed to prepare for the slab base .
the slab base design shall take into account the actual pole and camera system dimensions and weight .
assembly and installation of the columns shall be in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
apart from the foundation bolts all fixings and bolts shall be stainless steel grade mnum .
slab type cctv pole footing num .
prior to the installation of the pole footing the excavated hole shall be presented to the construction manager for approval to proceed .
hold point main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
all concrete shall be minimum class nnum in accordance with specification num concrete general works dependant on site requirements .
concrete num .
should the water table be such that the concrete can not be placed in a dry hole it shall be placed by tremie .
water shall not be allowed to flow through the space in which the concrete is to be cast .
should the walls of the hole be likely to collapse before pouring the concrete a simple sheet metal spirolock or plastic sleeve shall be inserted to prevent the collapse .
the tremie shall consist of a sheet metal hopper with a metal pipe leading out of the bottom that has a simple outlet valve at its lower end .
it shall be water tight with a minimum diameter of nummm .
the tremie shall be kept filled with concrete at all times during placing .
should the concrete charge be lost the tremie shall be withdrawn and refilled .
the tremie shall be operated in such a manner as to discharge below the surface of the fresh concrete and to maintain as nearly as practicable uniform flow .
concrete shall not be dropped through water .
no agitation or vibration of the concrete shall be permitted during placing .
compaction shall take place after concrete pouring has been completed and the water displaced .
tremie num .
prior to the drilling of any bridge or other structural element all locations sizes and depths of the penetrations and of any reinforcement likely to be affected by the drilling operations shall be accurately identified for approval by the engineering manager to proceed .
hold point num .
provision shall be made in the footing of all camera poles for three num cable entry points via large sweep conduit bends of radius no less than num mm two nummm conduits orange one nummm conduit orange footing conduit entry num .
a pit shall be installed as close as practical to the camera pole .
this shall allow the installation of the water container for the screen wash facility where used .
the conduits leading to the camera pole shall terminate at this pit .
the pit details shall be confirmed with the project manager to ensure site specific details are taken into account .
provision of pit adjacent to pole num .
the orientation of the sweep bends shall be compatible with the cable runs proposed to link into the cctv communications cabinet .
cable entry bends orientation num .
if a tcs camera pole is to be installed and will replace an existing traffic signal pole the footing shall be installed prior to the removal of an existing traffic signal pole and positioned as close as possible to the existing traffic signal pole or at a location nominated by the main roads project manager .
where the existing traffic signal reticulated ring main cables are not terminated in ground termination pits provision shall be made to install a traffic signal termination pit in accordance with main roads specifications at a location as close as possible to the new tcscamera pole footing or at a location nominated by the main roads project manager .
order of works main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
all pole footings shall be designed by a qualified structural engineer eligible for corporate membership with the institution of engineers using the relevant australian standard and taking into account wind soil and clearance conditions at the nominated site .
this shall include cyclone specific requirements .
pole footings designed by qualified personnel num camera pole assembly num .
for the dual use camera pole assembly all work involving wiring and connection of the traffic signals shall be carried out in conjunction with the current mrwa isa contractor .
for an existing tcs site the dual use pole installation will normally require the disconnection of the signal pole being replaced .
removal of signal hardware and the rewiring of the dual use pole will be required .
the signal aspects and any other signals hardware shall be reconnected to the new terminal box that shall be supplied and installed as part of the requirements for the camera installation .
tcs camera pole installation num .
poles tilting type shall be installed to articulate in a direction that will not cause disturbance or danger to traffic pedestrians and workers .
tilting pole articulation num .
poles shall be erected in accordance with the manufacturers published procedures .
care must be taken when handling the poles so that the galvanising is not damaged .
metal slings if used shall have adequate protection so that metal to metal contact does not occur .
poles must be erected in a safe way approved by the construction manager .
pole erection procedure num .
each pole shall be bolted truly vertical on its footing .
verticality num excavations num .
the contractor shall ensure that full information is obtained regarding any underground services in the vicinity of any excavation for footings or underground conduits and that care is taken during the progress of the work to avoid any possibility of damage to any public utility .
underground services information num .
any trenching near services shall be carried out manually .
manual trenching near services num .
the exact location of all services that are in the vicinity of any excavation shall be accurately determined with the assistance of the relevant authority .
main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num installation of communications cabinet or tophat for signals controller cabinet num general num .
each tophat or stand alone cctv cabinet shall be installed at the location depicted in the specific project documentation or location approved by the main roads project manager .
work on the traffic signals controller shall only be carried out with in conjunction with the current mrwa isa contractor .
cabinet or tophat installation num .
the video data processing data compression and interface equipment camera power supply and other control equipment shall be housed in the cabinet or tophat signals controller cabinet extension .
equipment housed in cabinet or tophat extension num .
all cctv cabinets shall be installed in accordance with mrwa drawing numbers num or num .
num .
all tophat installations shall be installed in accordance with mrwa drawing numbers num num depending on controller type .
tophat drawing number num communications num .
the contractor shall request the main roads project manager to liaise with the main roads systems development manager in order to coordinate the most suitable communications method for each particular cctv installation .
determination of communicatio ns method num .
where a telstra connection is to be used a conduit shall be installed between the telstra pit and the communications cabinet to meet telstra requirements .
num mains connection num connection of electrical mains supply num .
where a source of supply is available from a nearby mrwa lighting switchboard or traffic signal controller a connection shall be made to the cctv communications cabinet .
power source num .
where the supply is not available arrangements shall be made with western power to provide a consumer main supply meeting western powers requirements .
in such cases a meter box to western powers requirements shall be provided if no exemption to this is authorised by them due to the low power requirement .
western power num mains supply meter box num .
where a meter box is required it shall be installed in the location required in the project specific design documentation .
meter box location main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
two keys for the meter box shall be supplied and given to the mrwa project manager at the completion of the work .
meter box keys num .
all power from this connection point shall be reticulated underground .
no power or other conduits shall be mounted externally on any pole or structure including aerial pole .
only underground power num .
all electrical equipment shall be internally protected from damage from electrical transients in power or signal wiring from radio frequency interference or static electrical discharge including lighting strikes in the vicinity as outlined in section num num electrical installation num conduits and pits num .
all conduits and pits installed for any cctv traffic monitoring camera sites shall be supplied and installed in accordance with specification num cable conduits for intelligent transport systems .
mrwa specification num num .
unless otherwise specified conduit shall be installed between the communications cabinet base and the camera mounting pole footing incorporating the following num x nummm diameter white heavy duty pvc conduit for communications cables num x nummm diameter orange heavy duty pvc conduit for power cables conduit between communicatio ns cabinet and camera num .
conduits shall have a bend radius of num mm or greater .
bend radius num .
the conduits shall be installed such that water which may enter the conduits always drains into the cable pits .
drainage num .
all cables in the pit whether joined or not shall be taken over the conduit wedged into and across the top of the pit and securely fixed with a nylon cable tie to the conduit as detailed in main roads standard drawing no .
num .
cable ties num .
all cables shall be clearly identified with permanent water resistant cable markers showing each outgoing cable in the nodefield cabinets .
indelible cable markers num integration with toc dvtel camera system num .
the cameras installed under this specification shall be fully integrated with the current toc dvtel cctv camera control system .
the installed cameras shall be able to be controlled via the toc system including full control of the pan tilt zoom screen wash and wipe functions and shall provide a clear image from the camera .
toc integration main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num installation of safety barriers num general num .
guard railing shall be erected to conform to asnzs num road safety barrier systems .
however this requirement might vary as per the location and the availability of the space around the pole .
num verticality of posts num .
all posts shall be vertical .
the contractors attention is drawn to the need to detail individually angled brackets and joints to ensure that this requirement is met .
num curving of rails num .
where rails are shown to be curved they shall be curved to form that shape without springing forces being applied to the posts .
the methods adopted or curving the rails shall be such as not to excessively distort the section or damage the material .
num painting of kerbside face num .
on completion of assembly the kerbside face of all rhs guardrails shall receive one num coat of an each primer complying with government paint committee specification number gpcpnum .
this shall be followed by two coats of white acrylic paint complying with specification number gpccnuma .
the colour shall be as detailed in the design of the installation num existing guardrails num .
where extension of existing guardrail is required or where a guardrail is in close proximity to an existing guardrail the contractor shall ensure that the design of the guardrail is compatible to the design of the existing guardrail as well as complying fully with the specifications and drawings .
the contractor shall take care to ensure that the railings are erected to smooth curves which reflect the design profiles of the existing guardrail .
in particular the contractor shall ensure that a smooth profile is maintained in the top rail after the site connections have been completed .
num num not used acceptance and test criteria num acceptance testing num general main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the contractor shall supply all labour materials and equipment required to fully test and commission the installation .
commissioningacceptance testing shall be carried out in the presence of a representative of the mrwa .
contractor supply num .
installation andor equipment will be accepted only after satisfactory completion of commissioning tests .
if a test is unsuccessful the equipment shall be repaired and reerected as appropriate and subject to retest until successful .
acceptance num .
the cost of any retesting if necessary shall be borne by the contractor .
retesting num sequence num .
the contractor shall undertake testing and commissioning in the following sequence testingcomm issioning sequence a submit draft inspection and test plan itp b update itp based on mrwa requirements c undertake inspection and testing d submit completed itp for review complete any additional items as required e undertake commissioningacceptance testing with mrwa num requirements num .
receipt of the following by mrwa shall constitute advice by the contractor that the installation is complete and ready for acceptance testing readiness for acceptance testing a the completed signed itp b supporting details c draft manuals and asconstructed documentation num .
mrwa will review the completed itp and supporting details and will advise the contractor if any further work or submission is required prior to acceptance testing .
review num arrangements num .
prior to acceptance testing the contractor shall make all necessary access arrangements and confirm with mrwa of the need for and nature of any necessary site inductions .
site inductions main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
during acceptance testing the contractor shall attend site and make available for the use of mrwa tools plant equipment operators and escorts as necessary to enable access to all system components system component access num .
acceptance testing with mrwa may include repeat of any or all elements of the itp plus a detailed verification of the correct operation of each device and function .
repeat testing num acceptance testing delays num .
once the acceptance testing commences mrwa reserves the right to delay or abort acceptance testing if testing delayabortion a the status of the work does not match the status verified by the contractor on the itp b the status of the work does not allow full and complete operation of the system c a component failure renders any part of the system inoperable d the site owneroperator denies access to any part of the works e the works are not accessible due to inadequate or incorrect access provision being made by the contractor f the acceptance testing work can not proceed with reasonable certainty that the installation is in its final state due to outstandingongoing work by the contractor .
num .
if the cause of the delay or cancellation is within the responsibility of the contractor as assigned under the contract any associated costs will be borne by the contractor .
associated costs num inspection and test plan num general num .
in addition to the contractors own quality assurance requirements the contractor shall provide a complete itp .
the itp shall include test schedules designed to incorporate the following information provision of itp a name of test and its status original test or repeat due to a previous test failure date time and location of the test b record of all values measured during installationcommissioning main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num c list of test equipment used and statement of software and software version number used d a description of how the test is to be conducted connection to test equipment configuration of test equipment test process e reference back to this specification to confirm compliance with each individual requirement clause num draft submission num .
four weeks prior to the proposed date for commencement of inspection and testing the contractor shall submit a draft itp for assessment by mrwa .
update the itp based on the requirements of mrwa and conduct inspection and testing in accordance with the plan .
draft itp num undertaking the itp num .
inspect test and tickcross off each item on the itp .
each page of the itp shall be signed and dated by the person conducting the site inspection and testing .
itp conformance num .
where a specific item on the itp can not be checked off by the inspection personnel place a cross against the incomplete item note the reason for the omission and identify the required rectification action itp non conformance a all crossed items shall be completed before acceptance testing with mrwa b on completion the overall itp shall be signed and dated by the contractor c forward a scanned electronic copy of the completed signed itp to mrwa d on receipt of the itp and supporting details mrwa will confirm dates for acceptance testing num num not used main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num documentation num .
the contractor shall provide the following staged documentation during the progress of the project .
num cctv design documents num .
the cctv design documents shall include as a minimum the following documented information design documents a cctv block diagrams b cctv functional description c cctv wiring diagrams d cctv equipment specifications num equipment specifications num .
the equipment specifications shall include the hardware and software data sheet specifications to show the equipment offered for the cctv system complies with the levels of functionality performance and suitability required in this specification .
not less than the following equipment specifications shall be provided equipment specifications a structural specifications of camera and camera head mounting components b camera enclosure component environmental specifications c cctv camera data sheets and functional descriptions d cctv camera lenses data sheets e videodata encoder data sheets num cctv inspection and test plan num .
the contractor shall provide an inspection and test plan in accordance with acceptance and test criteria sections num num of this specification .
inspection and test plan num infrastructure information num .
inventory records shall be adjusted to reflect the installation of the monitoring camera and all associated items .
itp conformance num num not used main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num as built and handover requirements num asbuilt information the contractor shall provide all drawings documentation and training enabling the longterm maintenance and management of all newly installed camera systems .
all drawings shall comply with the standard main roads format main roads western australia autocad drawing standards .
asbuilt information the contractor shall provide documentation in the form of drawings plans and diagrams showing camera system site installations all components interconnections and the location of all services .
this information provided in two sets of manuals should include a finalised design phase documentation .
b specifications technical manuals software manuals and operator manuals for all cctv equipment .
c drawings and datasheets for all equipment including requirements for maintenance fault finding and repair .
d a complete inventory of all major components installed at each camera site including cameras lenss video data and control data transmission equipment camera poles mounting platforms equipment housings etc .
e the modification of existing asconstructed maintenance drawings in cad format to show all changes implemented as part of any new contract including both physical layout pits cabinets conduits cables and other equipment and schematics electrical and optic fibre .
this applies to existing optic fibre backbone drawings camera site drawings and drawings related to the toc site .
f cctv communication network drawings related to the new installation g cable schedules for the cctv system .
h gps coordinates for each camera location .
i final test and commissioning specifications with results and dispositions of nonconformances .
the contractor shall provide a set of asconstructed drawings in line with main roads asset drawing guidelines mrwa electrical infrastructure asset drawing guidelines sections num and num consisting of but not limited to the following main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
a cctv general arrangement drawing in num scale showing the physical layout of the installation including all equipment installed both above and below ground i.e .
camera poles footings crash barriers communications cabinets etc .
the location and route of each conduit run for power communications and camera connections .
all electrical and communications cable sizes cable runs and points of attachment .
general background including the kerb line of roads and islands this can be imported from drawings supplied by the principal .
an asset number in the format of cam where is an asset number advised by the principal .
num .
communications cabinet layout drawing showing electrical equipment layout incoming electrical cables switchboard power supply and surge protection communications equipment layout including transceiver equipment isdn optical termination points outgoing and incoming communications cables num .
electrical wiring diagrams of the complete installation including interconnections and interfaces between all equipment .
num .
upgraded electrical layout drawings where a camera is installed at a traffic signals site .
the electrical cable charts laminated shall also be updated and reissued to reflect all changes made .
num .
where applicable provision of optical fibre test results and updated as constructed information in accordance with main roads speciation for the design supply and installation of optical fibre communications networks num .
the contractor shall make an accurate record of all changes where the actual installation differs from that shown in the contract drawings and specification .
this record shall be forwarded to the mrwa project manager .
num .
each submitted drawing shall be supplied in four num anum and two num anum paper copies plus an electronic copy in autocad rnum format .
num num not used main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contract specific requirements num num not used main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numa main roads standard drawings the following main roads standard sign drawings are available on the main roads web site .
drawing no .
ref .
description num mrwa web page cctv vds cabinet num mrwa web page wind speed region and terrain category chart num mrwa drawing camera mounting brackets dome camera num combined cctv and traffic pole elevation and sections chs pole num combined cctv and traffic pole details chs pole num combined cctv and traffic pole elevation and sections shs pole num combined cctv and traffic pole details shs pole num combined cctv and traffic pole camera mounting details main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contract specific requirements to add or delete the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
none at this time .
main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num guidance notes delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference all edits to downloaded tdp documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
deletions shall be struck through e.g .
example .
insertions shall be in italics e.g .
example .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted then the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
the custodian of this specification is the asset manager traffic systems .
num .
scope num this specification primarily covers the requirements for new closed circuit television cctv cameras for traffic monitoring on the freeways arterial and local roads both in metropolitan and country areas from the main roads traffic operations centre toc .
it also provides the requirements for web cameras providing traffic images directly to the public via the internet .
num where modifications to existing cctv cameras are proposed then the scope clause num will need careful editing to clearly outline the extent of the works .
the relevant clauses in the document would also need to be updated to ensure the information provided accurately outlines the extent of the works required .
num .
cross referencing to other contracts num the final cctv camera specification shall include crossreferencing to other relevant specifications as likely to be required such as specification num general requirements specification num clearing specification num earthworks specification num cables conduits pits for intelligent transport systems specification num signals specification num concrete works specification num antigraffiti main roads western australia specification num cctv monitoring cameras page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification amendment checklist specification name no num revision no ____title cloced circuit television monitoring cameras project manager name _____________signature ___________date________ checked by name _______________signature ______________date________ contract no ______contract description ________________________________ item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked change mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materialsproductsclauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from mcp .
num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection testing parameters included in spec num test methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date_______________ main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num cable conduits pits for intelligent transport systems its copyright main roads western australia main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num cable conduits pits for intelligent transport systems revision register date clause number description of revision authorised by num num num num added asnum num and ansisctenum added loading requirements for vault assemblies added installation of hdpe pits .
amtsamt s num num clause num typo corrected amts num num whole document revision of several areas relating to pit materials construction security features and installation maintenance requirements .
pits included in title amts num num num num pit gasket clauses added tom num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num materials and workmanship num num proprietary articles num num its cable pits num num its conduits num num its pit labelling num num num not used num installation num num notices num num conflict with other buried services num num public safety num num clearing num num trenching num num road crossings num num rock excavation num num backfill num num reinstatement and cleanup num num its cable pits num num its conduits num num its cable route markers marking tape num num testing of conduits num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num asbuilt information num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num cable conduits pits for intelligent transport systems general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and installation of underground cable conduits pits and route markers and associated equipment for running communications and electrical cables for intelligent transport systems its .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australiannew zealand standards asnzs num conduits and fittings for electrical installations asnzs num saa wiring rules as num num access covers and grates as num num hot dipped galvanizing zinc coatings asnum num slip resistance classifications of new pedestrian surface materials other standards austel technical standard num installation requirements for customer cabling wiring rules ansisctenum specification for underground enclosure integrity main roads specifications specification num traffic specification num clearing specification num earthworks specification num culverts num num not used main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num products and materials num materials and workmanship num .
all work relating to cable conduits for electrical purposes as detailed on the drawings shall be carried out in accordance with asnzs num .
asnzs num num .
all work related to conduits for communication purposes as detailed on the drawings shall be carried out in accordance with australian communications authority regulations .
aca regulations num .
the requirements of the power supply authority and the telecommunication authority and any other body or bodies having jurisdiction over such works in western australia and the further requirements of this specification shall also be satisfied .
authorities num .
where any apparent discrepancy or contradiction occurs between this specification and the aforementioned standards and regulations this specification shall take precedence .
precedence num proprietary articles num .
where any proprietary article is mentioned in these documents sole preference to any named material or equipment is not intended .
preference num .
the contractor shall submit to the superintendent details of material or equipment where they are different to that which is specified .
the characteristics of type quality appearance finish method of construction and or performance shall not be less than that specified and the contractor shall demonstrate conformance to the requirements of the specification and the drawings .
the contractor shall allow up to num days for assessment of the proposal .
substitution and conformance num .
prior to the purchase of alternative material or equipment the contractor shall obtain the superintendents written approval .
hold point num its cable pits num .
cable pits shall be made of precast concrete glass reinforced polyester grp resin or high density polyethylene hdpe unsupported and structurally tested certified and badged for the required loading .
see also section num item num .
they shall be fitted with heavy duty well fitting metal or composite resin fill crf lockable by padlocks lids as num certified and badged class b num kn .
cable pit type num .
the cable pit type used shall consider the intended application .
where pits are to be installed over existing conduits with optical fibre already installed or over blown fibre tubes where the integrity of some fibre runs needs to be maintained the installed pits shall be of a separable or segmented construction to facilitate this pit application main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num requirement thus not affecting the structural integrity of the cable pit .
num .
the locking mechanism may reside in the lid in a separate lid section or can be incorporated in the pit structure .
the securing mechanism for the lid to the pit shall directly engage the outside edges of the lid with the side of the pit or with the side of a separately secured lid section .
a securing mechanism that does not directly lock down or latch at least two opposing sides of the lid shall not be deemed to meet these requirements .
pit locking main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
as a minimum requirement the pit and lid tested as a completed assembly shall withstand a loading of at least num kn conforming to the class b rating specified in as num num table num. and tested in the following configurations table num load testing details and requirements test sequence test configuration requirements vertical centre load num applications of num kn applied at a rate not to exceed num kn per minute followed by num application of num kn at a rate not to exceed num kn per minute in free air .
load applied to the geometric centre of the product assembly by a num mm by num mm steel load application plate with num mm soft plywood layer between product and plate .
the lid shall not deflect more than conum on the first num kn load application and have no more than conum permanent deflection after the fifth load application .
there shall be no structural damage of any part of the assembly after the last application of num kn load .
sidewall vertical load num applications of num kn applied at a rate not to exceed num kn per minute followed by num application of num kn at a rate not to exceed num kn per minute in free air .
load applied to the centre of the product assembly sidewall with the longest axis by a num mm by num mm steel load application plate with num mm soft plywood layer between product and plate such that half of the plate is engaged with the vault lid or nummm by nummm loading plate engagement .
the load shall be applied in the geometric centre of the engaged portion of the load application plate .
the lid shall not deflect more that conum on the first num kn load application and have no more than conum permanent deflection after the fifth load application .
there shall be no structural damage of any part of the assembly after the last application of num kn load .
sidewall lateral pressure test num applications of num kn applied at a rate not to exceed num kn per minute in free air followed by a single application of num kn load .
load is applied laterally to the longest sidewall by a steel plate num mm by num mm bearing against a soft medium such as sand to ensure uniform pressure to the sidewall .
the maximum deflection of the vault wall shall not exceed num mm per num mm of average sidewall length at numkn.the assembly shall not have structural damage after the num kn load .
higher ratings may need to be specified based on the pit location and the likelihood of larger and heavier vehicles being driven over the pit .
pit lid loadings main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num asnum num includes ratings of up to num kn loading for class g. to meet the loading requirements it is expected that the top of the pit would be strengthened as part of the design either with an increased material width nominally nummm surrounding the lid or by a reinforcing frame .
given that the lid loadings are transferred to the pits the design construction mode and material manufacture and installation of the pits shall be such that they can accommodate the specified forces without damage or distortion .
co used above refers to the circular opening of the pit and is defined in asnz num paragraph num and shown in figure num of the specification .
the following procedures and test methods shall be used to perform the test sequences noted above vertical centre load a num mm x num mm x num mm steel plate will be placed on a num mm x num mm x num .
num mm soft plywood layer and be located at the centre of the enclosure lid oriented as indicated in figure num .
the full magnitude of the cyclic load will be applied over the centre of the plate for num seconds and then removed .
the loading and unloading rate shall not exceed num kn per minute .
this cycle is repeated num more times after which the final maximum load is applied for num seconds and then removed .
figure num vertical centre load test configuration main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num sidewall vertical load a num mm x num mm x num mm steel plate will be placed on a num mm x num mm x num .
num mm soft plywood layer and be located at the geometric centre of the longest axis of the vault such that half of the plate is engaged with the pit lid and the other half overhangs the pit lid or nummm by nummm loading plate engagement with the lid as shown in figure num .
the full magnitude of the cyclic load will be applied over the centre of the engaged portion of the plate for num seconds and then removed .
the loading and unloading rate shall not exceed num kn per minute .
this cycle is repeated num more times after which the final maximum load is applied for num seconds and then removed .
figure num sidewall vertical load test configuration main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num table num application chart application reference specification spec .
level load requirement loading plate loading level ultimate load requirements cyclic pedestrian light traffic areas accessible to non commercial vehicles including footways and light tractor pathways .
as num class b vertical centre load sidewall vertical load num mm by num mm steel plate with nummm plywood interface layer num x numkn num kn max deflection after first cyclic load conum max permanent deflection after last cyclic load conum .
no structural damage after ultimate load medium dutyslow traffic in road areas accessible to slow moving commercial vehicles as num class c vertical centre of lid lid and frame only num mm by num mm steel plate with nummm plywood interface layer num x num kn num kn max deflection after first cyclic load conum max permanent deflection after last cyclic load conum no structural damage after ultimate load main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num heavy duty traffic in road carriageway s and roads open to commercial vehicles as num class d vertical centre of lid lid only num mm by num mm steel plate with nummm plywood interface layer num x numkn num kn max deflection after first cyclic load conum max permanent deflection after last cyclic load conum no structural damage after ultimate load num .
alternative materials for the pit and lid can be approved by the contract superintendentmanager in consultation with the asset manager traffic systems .
consideration of these alternatives may be based on the following factors a chemical and biological inertness b low fluid absorption c durability and resistance to weathering and ultraviolet radiation uv d structural properties load bearing capacity and resistance to distortion .
e hardness ability to be cut and drilled with masonry tools f thermal performance at high and low temperatures g electrical conductivity and dielectric properties h weight in any case lifting equipment commensurate with the weight should be used for handling the use of alternative materials shall take into consideration the site soil conditions and specified loading requirements .
typical alternatives could include hdpe andor composite materials such as glass reinforced polyester resin grp .
materials num pit lids shall have a slip classification of w when tested according to the wet pendulum test or b when tested according to the wet barefoot requirements as described in the as num specification .
num .
preformed pits shall be designed and manufactured to suit the intended use .
prior to acceptance by main roads documentation shall be supplied outlining the structural design and the materials used in the product .
this documentation shall include but not be limited to structural calculations specifications certified test results to verify approvals documentation main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num product performance and longevity .
information should also be supplied on specific installation requirements to ensure optimum product performance .
num .
the manufacturer andor supplier shall include instructions for initial and periodic maintenance as necessary for the pits lid and locking mechanism .
the requirement or availability of any special tools shall be included .
instructions maintenance num .
generally the nominal pit sizes to be used are mrwnum mrwnum mrwnum mrwnum mrwnum mrwnum as outlined as follows table num nominal pit sizes nominal internal dimensions mm product model length width depth mrwnum num num num mrwnum num num num mrwnum num num num mrwnum num num num mrwnum num num num mrwnum num num num the sizes tabulated are the nominal minimum internal dimensions of the listed pits .
as a guide the project supervisor may approve the use of a pit that may have some dimensions smaller than the specified nominal size by no more than num mm .
vault extensions might be required when added depth is required .
extensions when used must be secured onto the bottom of the pit .
pit sizes num .
for the mrw concrete pits two drainage holes of nominal nummm diameter shall be provided in the base of each cable pit located approximately nummm from each end on the central long axis .
the mrw hpde pits are to have a clearance between the floor and the sidewalls of the pit that allow the drainage of water .
drainage holes num .
where the use of highdensity polyethylene hdpe pits has been approved the product would be subject to meeting structural requirements that will depend on soil conditions and preparation associated with installation .
hdpe pit structural requirement num .
when the mrw concrete pits are used a plinth shall be constructed in accordance with drawing num and shall have a minimum num day compressive concrete strength of num mpa .
when using the mrw hdpe pits configured with composite resin fill crf lids a composite raising ring of integral construction may be used in lieu of a hdpe and concrete pits main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num separate concrete surround .
the ring must be secured to the top of the pit .
the pit ring and lid as an assembly shall carry the required loads as detailed in the application chart of num above .
there may still be a project specific requirement to install pits with concrete surrounds or within a concrete pad or paved area .
this requirement should be confirmed by the project manager .
num .
unless otherwise specified pit lids must be badged and fully certified to as num num .
pit lids shall be padlockable type num to nummm tread patterned hot dipped galvanised steel to as num num .
composite resin fill lids shall meet asnum slip resistance standards with a w wet pendulum andor b wet barefoot classification .
if the locking mechanism resides in the lid the lock shall be recessed in a chamber hidden behind a steel panel of similar material to the lid .
all metal components of the lid pit and locking mechanism shall be hot dipped galvanised steel to as num num or marine grade stainless steel .
pit lids steel num .
alternative pit lid material and construction may be approved by the project superintendentmanager in consultation with the asset manager traffic systems .
such alternatives could include composite resin fill hdpe or separate lid sections such as a combination of a as num num galvanised steel lid with a concrete filled galvanised steel aluminium tray lid provided that the loading construction performance and locking requirements of this specification are met .
all lids shall be lockable with either a recessed padlock as discussed in paragraph num above for high security or a captured l bolt lock for medium security applications .
pit lid alternatives num .
for pit lids including lids incorporating the locking mechanism the lid surface shall have no hole larger than nummm diameter with the locking chamber closed .
alternative lifting methods such as magnets may be used in place of lifting holes to access the locking chamber under a spring loaded cover .
the locking mechanism cover plate shall not be secured by screws .
all lids shall allow for safe and practical lifting .
requirement for special tools if any should be identified .
no lifting hole num .
the pit locking mechanism whether located in the pit or the lid shall be supplied and fitted with a type num yale brass padlock with stainless steel shackles and must utilise the main roads secure restricted copy locking system .
details of the locking system should be obtained from the project superintendent manager .
padlocks pit locking num .
pit gaskets are to be installed for sealing and prevention of sharps and other hazardous material from being inserted into the pit .
gaskets shall be secured to the lids in such a way that they remain with the lid upon removal of the lid from the pit .
as an alternative mrw pits may have containment receivers on all open holes making the use of gaskets unnecessary .
pit gaskets num .
suppliers of mrw pits covers raising rings and accessories shall issue a warranty for the installed pit assembly for a period of seven years from the time of purchase against damage due to normal use in field installations assuming the following conditions warranty main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num pit components and assembly are certified by an independent test laboratory for performance to the requirements of this specification .
num component selection of the pit assembly must be in compliance with the manufacturers recommended practice and application chart of this specification .
field deployment of mrw pits must comply with mainroads design requirements and specific infield criteria .
num installation of the pit assembly is completed according to the installation instructions contained in this specification .
num product is used as designed for the application ..
product abuse or misapplication is not covered .
num if pit product or pit component becomes damaged within the warranty period the component will be replaced free of charge to mainroads .
the warranty expressly does not include labour or travel costs associated with pit or pit component replacement .
freight costs to transport replacement items to mainroads will be the responsibility of the manufacturer .
num its conduits num .
all conduits shall comply with the requirements of asnzs num .
asnzs num num .
all rigid upvc electrical conduits shall be of nummm diameter heavy duty compliant for underground use and shall be orange in colour .
orange conduit num .
all rigid upvc communication conduits shall be of nummm diameter heavy duty and comply with austel technical specification ts num compliant for underground use and shall be white in colour .
conduits for the main backbone shall be num mm diameter but may be reduced to nummm diameter for branch connections to nodes and field devices such as controllers and cctv .
white conduit num .
only rigid upvc conduit fittings shall be used and all joints cemented using the manufacturers recommended adhesive .
cemented joints num .
where a thread is required on a conduit a suitable adaptor shall be cemented to the conduit .
threads num its pit labelling num .
its pit markers shall be fixed to the plinth surround of the cable pit with four brass or stainless steel countersunk screws and a suitable outdoor adhesive .
the pit marker shall have the pit number engraved onto the plate in accordance with main roads drawing num num .
where there is no separate plinth fitted the label should be attached as above to the upper surface of the pit side otherwise with the approval of the project superintendentmanager to the pit lid .
pit label main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num num not used installation num notices num .
the contractor shall lodge all notices required by the power supply authority and any other authority having jurisdiction over the installation and pay any fees required .
notices and fees num conflict with other buried services num .
prior to commencing any work the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that all underground utilities have been identified located and all necessary approvals from relevant service authorities have been obtained .
hold point num .
for drainage pipes and other services shown on the drawings in close proximity to conduit routes manual excavation may be necessary .
manual excavation num public safety num .
the contractor shall progress the works such that the length of open trench is kept to a minimum .
no open trenches shall be left unattended and shall be filled and compacted at the end of each day .
open trench num .
where necessary control of traffic including pedestrians and cyclists shall be undertaken by the contractor in accordance with specification num traffic and any appropriate and relevant australian standards applicable to traffic management .
traffic control num clearing num .
clearing shall be undertaken in accordance with specification num clearing .
clearing num trenching num .
the base of trenches shall be free of debris stones and sharp objects .
debris num .
excavations in proximity to paved areas shall be suitably shored to prevent the sides of the excavation from collapsing .
paved areas shall not be undermined by excavations from work under the contracts .
any damage caused shall be treated as a non conformance .
shoring num .
where trenching is shared with a telecommunications carrier the location of the shared trench with its associated pits and services shall be clearly identified .
details of requirements and responsibilities would be covered by an appropriate shared trenching agreement between main roads wa and the telecommunications carriers .
the communications infrastructures should meet the agreed shared trenching main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num requirements .
shared trenching arrangements may be negotiated with the contract superintendentmanager in consultation with the asset manager traffic systems .
agreements would be signed by main roads at executive level .
num road crossings num .
new road crossings for the cable conduits shall be installed at the locations shown on the drawings .
the work shall include installation of bored sleeves locations num rock excavation num .
trench excavation in rock shall be carried out in accordance with specification num earthworks .
rock excavation num backfill num .
excavations not in paths or roadway shall be backfilled and compacted to match the surrounding soil density and graded to match surrounding surface level .
the top nummm layer above the top of the conduits shall be top soil to match existing surrounding material .
where there is insufficient viable top soil available on site suitable material may be sourced elsewhere .
compaction num .
prior to backfilling any trenches the contractor shall certify that the conduits have been installed in accordance with the contract and as built records of the location of the conduits have the superintendents approval .
hold point num .
backfilling and compaction under paths or roadways shall be done in accordance with specification num culverts .
num reinstatement and cleanup num .
pavement surfaces including concrete or brick paved areas and pathways shall be reinstated to the satisfaction of the superintendent .
surface reinstatement num its cable pits num general num .
the maximum distance between cable pits shall be num metres .
every fourth pit i.e .
pits at approximately num metre intervals shall be a large mrwnum size to allow for the coiling of additional cable .
these distances are applicable for optical fibre cable drawn in conduit .
num .
where blown fibre is installed the distance between pits may be extended to a nominal num metres coinciding with vehicle detector locations where applicable .
pit spacing for blown fibre may extend beyond this to a nominal num metres where there is no requirement for field devices within this spacing .
pit sizes will normally depend on project specific requirements .
with the pits often coinciding blown fibre pits main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num with device locations and the reduced need for intermediate drawing pits the mrwnum size would normally be required .
some mrwnum pits at specific locations may also be required .
num .
cable pits shall not be installed in locations subject to vehicular traffic .
the pits should however be within num metres of a location where a splicing van can be safely parked .
vehicular traffic num .
all foreign material including sand and dirt shall be removed from the pit after installation .
foreign material num .
all pits shall have a minimum depth of no less than nummm below the finished ground surface level .
depth num .
the top of each pit shall be installed to the horizontal plane across each axis except as required by items num and num below .
num .
in nonpaved areas the top of each pit shall be above the design surface level or natural level by nummm nummm with the localised soil within num metre graded up to the top of the pit .
nontrafficable areas num .
when installed in paved areas pit lids shall be at the same level as the surrounding pavement surface and positioned flush with the surrounding pavement surface to avoid the edge becoming a tripping hazard .
paved areas num .
the pit gasket shall be installed directly under the lid and rest on the pit lip .
when a pit containment receiver is used in the lifting holes no gasket is required .
pit gasket num .
pits shall be positioned with the largest dimension running parallel to a reference line such as a path boundary kerb line or conduit run .
orientation num .
pit location should take into consideration other utilities and services .
it should not be located over other services without the written approval of the relevant authority .
other utilities num .
generally pit location should take into consideration serviceability and access requirements .
pits should be placed where they can adequately be accessed by maintenance personnel .
they should not be placed where they create a hazard either for personnel accessingservicing the pit or others .
maintainability hazard avoidance num hdpe pits num .
mrw hdpe pits may be installed by opening the ground to proper dimensions and placing a foundation of crushed rock in the bottom of the hole placing the pit assembly with a floor on the crushed rock backfilling and tamping the soil as detailed as following hdpe pit installation num the perimeter of excavation should be approximately nummm to nummm longer and wider than external dimensions of mrw pit whilst depth should be approximately nummm to nummm deeper than the depth of mrw pit being installed .
pit excavation main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num excavate the site using hand or mechanical methods ensuring that the bottom of the excavation is level and conforms with general slope of ground level .
num bed the mrw pit on layer of fine crushed rock nummm or less to a depth of nummm to nummm to prevent subsidence and assist drainage .
the rock shall be free of soil and organic material .
alternatively a dry mix of cement and crushed rock in a ratio of num may be used where higher lateral loads are anticipated .
in circumstances where other services are located underneath the mrw pit place approved mechanical protection below foundation covering complete base area of the pit .
preparing pit foundation num mrw pit cover and floor should be installed and secured on body prior to placing pit into position andor backfilling .
place the assembled pit into the excavation using appropriate handling method or aid .
once pit and lid are placed in position adjust the height and top of the pit so that it is level with surrounding footwaydriveway or ground surface .
centre the pit in the excavation in line with the conduit entries and parallel to the edge of the footway or driveway paving .
placing pit in excavation num ensure top of the pit is as per final ground level and allow for the correct depth of footway or driveway to the edge of the pit .
a discard rocks larger than nummm from the backfill material .
b match level and surface grade to surrounding area .
c remove excess excavated material from the site .
d backfill around the pit using the finer excavated material in nummm deep layers tamping each layer either by hand or using a mechanical tamper .
e ensure backfill flows into mrw pit rib pockets to secure pit into position .
installed pit is as follows backfilling main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num figure num installed hdpe pit .
num its conduits num .
all conduits shall be installed at a depth not less than nummm below the finished ground surface level .
installation location num .
the bottom of cable conduits entering cable pits shall enter at a distance of no less than nummm from the bottom of the cable pit .
see drawing num .
conduit entry num .
the bottom of cable conduits entering cable pits shall enter at a distance of no greater than nummm from the top of the cable pit .
see drawing num .
num .
conduits shall be located not less than num metres behind the kerb line or shoulder where applicable except where shown on the drawings .
distance from kerb line num .
the conduits shall be as far as practicable in a direct line between pits .
conduit alignment num .
the separate conduits such as for communications and power as installed under this contract shall remain segregated and not cross over .
for example if the power conduit is on the side closest to the carriageway it shall remain this way and the corresponding pits shall also be the closest to the carriageway .
num .
notwithstanding the other clauses of this contract the conduit may after receiving the superintendents approval be placed on a radial alignment to avoid subterranean obstructions with a minimum radius of num m num .
where the conduits enter the cable pits a clearance hole num nummm to suit the conduit size shall be cut in the pit or panel insert clearance hole main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num using a hole cutter or similar tool .
pits with holes knocked in with a hammer or similar tool shall be rejected .
only one hole for each conduit entering the box shall be cut .
pits designed with rectangular blockouts for the use of hdpepvs panel insets can be utilised provided conduit entries are in accordance with this clause and the panel is firmly sealed to the blockout edges .
num .
the conduit shall be sealed to the pit with silastic or similar approved sealant .
sealing num .
a bellmouth shall be fitted to the end of each conduit within the cable pit .
bell mouth num .
approved under road boring techniques shall be used for road crossings under existing road pavement and railway reserves .
trenching methods are not allowed .
road crossings num .
seven num days prior to any boring activity the contractor shall submit the proposed boring methodology plant and equipment the extent of the site preparations required to undertake the works and the procedures that shall be followed to install conduits to line and level to the superintendent for approval .
boring notification num .
a numcore polyethylene or polypropylene rope with num mm nominal diameter and blue yellow in colour shall be installed in each conduit and suitably anchored at each end .
draw rope num .
conduits to be installed in existing ducts under the roadway shall be capped at each end prior to installation to prevent foreign material entering the conduit .
special care shall be taken at all times to ensure that all conduits are free of foreign material .
conduits to be kept clear num .
conduits with foreign material inside shall be deemed to be nonconforming until all foreign material is fully removed or a replacement conduit is installed .
non conforming conduits num .
conduit entry and exit points for the optical fibre shall be parallel with the long axis of the pits at opposite ends .
side entry to pits or entry of conduits at right angles is not allowed .
large radius sweeping bends shall be used in lieu of right angle entryexit conduits .
conduit entries num its cable route markers marking tape num .
the location of all underground conduits shall be indicated by cable markers mounted on posts nummm above ground to top of sign .
a post bollard bearing the cable route marker shall be located at each cable pit and placed between the cable pit and direction of possible traffic encroachment within several metres of cable pit .
posts shall be concreted to ensure stable footing .
post mounted cable route markers num .
the its cable route marker shall be adhesively attached to a post or bollard in accordance with main roads drawing number num .
num .
each marker shall be inscribed with the telephone number main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num num num and dial before you dig number num .
num .
the post or bollard shall be of durable materials of ultra violet resistant heavyduty plastic aluminium or galvanised steel .
postbollard num .
where a metal bollard is used it shall be a num x num x num rhs nummm long and finished in matt golden yellow ynum in accordance with as num with a yellow cap inserted into the top of the post or bollard .
num .
where longitudinal spacing allows markers shall be placed close to fences or other fixed structures to avoid damage by maintenance or other vehicles .
nummm of post shall be buried in ground leaving nummm above ground .
posts shall be concreted to ensure stable footing .
placement num .
markers shall not obstruct access for pedestrians cyclists or vehicles .
obstruction of access num .
communications marking tape continuously labelled for communications or nominal nummm width shall be laid in the trench num mm above the its communications conduit by the contractor together with tracer wire for the entire route .
the marking tape shall comply with the australiannew zealand standard asnzs num .
num testing of conduits num .
the contractor shall test conduits after trenches have been filled and pits installed .
the test shall be undertaken by drawing a test mandrel through the conduit .
the test mandrel shall be nummm long and num of the nominal internal diameter of the conduit .
conduit failing the testing shall be made good by the contractor .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num asbuilt information num .
the contractor shall supply as built drawings conforming to main roads western australia autocad drawing standards .
asbuilt drawings num .
the contractor shall make an accurate record of all changes where the actual installation differs from that shown in the contract drawings and specification .
num .
drawings shall be supplied in hard copy and electronic format autocad num .
num num not used main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contract specific requirements num num not used main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num guidance notes delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference all edits to downloaded tdp documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
deletions shall be struck through e.g .
example .
insertions shall be in italics e.g .
example .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted then the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
the custodian of this specification is the asset manager traffic systems .
num .
size and number of conduits each project will need discussion with the asset manager traffic systems to determine the size and number of conduits to be installed .
num .
road crossings num the location number and type of road crossings to be confirmed by the author .
num .
design considerations configuration of its conduits and cable pits num conduits shall be run to enable cables to be drawnin after installation with sufficient accessible cable pits to be used for this purpose .
num .
a single nummm diameter white conduit for fibre optic telecommunication cable and a single nummm diameter orange conduit for electrical power cable shall be installed below ground in a straight line between cable pits along the cable route in the configuration shown in main roads drawing number num .
alternative configurations and arrangements as with the use of brown fibre may be approved by the project superintendentmanager in consultation with the asset manager traffic systems .
num .
except where shown on the drawings cable pits for each of the conduits shall be located at intervals to allow for hauling of the cable and connection to terminal equipment .
main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
existing road crossings for cable conduits are at locations and at depths below the pavement as shown on the drawings .
the crossings consist of one or more nummm concrete pipes extending num metre either side of the roadway .
heavyduty underground conduits shall be used to segregate cables through the concrete pipes .
num .
cable pits shall be provided at the following specific locations a each side of under road crossings .
b nominated locations as shown on the drawings .
c changes in direction of conduit alignment of more than ten degrees .
d interfaces between different types of cable routes .
e every num metres or less except for blown fibre installations where the spacing may be between nummetres and num metres depending on device connection requirements .
num .
one mrwnum cablejointing pit shall be located at every fourth pit location .
one mrwnum cablejointing pit shall be located at each side of underroad crossings .
all other pits shall be mrwnum cable hauling pits .
except where shown on the drawings the cable pits for each conduit route shall be located adjacent to each other a minimum of num metres apart longitudinally and offset to allow the other conduit route to pass .
see main roads drawing number num .
the intention of this requirement is to allow the conduits to be laid side by side in the trench whilst ensuring that the two types of cable are completely segregated .
num .
where the work involves the relocation of existing its conduits the use of mrwnum type pits in lieu of mrwnum pits may be specified to allow the reuse of pits andor lids if this is an option .
main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contract specific requirements to add or delete the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
none at this time .
main roads western australia specification num cable conduitspits for its page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification amendment checklist specification name no num revision no ____title cable conduits for its project manager name _____________signature ___________date________ checked by name _______________signature ______________date________ contract no ______contract description ________________________________ item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked change mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materialsproductsclauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from mcp .
num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection testing parameters included in spec num test methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date _______________ main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num optical fibre installations copyright main roads western australia main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num optical fibre installations revision register date clause number description of revision authorised by all specification created mtmoa main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num product and materials num num general num num num not used num design requirements num num general num num maintenance considerations num num conduit duct selection num num route selection num num subducting num num num not used num cable installation requirements num num general num num conduit duct cleaning num num cable hauling equipment num num hauling eyes num num ropes for hauling optical fibre cables num num cable crush and bend radii num num installation of new cables in occupied conduit ductsnum num hauling care of existing plant num num num not used num closure fobot installation requirements num num general num num cable identification and labelling requirements num num underground splice closures num num fobots and patch panels num num other fobots num num patch cords and leads num num num not used num testing and acceptance criteria num num cable acceptance num num otdr link loss num num irregularity check num num splice loss location num num lspm instertion loss num num preterminated connector loss num num commissioning acceptance test results num num equipment acceptance and commissioning num num inspection and test plan num num testing sequence num num num not used num main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num as built and handover requirements num num asbuilt information num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num optical fibre installations general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of design supply installation testing and commissioning documentation and handover requirements of main roads wa optical fibre installations .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australiannew zealand standards asnzs isoiec num telecommunications installations implementation and operation of customer premises cabling .
part num testing of optical fibre cabling isoiec num mod asacif snum installation requirements for customer cabling wiring rules asnzs num optical fibre communication cabling systems safety .
asnzs iec num safety of laser products safety of optical fibre communication systems ofcs asnzs num telecommunications installation generic cabling for commercial premises asnzs num electrical installations wiring rules asnzs num electromagnetic compatibility emc generic emission standards residential commercial and light industry as num software test documentation as num steel structures asnzs cispr num information technology equipment radio disturbance characteristics limits and methods of measurement asnzs iso num quality systems model for quality assurance in production installation and servicing asnzs num lightning protection main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num other standards itut gnum characteristics of a singlemode optical fibre and cable tablenumg.num.d attributes .
iec num optical fibres measurement methods and test iec num optical fibres product specifications sectional specifications for class b singlemode fibre .
iec num optical fibres product specifications outdoor cable .
main roads specifications specification num cable conduit for intelligent transport systems num definitions num .
applicable terms and definitions in addition to those in main roads glossary of terms are listed below acma australian communications media authority amts asset manager traffic systems elv extra low voltage as defined in asnzs num fist fibre infrastructure system technology fobot fibre optic break out tray frp fibre reinforced plastic itp inspection and test procedure its intelligent transport systems lspm light source and power meter mbr minimum bend radius nata national association of testing authorities od outside diameter otdr optical time domain reflectometer smof single mode optical fibre sz reversed helical stranding tcs traffic control system toc traffic operations centre main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num backbone refers to the optical fibre cable that provides communication connections between its node cabinets and or its communications cabins to toc as well as communication connections via branch cables from its field cabinets to its node cabinets its communications cabins and toc generally num fibre cables and greater .
branch cable to describe an optical fibre cable from an underground splice closure or fobot to an its field cabinet its node cabinet its communications cabinet or a link cable between splice closures generally from num up to num fibre cables external loose tube cable a cable that contains optical fibres in loose tubes .
generally these tubes are laid up with sz stranding reversed helical stranding around the fibre reinforced plastic frp central strength member for ease of mid span access jointing .
cables generally consist of num fibres per loose tube and where required filler tubes .
num num not used product and materials num general num .
all optical fibre cables shall be external loose tube smof type unless otherwise specified .
loose tube num .
all pigtails and patch cord leads shall be smof type unless otherwise specified .
smof num .
all pits conduits optical fibre cable and equipment shall specification num a comply with mrwa specification num cable conduits pits for its and b meet all functional requirements when installed at the specified locations .
num .
comply with applicable australian standards or the appropriate international standard .
australian standards num num not used design requirements num general num .
this section provides supporting information to be taken into consideration when undertaking the design of the optical fibre system .
it aims to ensure that new fibre routes make best use of existing and new infrastructure to maintain the integrity of new cables .
main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
for optical fibre backbone cable installations a minimum numm of cable shall be stored coiled in cnum pits no greater than numm apart for future installation requirements .
longitudinal spare cable num .
for optical fibre cables to be entered into an underground splice closure a minimum numm plus numm of cable for jointing requirements shall be provided .
underground enclosure spare num .
for optical fibre cables to be entered into a fobot a minimum numm of cable shall be stored coiled in the nearest adjacent pit plus a minimum numm of cable for splicing requirements shall be provided .
fobot spare num .
for optical fibre cables in each change of direction pit road crossing etc .
a minimum of numm of cable shall be stored coiled in each change of direction pit .
change of direction num .
optical fibre backbone cables shall contain a minimum num fibres .
to extend an existing backbone cable written approval is required from the mrwa amts for the installation of a new optical fibre backbone cable that has less than num fibres but the same amount or greater fibre cores as the existing optical fibre backbone cable .
backbone size num .
optical fibre branch cables the design shall include sufficient capacity so that no more than num of the new optical fibre cable cores shall be used at commissioning .
branch size num .
field cabinet cable asset numbering fibre cores switch ports and ip addressing shall be allocated by the mrwa amts or mrwa amts nominated representative using the appropriate allocation request form .
allocation requests num maintenance considerations num .
the following shall be strictly in accordance with this standard a route design b route marking i.e .
marker posts and detectable warning tape c route reinstatement d cable type selection and e asset documentation .
num conduit duct selection num .
to minimise the risk of damage to optical fibre cables from hauling cables or removing cables the following guidelines shall be used in descending order of preference for selecting a conduit .
order of preference a choose a conduit occupied by only optical fibre cables .
b choose a conduit occupied by optical fibre or copper communications cables .
main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num c choose a vacant conduit .
num route selection num .
when selecting a conduit from a nest of conduits or from a different route mixing backbone feeder tie cables and subduct in one conduit shall be avoided .
shared conduit num .
the route with the lowest run of conduits shall be selected .
lowest run num .
where there is a choice in alternative conduit routes the following guidelines in order of preference shall be used for selecting the conduit run for the installation of an optical fibre cable .
the route selected shall have route preferences a the greatest depth of cover b the shortest distance num subducting num .
subducting as part of optical fibre cable installation is not the standard practice for mrwa fibre network .
subducting shall only be used after receiving written approval from the mrwa amts or mrwa amts nominated representative to do so .
approval for subducting num .
when approved subducting shall only be used in the following situations a significant changes in levels potential damage to the cable within the pit or duct entry or for security issues b there are no nonsubducted optical fibre already installed in the duct c where approval has been granted for other government departments or telecommunications carriers to install cables in mrwa its pits andor conduit .
d significant changes in levels potential damage to the cable within the pit of duct entry for security reasons .
e there is no nonsubducted optical fibre already installed in the duct num .
only one optical fibre cable shall be installed in an empty sub duct and under no circumstances shall a second cable of any type be drawn into the same sub duct or into any other occupied subduct i.e .
overhauling of cables in subduct is not permitted .
subduct shall be white or grey in colour and be clearly labelled as per clausesnum splice closures fobots and cabinet labelling and num optical fibre hauling and intermediate pits cable labelling .
sub duct labelling main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num flexible secondary protection num .
where subduct is unsuitable but the above concerns are present then flexible conduit shall be installed .
two types of flexible conduit are currently approved for use within the mrwa tcs network flexible secondary protection a pipe agflow num mm b conduit pvc corrugated white nummm num num not used cable installation requirements num general num .
all external optical fibre loose tube cables shall loose tube fibre a be of dielectric construction i.e .
non metallic b include a fibre reinforced plastic frp central strength member c be water blocked without the use of petroleum based jelly filling compound to prevent the ingress of water and other impurities d have a blue outer nylon jacket and e be sheath marked containing the cable information every numm .
num .
have both the metre mark readings at each end and the serial item code on the cable sheath recorded at time of installation and submitted with as built drawings .
metre markings num .
all cables shall be labelled as shown in clause num cable identification and labelling requirements .
cable labels num conduit duct cleaning num .
before cable installation conduits ducts shall be clean and free from obstructions .
duct cleaning num cable hauling equipment num .
only nata certified cable hauling equipment is to be used .
nata certification num .
a winch calibrated to numkn shall be used for all cables .
for cables with a hauling tension of num kn or greater a winch must be used .
it shall be equipped with a tension monitor and an automatic shutdown device calibrated and locked to operate when a preset maximum tension of num kn is reached thereby stopping the haul and not exceeding the maximum hauling tension .
hauling tension main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
for cables with a maximum hauling tension less than num kn an approved fusible link with a breaking force less than the stated requirement as measured by a nata certified laboratory shall be used providing approval has been obtained from the principal .
a copy of the certification for the fuse type shall be provided with the commissioning and hand over documents .
num hauling eyes num .
the minimum tensile rating of all hauling eyes shall be equal to num times the cable tensile rating .
hauling eyes rating num .
if hauling eyes are not fitted and wire grips are used extreme care must be taken to avoid cable damage and stripping of the sheath by attaching the correct sized grip in a proper manner .
on completion of the haul at least num m of cable should be removed from the cable end fitted with the wire grip .
num ropes for hauling optical fibre cables num .
only kevlarspectra braided rope shall be used for mechanical hauling of optical fibre cable .
this rope must be manufactured with a braided core of kevlarspectra fibre cordage and braided polyester cover and have an outside diameter of not less than num mm .
mechanical hauling rope num .
the kevlarspectra braided hauling rope shall be at least of sufficient length to always extend between the cable end and the winch with the immediate cable load .
haul rope length num .
where more than one winch is being used on a haul the rope between winches and without the immediate cable load shall be of an approved type other than the kevlarspectra type hauling rope connected to the cable e.g .
double braid hauling rope .
the connection between the hauling ropes must be able to withstand a load in excess of num kn and must provide a smooth profile to avoid any damage to existing cables or ducts .
multiple winches num .
for mechanically drawing in hauling ropes approved hauling rope shall be used e.g .
double braided hauling rope .
mechanical drawing num .
polypropylene rope shall not be used for mechanically hauling optical fibre cable or hauling ropes .
it may be used for manual hauling e.g .
over short sections for feeder cables and cabling within buildings .
polypropylene rope num cable crush and bend radii num .
suitable installation equipment such as cable guides slippers and wheels capstan shall be used so that the dynamic and static bending and crush performance requirements are complied with .
bending and crushing requirements num .
cable rollers systems shall be of such design not to exceed the minimum bending radii mbr and crush performance of cables .
cable rollers num .
when housing cables the mbr and minimum outside loop dimensions must not be exceeded .
minimum outside loop l mbrxnum num x od .
minimum outside loop main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num installation of new cables in occupied conduit ducts num .
the conduit must be proven with a suitable mandrel prior to attempting any hauling .
as a guide where the conduit capacity is questionable e.g .
the aggregated existing plus new cablesubduct diameters exceeds num of the internal diameter of the conduit the conduit must be proven with a suitable mandrel num times the size of the cable .
if this is successful and it can be reasonably assumed there will be no damage to any cables subducts or infrastructure the haul can proceed .
conduit proving num .
if at any stage the proving of the conduit becomes difficult or the conduit can not be proven and there is a possibility of cable damage the conduit must be upgraded conduit upgrading num .
once all sections of the proposed haul have been proven the hauling tensions and lay off points if required shall be determined lay off points num .
pressure roping shall be used in preference to hand rodding to minimise the possibility of intertwining of cables during hauling .
pressure roping num .
a water based cable lubricant that is nontoxic non flammable and compatible with all types of cable sheath shall be used on the cables rope and mandrel when hauling over existing cables .
lubricant num .
existing optical fibre cables shall be restrained from moving in the same direction as the haul .
num .
during the haul supervision shall be provided at entry exit and change of direction locations .
num hauling care of existing plant num .
the existing mrwa tcs network must be cared for at all times and not interfered with during the course of proving conduits the installation of rope andor additional cable .
existing network num .
if the existing cables andor closures need to be moved during work tasks they are to be handled carefully suitably restrained and replaced correctly in the pit on completion of the task .
num .
avoid lacing the rope through existing cable loops as this will cause undue pressure to be inserted upon the cables and joints .
num .
care must be taken to ensure existing cables identification tags joints or other plant are not caught up with and dragged by the hauling rope or cable being installed .
num .
existing cables or subduct shall be constantly observed for movement through dragging .
if there are any significant signs of cable gathering or of cable or subduct movement at any location along the route the haul shall stop immediately and action taken e.g .
reapply lubricants restraint to prevent further movement dragging of the cables or subduct before recommencing the haul .
num num not used main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num closure fobot installation requirements num general num .
only a recognized industry network carrier accredited acma licensed technician shall install any splicing joint closures and fobots .
the accredited licensed technician shall have a minimum of num year experience in the jointing splicing testing and installation of optical fibre cables and associated equipment .
accreditation num .
all cable installation work shall be in accordance with the design documentation and to a standard that will not unduly shorten the life expectancy of any of the components .
life expectancy num .
all cables shall be installed in accordance with the design to facilitate unencumbered maintenance of the modules contained within it .
num .
all installation works shall be coordinated with adjacent works of any description to ensure cables are installed without damage or are not affected in any way by the adjacent works activity .
adjacent works num .
if any of the proposed cable works or alterations is not in agreement with the existing plans the mrwa amts or mrwa amts nominated representative shall be contacted so the problem can be resolved prior to the commencement of the work .
any active services must be noted .
particular care must be taken where active fibre links to core distribution access switches are present on the cable as outages on these systems may affect a significant number of mrwa its assets .
it is important that identification is carried out at both ends of a cable to confirm that no unrecorded fibre transpositions or cable alterations have been made .
active services num .
prior to commencing work on any live cable or fibres a full set of up to date plans and records must be available documentation must be forwarded to the mrwa amts for approval num days prior to the work commencing stating job project number location proposed date time expected duration of outage if any services affected .
written approval must have been received from mrwa amts prior to carrying out the work described .
mrwa toc must be notified prior to and on completion of the work described .
work notification num .
all splicing joint closures fobots shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
manufacturers recommendati on num .
all splicing joint closure fobot manufacturers specified minimum bend radius shall not be exceeded .
minimum bend radius num cable identification and labelling requirements num general num .
cable labelling shall consist of rectangular white pvc tag nummm x nummm x nummm .
main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the details of the cable shall be clearly printed in block letters and numbers between the ridges of the tag with a permanent black marking pen .
num the tags shall be secured to the cable using pvc cable ties with the excess cable tie trimmed off .
num splice enclousre fobot and cabinet cable labelling num all cables shall be clearly marked and identified nummm below all splice closures nummm from fobot entry and nummm above the base of cabinets .
cable in closure markings num .
the tags are to contain the following information as per example figure num a top line cable size b middle line mrwa cable asset number and c bottom line mrwa asset number of where the cable originates .
numf fcnum splnum figure num num optical fibre hauling and intermediate pits cable labelling num .
all cables shall be clearly marked and identified in all haul and intermediate pits the tag shall be located on the centre of the cable between each pit entry .
cable in pit markings num .
the tags are to contain the following information as per example figure num a top line cable size b middle line mrwa cable asset number and c bottom line mrwa asset numbers of where the cable originates terminates .
numf fcnum splnum cabnum figure num num underground splice closures num .
underground splice closures shall have prior approval for use by the mrwa amts or mrwa amts nominated representative .
approvals main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
underground splice closures shall be manufactured and be designed for external use .
external use num .
product specification data sheets shall be provided to mrwa amts prior to approval .
specification datasheets num underground splice closures shall be tested for mechanical electrical and environmental performances adequate for the use in the intended environment .
performance testing num .
the minimum bend radius as specified by the manufacturer of the optical fibre cable shall not be exceeded throughout the closure system under all normal conditions of use .
bend radii num .
underground splice closures shall be designed so as no specialised tools or equipment are required to both open and to seal and be environmentally proofed to ip num rating when sealed .
ip rating num .
the packaging shall be designed to ensure that the underground splice closure and associated materials are not damaged under normal shipping and handling .
equipment shall be inspected prior to installation and shall not be used if damage is evident .
closure damage num .
metal components shall be resistant andor protected against general corrosion and various forms of local corrosion stress corrosion cracking pitting etc ..
corrosion protection num .
underground splice closures shall be capable of accepting an industrywide range of cable sizes and unit configurations .
the housing shall be capable of accepting cable designs of either loose tube blown or slotted fibre cables .
cable size and configuration num .
underground splice closures shall be capable of accommodating splice tray organisers which accept fusion type optical fibre splices .
the splice closure shall have provisions for storing fibre splices in an orderly manner mountings for splice organiser assemblies and space for excess or unspliced fibre .
splice organisers shall be re enterable .
splice tray organisers num .
heat shrinkable splice protectors with a length of nummm to be used unless otherwise specified .
splice protectors num .
underground splice closures shall be capable of accommodating and terminating the strength members of all cables entered into enclosure .
strength members num .
each individual fibre cable entered into the underground splice closure shall be secured to the strength member fixation points .
fixation points num .
underground splice closure reentry and subsequent re assembly shall not require specialised tools or equipment .
further these operations shall not require the use of additional parts other than seals and or heat shrinks .
closure reentry num .
underground splice closures and all cables entered into the closure shall be installed as per the manufactures specifications and main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num installation guidelines .
num fobots and patch panels num all optical fibre cables to be terminated within fobots shall have a front accessible patch panel .
patch panel num .
fobots shall be num rack mountable with provision of up to minimum of num ports and have a front sliding tray access unless otherwise specified .
num rack mountable num all fobots shall have front patching facilities .
patching facilities num .
all fobots in the same cabinet shall be of the same make .
num .
all fobots shall be capable of accommodating and terminating the strength members of all cables entered into the fobots .
strength members num .
each individual fibre cable entered into the fobot shall be secured to the strength member fixation points .
fixation points num .
rubber cable boot cable gland shall be used where cable enters the fobot .
cable glands num .
sufficient internal capacity shall be provided for the orderly storage of a minimum one metre length of each fibre end prior to splicing .
spare cable storage num .
each bundle of unsheathed fibres shall be sleeved in pvc tubing .
num .
all fibre coils shall be wound through internal cable management rings .
management rings num .
all pigtails shall be pvc sheathed with factory terminated sc connectors arranged to mate with the sc through adapters connectors unless otherwise specified .
sc connectors num .
connector loss max numdb per mated through adapters connector .
connector loss num .
all pigtails shall be wound through the internal cable management rings .
num .
all fobots shall have duplex sc through adapters connectors fitted unless otherwise specified .
num .
any unused through adapter connector mounting positions shall be covered with manufacturers blanking plates .
blanking plates num .
one splicing tray cassette shall be used for each fibre tube .
num .
storage of spliced fibres shall only be allowed with no degradation of either the transmission quality or the fibre itself .
num .
no fibres shall exceed the manufacturers specified minimum bending radius .
bend radii main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
easy access and removal of individual splice protectors shall be provided for future rearrangement or maintenance purposes without disturbing adjacent fibres .
num .
heat shrinkable splice protectors with a length of nummm shall be used unless otherwise specified .
splice protectors num .
the fobot patching ports shall be labelled in order to identify each fibre that is terminated on the front of the fobot .
labelling num .
fobot product specification datasheet shall be provided to mrwa amts .
datasheets num other fobots num .
where num rack mountable fobot can not be installed due to cabinet capacity all optical fibre cables ends shall be terminated on a din rail mounted fobots which shall provide sufficient ports for termination of at least num fibres and pigtails per fibre cable .
din rail mounting num patch cords and leads num patch cord and lead length num .
all patch cord leads shall have a minimum numm additional length for storage .
lead length num patch cord and lead management num .
num rack mountable cable management rails shall be provided above and below each fobot installed in node cabinets and scats cabins .
lead management num patch cord and lead storage num .
a num rack mountable front sliding tray patch cord leads management tray shall be installed below the lowest fobot .
additional storage management trays shall be installed if specified on design drawings .
lead storage num .
patch cords leads to or from fobot s shall enter the left hand side of the storage management trays .
num patch cords leads to or from communications equipment shall enter the right hand side of the storage management trays .
num num not used testing and acceptance criteria num cable acceptance num .
cable acceptance shall follow the completion of installation of the endtoend optical fibre link as specified in asnzs isoiec num telecommunications installations implementation and operation of customer premises cabling .
part num testing of optical fibre asnzs isoiec num main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num cabling isoiec num mod .
num otdr link loss num .
all otdr fibre test results shall be recorded and saved with the correctly assigned mrwa asset numbers used to describe end a end b with cursors correctly aligned .
otdr tests num .
all fibres are to be tested utilising twoway otdr link loss ll measurements .
the measurements shall also be carried out on spare fibres within the cable that either terminate at one end only or are provided between jointsplice locations .
twoway measurement num .
an otdr link loss ll measurement shall be performed on all fibres to confirm the integrity of the cable link excluding the performance of the preterminated connector .
fibre integrity num .
on terminated fibres the link loss tests shall be performed after termination of connector which would then include the connector loss being factored in the ll data recording .
the link loss shall be tested and recorded in both directions at wavelengths numnm utilising the otdr twopoint method i.e .
position the first cursor just beyond the front end attenuation saturation dead zone where the trace is linear and position the second cursor at the end of the trace just before the trace begins to rise .
the twoway average link loss ll for a fibre shall be calculated as the average of the measurements .
the twoway average otdr ll shall not exceed the following link loss test maximum loss at num nm ll numl numn num where maximum link loss a ll maximum allowable link loss in db b l the optical link length in km c n number of splices num .
if a fibre fails the otdr link loss after a number of re measurements then a more comprehensive evaluation of the fibre link should be undertaken to determine the high loss i.e .
recheck of any irregularities splice losses and fibre attenuation coefficient dbkm .
test failure num irregularity check num .
all fibres in each section length shall be checked for any irregularities in both directions at wavelengths of numnm and numnm .
the magnitude of irregularities point losses in length shall be calculated as the average of the irregularity loss measured in both directions at wavelengths of numnm and numnm .
irregularities shall not exceed numdb two way average for any wavelength .
test wavelengths num .
the magnitude and distance from each fibre end to an irregularity shall be recorded on a fibre anomaly sheet to be included in the final report .
irregularity locations num .
any point loss that exceeds the above criteria shall be rectified with the fibre subsequently retested .
check failure main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num splice loss location num .
these measurements shall be undertaken for the purpose of ensuring the integrity and quality of splice performance and identifying and documenting optical fibre cable distances to all splice locations to assist in the future location of faults .
splice loss num .
the optical distance and magnitude of all splices shall be measured from both directions at wavelengths of numnm and numnm .
the loss of any splice shall not exceed numdb two way average at numnm and numnm .
test wavelengths num .
any splice loss that exceeds the above criteria shall be re spliced .
if the splice does not improve after two attempts at resplicing and otdr testing confirms that the splice loss is not consistent with a high point loss within the splice enclosure then the splice shall be accepted but reported as a high splice loss .
all splice lossjoint measurements shall be recorded and any reported high splice loss value shall be appropriately marked and reported .
excessive splice loss num lspm instertion loss num .
this measurement shall be undertaken on terminated fibres to verify the overall endtoend power budget level of the entire fibre link .
the insertion loss il for each fibre shall be measured in both directions using a stabilised lspm .
insertion loss num .
these results shall be compared with predictions based on the manufacturers smof geometrical properties and minimum splice loss criteria .
num .
the maximum twoway average insertion loss shall not exceed the following criteria maximum insertion loss a maximum loss at numnm il numl numn numc num b maximum loss at numnm il numl numn numc num where a il maximum allowable insertion loss in db b l optical section link length in km c n number of splices including preterminated connector and d c total number of through connectors .
num .
if a fibre exceeds the acceptance criteria then the insertion loss value shall be appropriately marked e.g .
circled highlighted etc ..
excessive insertion loss num preterminated connector loss main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
this calculation is performed to verify the overall performance of the individual connector pigtail combination situated at either end of the optical fibre link .
num .
for each fibre the delta between the maximum insertion loss average il .
num .
lspm insertion loss clause num less the otdr average link loss ll clause num shall not exceed numdb .
results for all fibre shall be calculated and recorded .
num if the numdb limit is exceeded for any fibre then a more comprehensive evaluation of the individual preterminated connector at both ends will need to be undertaken to determine the high loss i.e .
investigate the launch conditions of each preterminated connector using otdr in high resolution mode .
num commissioning acceptance test results num .
all otdr fibre test results shall be recorded and submitted in both original trace format and pdf .
original trace format in soft copy electronically with original trace format reader and all tested fibres trace results pdfs in both hard and soft copies electronically .
submission num .
all ll il measurements and calculations shall be recorded and submitted on completion in both hard and soft copies electronically .
test result shall be compiled on an excel spread sheet with the correct values entered in the required cells .
a insertion loss results insertion loss measurement two way and average insertion loss results shall be recorded .
b connectorpigtail performance results calculated and shall be recorded and incorporated along with the tabulated insertion loss results above .
num .
any issues and steps taken to correct shall be recorded .
corrections num .
all faulty links found during testing shall be replaced in their entirety .
no lengths of damaged or suspect cable or components shall be left in the system .
cable damaged during installation shall not be reused .
all retest and cable replacement costs where necessary shall be borne by the contactor .
faulty links num equipment acceptance and commissioning num .
factory certification shall be provided for all optical fibre equipment to be supplied and installed and shall be tested in the suppliers factory .
the contractor shall provide a factory quality control testing certificate for all supplied optical fibre equipment to the mrwa amts nominated representative .
factory certification num .
site acceptance testing shall demonstrate the compliance of the fibre installation after all works have been completed .
site acceptance num .
the contractor shall supply all labour materials and equipment required to fully test and commission the installation .
commissioning main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num commissioningacceptance testing shall be carried out in the presence of the mrwa nominated representative .
mrwa shall be notified of testing num hours in advance of testing to allow for mrwa amts nominated representative to be present at testing .
num .
installation andor equipment will be accepted only after satisfactory completion of commissioning tests .
if a test is unsuccessful the equipment shall be repaired and re installed as appropriate and subject to retest until successful .
num .
the cost of any retesting if necessary shall be borne by the contractor .
retesting costs num inspection and test plan num general num .
in addition to the contractors own quality assurance requirements the contractor shall provide a complete itp .
the itp shall include test schedules designed to incorporate the following information quality assurance a name of test and its status original test or repeat due to a previous test failure date time and location of the test b record of all values measured during installationcommissioning c list of test equipment used and statement of software and software version number used d a description of how the test is to be conducted connection to test equipment configuration of test equipment test process num .
the itp shall reference back to this specification to confirm compliance with each individual requirement clause .
num draft submission num .
num days prior to the proposed date for commencement of inspection and testing the contractor shall submit a draft itp for assessment by the mrwa nominated representative .
update the itp based on the requirements of the mrwa nominated representative and conduct inspection and testing in accordance with the plan .
draft itp num undertaking the itp num .
inspect test and tickcross off each item on the itp .
each page of the itp shall be signed and dated by the person conducting the site inspection and testing num .
where a specific item on the itp can not be checked off by the inspection personnel place a cross against the incomplete item note the reason for the omission and identify the required rectification action .
a all crossed items shall be completed before acceptance testing with the mrwa nominated representative .
b on completion the overall itp shall be signed and dated by the contractor .
main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num c forward a scanned electronic copy of the completed signed itp to the mrwa nominated representative .
d on receipt of the itp and supporting details the mrwa nominated representative will confirm dates for acceptance testing .
num testing sequence num .
the contractor shall undertake testing and commissioning in the following sequence testing and commissioning a submit draft inspection and test plan itp b undertake inspection and testing c submit completed itp for review complete any additional items as required num receipt of a the completed signed itp b supporting details and c draft manuals and asinstalled documentation by mrwa nominated representative shall constitute advice by the contractor that the installation is complete and ready for acceptance testing .
mrwa nominated representative will review the completed itp and supporting details and will advise the contractor if any further work or submissions are required prior to acceptance testing .
num .
prior to acceptance testing the contractor shall make all necessary access arrangements and confirm with the mrwa amts nominated representative of the need for and nature of any necessary site inductions .
num .
prior to acceptance testing the contractor shall provide onsite copies of all relevant equipment manuals optical fibre test results and as built red line marked up drawings relating to each specific site .
all relevant equipment manuals optical fibre test results and as built red line marked up drawings relating to each specific site shall be placed in a bnum clear case document folder and left in the document holder provided in the cabinet door or on the cabinet shelf .
relevant documentation num .
during acceptance testing the contractor shall attend site and make available for the use of the mrwa amts nominated representative tools plant equipment operators and escorts as necessary to enable access to all system components .
site access num .
acceptance testing with the mrwa amts nominated representative may include repeat of any or all elements of the itp plus a detailed verification of the correct operation of each device and function .
num .
once the acceptance testing commences the mrwa amts nominated representative reserves the right to delay or abort acceptance testing if delay or abort main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num a the status of the work does not match the status verified by the contractor on the itp b the status of the work does not allow full and complete operation of the system c a component failure renders any part of the system inoperable d the site owneroperator denies access to any part of the works e the works are not accessible due to inadequate or incorrect access provision being made by the contractor f the acceptance testing work can not proceed with reasonable certainty that the installation is in its final state due to outstandingongoing work by the contractor .
num .
if the cause of the delay or cancellation is the within the responsibility of the contractor as assigned under the contract any associated costs will be borne by the contractor .
delay or cancellation num num not used as built and handover requirements num asbuilt information num .
the contractor shall supply as built drawings conforming to main roads western australia autocad drawing standards .
asbuilt drawings num .
the contractor shall make an accurate record of all changes where the actual installation differs from that shown in the contract drawings and specification .
num .
drawings shall be supplied in hard copy and electronic format autocad .
num .
the contractor shall supply copies of all test results as described in this specification .
num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num guidance notes delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference all edits to downloaded tdp documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
deletions shall be struck through e.g .
example .
insertions shall be in italics e.g .
example .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted then the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
the custodian of this specification is the road and traffic engineering electrical engineer main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contract specific requirements to add or delete the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
none at this time .
main roads western australia specification num optical fibre installations page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification amendment checklist specification name no num revision no ____title optical fibre installations project manager name _____________signature ___________date________ checked by name _______________signature ______________date________ contract no ______contract description ________________________________ item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked change mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materialsproductsclauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from mcp .
num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection testing parameters included in spec num test methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date _______________ main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num specification num variable message signs fixed type copyright main roads western australia main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num specification num variable message signs revision register date clause number description of revision authorised by num whole document new specification ee num whole document revised and restructured to match as num ee main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definition of terms num num general num num order of precedence num num not used num supply and arrangement num num mechanical requirements num num electrical requirements num num communications equipment num num markings and labels num num not used num display and optical requirements num num display requirements num num optical requirements num num not used num operation and control num num communication protocol num num not used num environmental requirements num num enclosure protection num num wind loading num num electromagnetic compatibility num num not used num installation num num general installation num num provision for traffic num num products and materials num num mechanical installation num num electrical installation num num communications num num reinstatement and cleanup num num not used num main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num testing and commissioning num num general num num product acceptance testing num num factory acceptance testing num num delivery acceptance testing num num site acceptance testing num num maintenance handover num num documentation num num not used num appendices num annexure numa num annexure numb num annexure numc num specification amendment checklist num main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num specification num variable message signs fixed type general num scope num .
this specification defines the requirements for the supply installation testing and commissioning of variable message signs vms .
the scope of work covered by this specification includes a the supply of the materials for vms housing and associated communication equipment b the installation and workmanship of the vms and connection to power and communication infrastructure c the supply and installation of structural and steelwork for the vms sign d the testing and maintenance of the sign and all communications and associated equipment e the removal andor replacement of vms and related equipment and f the supply of asconstructed documentation and any relevant training information .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below acts and regulations govt .
of western australia office of energy wa electrical requirements electricity act num and associated amendments and regulations and electrical safety act num and associated amendments regulations and codes of practice australiannew zealand standards as num fixed variable message sign as num aluminium and alloys main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num as num fixed platforms walkways stairways and ladders asnzs num vms electrical requirements asnzs num safety of power transformers power supply units and similar asnzs num electrical asnzs num electrical verification asnzs num electrical approval and test asnzs num transformer approval and test asnzs num rcd approval and test asnzs num lighting protection asnzs num electrical conduits asnzs num steel structures asnzs num galvanized coatings other standards acma technical planning guidelines appendix num emission standard for the australian analogue terrestrial television service video characteristics asacif snum installation requirements for customer cabling .
austel technical standard num installation requirements for customer cabling ccitt recommendation gnum characteristics of a single mode optical fibre cable .
ieee num ethernet standards cpcm austelaca customer premises cabling manual .
ts num austelaca technical specifications main roads specifications and documents mrs num intelligent transport systems its policy main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num mrs num asconstructed drawings guidelines dnum guidelines for variable message sign control specification num traffic specification num clearing specification num earthworks specification num culverts specification num safety and traffic barrier systems specification num roadway lighting specification num cable conduits pits for intelligent transport systems its specification num optical fibre installations specification num traffic signals specification num uninterrupted power supply ups specification num earthworks and backfill for structures specification num structural steel specification num antigraffiti materials specifications various num definition of terms all terms and definitions in addition to those provided in asnzs num which apply to this specification are listed below as australian standard asnzs australian and new zealand standard austel australian telecommunication cabinet ground mounted control housing as per asnum contractor the service provider engaged and paid by main roads to engage in the manufacture supply delivery installation and commissioning of the infrastructure and its constituents main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num elv extra low voltage as defined in asnzs num isa integrated services arrangements its intelligent transport systems mrwa main roads western australia pm project manager tcs traffic control system toc traffic operations centre ups uninterruptible power supply num general num .
the vms and all associated equipment supplied shall meet all the requirements of as num unless otherwise specified in this document as num num order of precedence num .
the following order of precedence in descending order of precedence will apply to resolve any ambiguity or discrepancy in the referenced documents and standards to the extent necessary to resolve the conflict ambiguity or discrepancy .
precedence num project specific requirements as approved by asset manager traffic systems num this specification and referenced drawings num main roads standards specifications and guidelines num australian standards specifications and guidelines followed by num other supplementary standards and specifications .
num not used main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num supply and arrangement num mechanical requirements num general num .
the vms shall be designed and manufactured based on the project specific requirements and main roads design guidelines for variable message signs .
num sign enclosure num .
access shall be provided to all internal components of the sign .
access to components num .
the enclosure doors shall be fitted with suitable locks to ensure positive seal .
num .
all locks shall be keyed to mrwa master key no .
num .
locks num .
all hinge pins door stays and associated equipment shall be made from stainless steel .
stainless steel hinge pins and door stays num .
doors shall be fitted with suitable internal stiffeners .
door stiffeners num .
to allow for ease of maintenance in darkness a led or florescent light shall be supplied that is automatically operated when the enclosure door is opened .
the light shall adequately illuminate all internal components .
lighting num sign support structure num .
unless otherwise specified the sign support structure shall be positioned such that the distance between the rightmost side of the sign and right side of the median lane is kept at a minimum of numm on routes where high wide loads are permitted .
this requirement shall be taken into account when the support structure is designed .
this requirement is not applicable to routes where high wide loads are not permitted .
the structure shall also provide a vertical clearance of numm between the sign enclosure and the trafficable surface .
horizontal and vertical clearances num .
vms support structure and all associated hardware shall be supplied under the contract .
the concept design for the support structure shall be approved by main roads in relation to general construction aesthetics and finish .
support structure design approval num .
all poles and supports shall be sufficiently sealed to ensure that moisture running down the side of the column or vermin can not enter the column .
sealing main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num num .
all fastenings shall be stainless steel num or num grade .
fastenings num groundmounted control cabinet num .
the vms sign shall be supplied with a ground mounted cabinet containing the control and communications equipment .
in the event this is not possible under site conditions a suitable alternative can be used where approval by asset manager traffic systems is obtained .
cabinet num .
the groundmounted cabinet shall be provided with a raised concrete plinth with a minimum thickness of nummm .
concrete plinth num .
the groundmounted cabinet shall be placed within num metres of the vms sign structure .
it shall not obstruct movements on any pedestrian or shared path and shall be located away from the traffic lane in accordance with the clear zone requirements set out for roadside furniture .
location of cabinet num .
the groundmounted cabinet shall be either a singledoor or doubledoor cabinet and be constructed as per the relevant standard drawing referenced in annexure a .
cabinet size num .
doors shall be fitted with suitable internal stiffeners .
door stiffeners num .
the ground mounted cabinet doors shall be fitted with suitable locks to ensure positive seal .
lock num .
the locking system hinge pins door stays and all associated equipment shall be made from stainless steel .
stainless steel locks hinge pins and door stays num .
all locks shall be keyed to mrwa master key no .
num .
key num .
if the sign is powered by a metered supply the supply shall be contained in a ground mounted cabinet .
in such an instance it is required that the ground cabinet locks are dual keyed capable of being operated by standard western power key nknum as well as mrwa master key no .
num .
dual keyed locks for metered supply num .
to allow for ease of maintenance in darkness a led or florescent light shall be supplied for the ground cabinet that is automatically operated when the cabinet door is opened .
the light shall adequately illuminate all internal components .
lighting num access and vandal resistance num .
type a vms shall be provided with an access platform only whilst type b and c vms shall be provided with both an access platform and an access ladder caged .
sign type and access provision num .
where an access ladder is provided the ladder shall extend to ground level .
ladder main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num num .
the design of the access platform and access ladder shall comply with the requirements in as num .
as num num .
the design of the support structure access platform and access ladder should be such that the possibility of unauthorised access to the structure is minimised .
minimises unauthorised access num .
a sliding hatch with a suitable locking mechanism shall be provided on the access ladder for entry to the safety cage .
all locking and sliding mechanisms and associated equipment shall be made of stainless steel .
sliding hatch num .
the hatch lock shall be keyed to mrwa master key no num .
key num .
a notice shall be provided on the face of the sliding hatch with the wording danger entry of unauthorised persons prohibited .
hatch warning notice num .
a reinforced concrete landing of minimum dimensions num x num x num mm shall be provided at ground level at the bottom of the access ladder .
concrete landing num .
the orientation for the access ladder shall be at an angle between num and num degrees to the horizontal plane for ease of maintenance accessibility .
ladder angle num .
at the top of the access ladder and located on the gantry platform a hinged spring selfclosing safety gate shall be installed .
the gate shall open inward onto the platform such that a person accessing the platform is not restricted in any way when egressing the ladder and stepping onto the platform .
safety gate num .
the safety gate shall have a notice affixed on the platform side with the wording danger fall hazard .
gate warning notice num .
the gantry support structure and notices shall be generally configured as per the detailed drawing references in annexure a. annexure a num electrical requirements num compliance with wiring standards num .
all electrical systems shall be compliant with asnzs num be verified in accordance with asnzs num and be approved and tested in accordance with asnzs num .
asnzs num asnzs num num .
all conductors shall be standard sizes with pvc insulation minimum voltage rating numkv and temperature rating vnum pvc or better .
conductors main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num num .
internal conductor sizes shall be of adequate cross section .
the minimum size permissible shall match the full current rating capacity of the connected equipment .
conductors shall be stranded in addition dc service shall be tinned .
the smallest conductor shall be not less than nummm .
conductor sizes num .
transformers used for the vms sign shall comply with asnzs num .
asnzs num num general purpose outlet num .
in the sign enclosure and the groundmounted cabinet a numv double general purpose outlet gpo shall be supplied complete with an integral num milliampere type ii residual current device compliant with asnzs num .
the gpo shall be mounted in an accessible location with sufficient room for power plug packs .
the gpo shall be supplied and protected by an auxiliary circuit breaker in the groundmounted cabinet .
gpo asnzs num num battery backup num .
the vms signs shall be supplied with batteries to back up the sign operation including control and communications for num full hour with half of available pixels displayed and for a minimum of num hours with the pixel display and conspicuity devices turned off .
back up operation num .
the batteries shall be of one of the following types listed in order of decreasing preference battery type num lithium batteries num gel batteries num absorbent glass mat agm batteries num .
in the event of a power failure the system shall fall back to full battery operation .
fall back num .
the vms shall automatically revert back to normal operation upon reconnection of main power .
return to normal operation num .
the vms shall allow for remote monitoring of battery condition and back up status .
during a mains power failure a mains power alarm shall be indicated to the main roads central control system .
remote monitoring num .
if required by the asset manager traffic systems the vms should be supplied with a ups as per specification num .
the specification may require amendment to suit the requirements of vms signs .
specification num main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num num surge protection num .
the vms shall be provided with the equipment which protects the sign against the surges as specified in section num of asnum .
asnzs num num .
the surge protection devices shall provide a visual display advising if the device has failed .
visual display num .
the surge devices shall be dinrailmounted and be easily accessible and viewable .
the unit shall be clear of any cable and shall not be mounted inline by flying lead on any mains switch or circuit breakers .
access and mounting num .
the surge devices shall be isolated from the mains supply when the main switch is open .
isolation num communications equipment num communication requirements num .
the contractor shall provide a connection between the main roads toc and the vms via main roads or third party communications facilities as approved by the main roads asset manager traffic systems .
approved communications arrangement num .
the connection to the toc shall be internet protocol ip based .
ip communications num .
if a wired thirdparty communications provider connection is used a conduit shall be supplied between the thirdparty communications pit and the vms groundmounted control cabinet to meet the thirdparty communications providers requirements .
thirdparty connection num .
any optical fibre required shall be installed as per specification num .
specification num num pits and conduits num .
at vms locations being connected to the main roads optical fibre backbone the contractor shall allow for the supply of a minimum mrwnumsized pit for power and communications .
minimum pit size num .
all pits and pitlids including locking mechanism shall be supplied in conformance with the details in the main roads specification num .
specification num num .
supply of all conduits shall comply with main roads specification num and asnzs num .
asnzs num specification num main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num num .
conduits installed to the vms shall consist of a minimum num mm orange conduit for power and a minimum num mm white conduit for communications conduit size num .
all cabling to the vms shall be reticulated through the inside of the support column and into the sign enclosure via sealed entry holes .
support column cabling num markings and labels num .
all internal equipment labels required shall be manufactured from traffolyte or other asset manager traffic systems approved material .
the labels shall be white blackwhite with engraved black letters on a white background or redwhitered with white letters on a red background .
labels num .
as far as practicable all labels shall be of the same overall dimensions with identical mounting holes .
the minimum size of letters shall be nummm upper case .
letters num .
the vms asset number shall be clearly shown on the outside of the door of each cabinet or enclosure .
the number shall be made up of nummm black characters on a nummm x nummm background of adhesive class num yellow retro reflective materials as per asnzs num part num .
a further label of the same material consisting of num lines of nummm black characters shall be placed nummm below the vms asset number .
line num shall read num num and line num main roads wa .
the vms asset number can be obtained by contacting mrwa electrical services .
sizes num .
the structure number shall be clearly shown on the vms support structure .
the number shall be made up of nummm black characters on a nummm x nummm background of adhesive class num yellow retroreflective materials .
structure number num .
manufacturers name plates shall not be affixed to the outside of enclosures and cabinets .
manufacturers name plates num not used main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num display and optical requirements num display requirements num .
the messages shown on the vms display shall be designed in accordance with asnum .
the message shown on the sign should be designed based on the approaching speed to ensure its legible and readable visibility num .
the warranty shall allow for the full replacement of pixels that fail or deteriorate noticeably in the period prior to official commissioning of the vms and the first three years following the commissioning date .
warranty num .
the display dimensions shall be selected depending on the vms type .
refer to asnum table num for more details on led requirements for different sized vms signs .
high output led num .
automated dimming facility shall be provided with each sign .
this should be achieved by either continuous dim level adjustment or discrete dim level adjustment minimum of num steps .
the control algorithm shall be capable of adjusting the dimming level with respect to external light conditions daylight and roadway lighting dimming control algorithm num .
four conspicuity devices shall be supplied on the corners of the vms character display and shall comply with the requirements of asnum .
conspicuity devices num optical requirements num .
the singlecolour of the vms character display shall be yellow as per table num in asnum colour num .
the threecoloured leds in pictograms shall be supplied in yellow green and red as per table num in asnum pictogram colour num not used main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num operation and control num communication protocol num .
the vms shall utilise the mrwa implementation of the rta nsw communications protocol as outlined in the rta specification tsispnum communications protocol for roadside devices .
tsi protocol num .
the contractor is to ensure the device is compatible and meets the requirements of the main roads implementation of streams .
in the event this is not possible the contractor shall liaise with the control systems workstream manager to discuss steps to be undertaken to ensure compatibility .
streams num .
the vms shall have the capability to be monitored and controlled from the site andor remotely via ip communications from the main roads traffic operation centre toc .
remote access num not used main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num environmental requirements num enclosure protection num .
all viewing screens and windows where provided shall be high impact uv resistance .
num .
the sign enclosure shall comply with ip rating of ipnum .
ipnum num .
the external finish and protective treatment to the support structure and other steelwork shall be as specified by mrwa specification num .
this requires the use of hot dip galvanizing unless otherwise stated .
specification num num wind loading num .
all structure footings shall be supplied in accordance with the relevant australian standard taking into account wind soil and clearance conditions at the nominated site .
this shall include cyclone specific requirements as necessary .
num electromagnetic compatibility num .
an electromagnetic interference filter rated at a minimum of num ampere shall be included to suppress the generation of emi to ensure compliance with all statutory electromagnetic compatibility emc requirements emi emc num not used main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num installation num general installation num .
the contractor shall ensure that all work is performed by technically competent persons and that all electrical work shall be performed by licensed electricians .
technical competence num .
all work shall conform to the requirements of the mrwa specifications and standards referenced in section num as a minimum .
conformance to mrwa specifications num .
the contractor shall lodge all notices required by the power supply and communications authorities and any other authority having jurisdiction over the installation and pay any fees required contractor to lodge all notices num .
sign and sign support fabrication drawings design assembly and erection instructions shall be prepared in accordance with asnzs num and asnzsnum prior to commencing manufacture .
asnzsnum asnzsnum num .
design drawings showing elevation and section details equipment layout materials schedule and label details shall be prepared prior to commencing manufacture .
the design drawings shall comply with the main roads design drawing presentation and typical standard drawings for vmss .
sign fabrication drawings num provision for traffic num .
refer to main roads traffic code regarding the current state of practice regarding provision for traffic main roads traffic code num products and materials num .
the contractor shall provide all equipment necessary to perform the required work .
contractor equipment num .
all materials provided by the contractor shall be new .
all materials shall be new num .
all materials provided by the contractor shall satisfy the requirements of this specification .
where it is unclear that an item will fully satisfy these requirements or the item does not satisfy the requirements the contractor shall submit details of the item to the project manager for approval inclusive of manufacturers data and information sheets and how the item does not meet the required specifications .
substitution and conformance main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num num .
the contractor shall demonstrate conformance to the requirements of this specification and project drawings when using materials and equipment different to that specified .
no loss of performance num .
the contractor shall ensure that all requirements involving reference material certificates as per specification num are met .
structuralsteelwork materials num mechanical installation num .
all external and internal surfaces shall be free from sharp edges or protrusions .
num .
all equipment shall be installed such that removal replacement or repair of each and every component may be carried out with standard electrical trade tools .
standard tools num .
particular attention shall be given to the location and clearance of handles levers switches etc .
in respect to the safety of personnel operating the equipment .
location clearances num .
all joints shall be full length welded and ground to a smooth square finish .
joints num .
antigraffiti coating shall be applied in accordance with the mrwa specification num for antigraffiti coatings .
antigraffiti coating num electrical installation num electricity regulations and authorities num .
the works shall be carried out in accordance with the office of energy wa electrical requirements asnzs num australiannew zealand wiring rules the requirements of western power synergy horizon or any other authority having jurisdiction over the installation power supply authority .
electricity act num .
the contractor shall submit all notices and applications required by the power supply authority and pay any fees required .
notices num .
the contractor shall ensure all equipment is designed to operate at the correct voltages prior to installation .
the contractor shall ensure all equipment installed is suitable for the maximum prospective short circuit current found at the point of installation .
power supply voltage supply num .
all insulated wiring within the enclosure or cabinet shall be run in horizontal and vertical lines .
each group of wiring shall be strapped at short intervals with nylon cable ties or enclosed in correctly sized trunking .
wiring runs main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num num .
each wire shall be terminated by crimp type terminal lugs fitted by the lug manufacturers recommended crimping tool .
terminations num connection of mains supply num .
where a source of supply is available from a nearby mrwa lighting switchboard or traffic signal controller a connection shall be made to the vms communications cabinet after it is ensured that there is sufficient load capacity to supply the vms .
power source num .
where the supply is not available arrangements shall be made with western power to provide a consumer main supply meeting western powers requirements .
in such cases a meter box to western powers requirements shall be provided if no exemption to this is authorised by them allowing other billing arrangements .
western power num when the power source is supplied from main roads lighting switchboard or other asset asset drawings for switchboard or relevant asset shall be amended .
switchboard num .
where a meter box is required it shall be installed in the location required in the project specific design documentation or as agreed by the project manager .
meter box location num .
all power from this connection point shall be reticulated underground .
no power or other conduits shall be mounted externally on any pole or structure including aerial pole .
only underground power num fixed traffic signal infrastructure num .
any work involving traffic signals infrastructure must be carried out in coordination with main roads electrical services .
work involving signals num communications num .
all work on the main roads optical fibre backbone shall be strictly controlled both in terms of access and the nature of the work being done .
work involving cutting of cables shall be specifically approved by main roads via the project manager who will assist with the required approval and allocation forms .
mrwa fibre optic specification num main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num num .
connections into the existing main roads optical fibre backbone shall only be made at specified locations agreed upon with asset management traffic systems .
these will be where there are already existing splice enclosures or fibre node locations .
only a specified tube may be opened up at the connection points .
under no circumstances shall other tubes be cut or damaged since these are assigned for other backbone functions .
the optical fibre requirements and core allocation details shall be specifically confirmed with main roads or their nominated contractor prior to any work being carried out on the backbone .
optical fibre backbone num reinstatement and cleanup num .
disturbed pavement surfaces for nonmotorised traffic such as concrete or brick paved areas and pathways shall be reinstated to original condition to the satisfaction of the main roads project manager .
reinstate pavement surfaces num .
any surplus or waste materials such as unused conduits offcuts packaging etc .
shall be removed from the site by the contractor who shall also be responsible for all cartage and tipping charges .
contractor responsible for cartage num not used main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num testing and commissioning num general num .
the contractor shall supply all labour materials and equipment required to fully test and commission the installation .
contractor supply num .
installation andor equipment will be accepted only after satisfactory completion and successful pass of each level of testing .
if any given test is unsuccessful the equipment shall be repaired and reerected as appropriate and subject to retest until successful .
acceptance num .
the cost of any retesting if necessary shall be borne by the contractor .
retesting num .
the contractor shall undertake the following testing levels and commissioning stage in the following sequence testingcommissioning sequence a conduct product acceptance testing if new product is used .
b conduct factory acceptance testing c undertake delivery acceptance testing d undertake site acceptance testing e undertake commissioning and maintenance handover num .
four weeks prior to a scheduled level of testing the contractor shall supply main roads with a draft inspection test plan itp for that level of testing .
after review and acceptance by main roads the testing shall be carried out by the contractor in accordance with the accepted plan .
num .
in addition to the contractors own quality assurance requirements the contractor shall refer to the minimum testing and observation requirements matrix in annexure c to ensure that the inspection test plan meets main roads testing requirements for the appropriate level of testing .
num .
the itp shall include test schedules designed to incorporate the following information itp requirements a name of test and its status original test or repeat due to a previous test failure date time and location of the test b record of all values measured during installationcommissioning c list of test equipment used and statement of software and software version number used main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num d a description of how the test is to be conducted connection to test equipment configuration of test equipment test process e reference back to this specification to confirm compliance with each individual requirement clause num .
the contractor shall ensure that a main roads is contacted num weeks in advance before each level of testing to ensure that a main roads representative is present at the discretion of main roads .
num product acceptance testing num .
approval is to be obtained from asset manager traffic systems for the use of the product .
all requested document shall be provided .
num .
the product shall undergo the minimum test and acceptance criteria as outlined in the testing matrix of annexure c num factory acceptance testing num .
factory acceptance tests fat shall be carried out on the vms prior to delivery to ensure conformance with specified requirements .
factory acceptance test num .
the details of the factory acceptance testing including but not limited to test procedures test data e.g .
from photometric tests flowcharts checklists approval documentation and method of verification suitable to main roads requirements shall be provided prior to shipment of each product .
requirements num .
the vms shall not be shipped until the fat has been completed to main roads requirements .
num delivery acceptance testing num .
delivery acceptance testing shall be carried out on the product and all its component items once procured immediately prior to installation .
num .
after inspection and testing each item shall be signed off by the contractors qa manager and main roads representative .
each page of the delivery acceptance testing shall be signed and dated by the person conducting the site inspection and testing .
itp conformance num .
the contractor shall ensure that the delivery acceptance testing covers the functional requirements as per this specification and those in annexure c testing and observation requirements matrix requirements main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num num site acceptance testing num .
the site acceptance testing sat shall be carried out prior to handover at a time agreed to by the main roads representative in consultation with the asset manager traffic systems .
site acceptance testsat num .
receipt by main roads of the signed itp and associated documentation for the site acceptance testing level shall constitute advice by the contractor that the installation is complete and ready for site acceptance testing .
readiness for site acceptance testing num .
mrwa will review the completed itp and supporting details and will advise the contractor if any further work or submission is required prior to site acceptance testing .
review num .
prior to site acceptance testing the contractor shall make all necessary access arrangements and confirm with mrwa of the need for and nature of any necessary site inductions .
site inductions num .
during site acceptance testing the contractor shall attend site and make available all tools plant equipment operators and escorts as necessary to enable mrwa to access to all system components .
system component access num .
site acceptance testing with mrwa may include repeat of any or all elements of the itp plus a detailed verification of the correct operation of each device and function .
repeat testing num .
once the site acceptance testing commences mrwa reserves the right to delay or abort site acceptance at its discretion testing delay abortion num .
if the cause of the delay or cancellation is within the responsibility of the contractor as assigned under the contract any associated costs will be borne by the contractor .
associated costs num maintenance handover num .
the newly installed vms shall be provided with reactive maintenance by main roads electrical services after commissioning of each unit prior to acceptance of handover .
electrical services num .
the contractor shall provide all materials and labour to rectify any faults found with the equipment during the warranty period .
num .
the contractor shall arrange to train up to num of main roads employees upon completion of all installation .
the training shall include all operational and maintenance aspects of the device .
training for main roads main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num num documentation num staged documentation num .
the design documents shall be supplied to main roads prior to installation of the site and shall include as a minimum the following documented information design documents a block diagrams b functional description c electrical single line diagrams d communications diagrams including integration into mrwas traffic control system e equipment specifications f structural drawings num .
prior to final handover the following documentation shall be supplied to main roads handover documentation a drawings and datasheets for all equipment including requirements for maintenance fault finding and repair .
b a complete inventory of all major components installed at each vms site including vms s control data transmission equipment sign structure and enclosure mounting platforms equipment housings etc .
c the modification of existing as constructed maintenance drawings in cad format to show all changes implemented as part of any new contract including both physical layout pits cabinets conduits cables and other equipment and schematics electrical and optic fibre .
this applies to existing optic fibre backbone drawings vms site drawings and drawings related to the toc site .
d vms communication network drawings related to the new installation .
e wiring schematic and schedules for the vms system .
f gps coordinates for each vms location .
num .
prior to handover the contractor shall also submit the training manuals in accordance with the following list in electronic format pdf training manuals main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num a all layout and as constructed plans for the installed structures b system block diagrams c operator manuals d technical manuals e maintenance manuals f specifications technical manuals software manuals and operator manuals for all vms equipment .
num asconstructed documentation num .
asconstructed information shall be supplied to main roads prior to commissioning in accordance with the main roads asconstructed drawings guidelines document num asconstructed guidelines num .
asbuilt drawings shall include upgraded electrical layout drawings where a vms is installed at a traffic signals site .
the electrical cable charts laminated shall also be updated and reissued to reflect all changes made .
refer to vms design guideline for more details .
num not used main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num appendices annexure numa main roads standard drawings the following main roads standard sign drawings are available on the main roads web site .
drawing no .
ref .
description d vms general arrangement d vms cabinet layout d vms structure detail d vms gantry detail d vms labelsign detail d vms single line diagram d vms connectivity diagram main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num annexure numb supply of electrical materials the following is a summary of electrical materials required for the works .
the list shall be completed and amended in accordance with the design drawings .
component descriptiontypemodel etc .
cable pits conduits wiring sign enclosure control cabinet ground mounted vms support structure main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num annexure numc vms testing and observation requirements matrix the following is a matrix summarising the minimum requirements for testing and observation at each of the four levels of testing to be undertaken for vms signs .
electrical requirements mechanical requirements control requirements product acceptance software simulator shall be supplied to amts for approval of vms .
the simulator should be able to communicate via the rta nsw protocol with the central vms control system at the traffic operations centre toc .
the simulator shall provide a reliable indication in terms of software response of how an actual vms would respond .
factory acceptance num day continuous burning in test program designed to operate all vms components including pixels lights monitoring and communications .
demonstrates satisfactory operation of all sign controls .
delivery acceptance electrical standards including all mandatory tests in asnum section num structural standards as per main roads specification num structural steel work main roads communication standards as defined and approved by the main roads control systems workstream manager site acceptance the sat shall verify that the operation of the sign as installed is in full conformance with specified main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num requirement for all aspects of sign and communications operation such as display features local control remote control from toc control software manipulation and storage of plans control of conspicuity signals etc .
main roads western australia specification num variable message signs fixed type page num of num contract xxxxx document num issued num specification amendment checklist specification name no num revision no ____title variable message signs project manager name _____________signature ___________date________ checked by name _______________signature ______________date________ contract no ______contract description ________________________________ item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked change mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materialsproductsclauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from mcp .
num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection testing parameters included in spec num test methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date_______________ main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num specification num electronic speed limit signs copyright main roads western australia main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num specification num electronic speed limit signs revision register date clause number description of revision authorised by all specification created ee num num annexb removed annexure b ee main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num products and materials num num general num num sign post num num electronic sign num num sign control num num communications system num num group controller num num markings num num requirements for mains powered signs num num requirements for solar powered signs num num battery requirements num num static signs and supplimentary plates num num test sign num num num not used num installation num num general num num communications num num traffic management num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num testing num num manufacturer specific software num num as built documentation num num training num num maintenance during defects period num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num first clause title other clauses see specification guidance notes num num num not used if there are no requirements num annexure numa main roads standard drawings num main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num specification num guidance notes num specification amendment checklist num main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num specification num electronic speed limit signs general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of supply installation testing and commissioning documentation training maintenance and handover requirements for electronic speedlimit signs and associated infrastructure .
lane use management signs lums are not considered as part of the scope of this specification .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below acts and regulations occupational safety and health act num occupational safety and health regulations num australian standards as num structural design actions permanent imposed and other actions as num structural design actions wind actions as num manual of uniform traffic control devices traffic control devices for works on roads asnum manual of uniform traffic control devices traffic control devices for general use as num road signs specifications as num secondary batteries for use with standalone power systems as num standalone power systems as num electronic speed limit signs australiannew zealand standards asnzs num electrical installations wiring rules asnz num electromagnetic compatibility generic emission standard residential commercial and light industry .
main roads specifications specification num traffic main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num specification num signs num definitions num .
applicable terms and definitions in addition to those provided in main roads glossary of terms and as num are listed below acma australian communications and media authority group a collection of signs within an immediate area controlled by a single group controller .
a group may consist of one or more signs .
phcs product host control system the software provided by the sign supplier or manufacturer for control of the sign sign an electronic speed limit sign esls including electronics signs used for school zones shopping precincts andor freeways .
site a collection of signs in a larger area typically associated with a common area such as a school or a shopping precinct .
a site may consist of one or more groups .
toc traffic operations centre tms traffic management system the software used to remotely control a sign vdu visual display unit num num not used products and materials num general num .
signs and associated equipment provided shall comply with as num unless otherwise specified .
as num num .
all equipment covered by this specification shall comply with the requirements of asnz num .
asnz num num .
all telecommunications and radio communications equipment covered by this specification shall comply with relevant requirements of the australian communications and media authority acma .
such equipment will be labelled with an acma issued atick or ctick or rcm .
atick ctick num .
prior to manufacture the contractor shall certify to the main roads representative that detailed designs of sign layout fabrication and assembly drawings calculations specifications and certifications of the signs and sign components conform to the requirements of the specification .
hold point main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num num .
the contractor shall demonstrate that materials and products used meet the requirements of this specification and shall highlight where they differ from those specified .
any deviations from the requirements of this specifications requires approval from main roads wa amts .
conformance num .
an electronic speed limit sign and associated infrastructure includes the following items associated infrastructure a sign post or alternative mounting method b electronic sign including sign control c sign controller including firmware d battery charge controller and solar panel as required e communications hardware f static signs and tags num .
signs and associated equipment shall be designed to meet main roads clearance requirements as shown on drawing num num .
any additional provisions required due to belowminimum lateral clearance shall be approved by main roads .
clearance num .
where an electronic speed limit group consists of two or more electronic speed limits signs the signs shall operate in a master slave configuration with a group controller acting as the master .
site configuration num .
where an electronic speed limit group contains only one electronic speed limit sign that sign shall be considered a group controller .
num sign post num .
the sign shall be mounted on a post unless specified otherwise by main roads .
postmounting num .
the sign post shall comply with table num of main roads standard drawing num .
post type num .
the sign post shall be coloured with golden yellow ynum colour powder coated .
colour num .
the footing for the sign post shall be designed as per main roads standard drawing num footing num .
the design of the sign post and footing fully fitted with equipment shall meet asnzs num .
wind loading num electronic sign num visual display unit num .
the visual display unit vdu shall have the following features a white matrix display with the ability to display a speed range from numkmh to numkmh in numkmh increments .
matrix display main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num b red illuminated annulus .
the annulus pixel configuration shall be as per table num of as num .
annulus c matt black background .
background d nonreflective high impact uvresistant front viewing window where required .
viewing window num display elements num .
unless otherwise stated the sign display shall comply with as num .
as num num .
the numerals shall not flash while a sign is displaying a speed limit .
flashing numerals num sign enclosure num .
the sign enclosure shall meet the requirements in as num section num .
as num num .
the sign enclosure shall be made of marine grade aluminium minimum of nummm thick and be golden yellow ynum colour powder coated .
material and colour num .
the sign enclosure shall incorporate a mechanism to adjust its angle to achieve the correct line of sight .
angle adjustment num .
the front window of the vdu shall be designed coated or treated to prevent or minimise fogging .
fogging num .
each sign shall be capable of being post mounted .
post mounted num .
the sign shall be rearmounting unless specified differently in project brief and design drawings .
rearmounting num .
the sign enclosure shall have a lockable door not opening to the rear which opens with the standard main roads nume key and positively closes the door against the seal ensuring a minimum ingress protection rating of ipnum .
key details can be obtained from the main roads representative .
door and lock num .
the enclosure shall be able to securely store all required equipment with the exception of the solar panel .
num sign control num general num .
the sign controller shall comply with as num section num .
as num num .
the sign controller shall be housed in the sign enclosure .
housing num .
the controller shall allow remote control of each function of its sign either via a group controller or direct to the tms if not grouped with a group controller .
remote control main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num num .
the controller shall integrate with the existing serial based control software .
this is currently software supplied by ad engineering but is to be changed to streams in the future consequently the sign controller shall a communicate using the fss application layer protocol .
b be upgradeable to use the tsispnum protocol and be fully compliant with streams .
c be able to be upgraded as b above remotely without hardware changes .
integration num .
the controller shall provide but not be limited to the following operations controller operations a the ability to flash the inner rings of the annulus while the outer rings stays on .
flash annulus b the ability to flash the inner red annulus led rings at a rate of num hz with a num duty cycle .
numhz flash c the ability to turn the vdu on and off .
switch vdu d the ability to program and store on off times for the vdu for a minimum of two calendar years with a minimum of two on and two off commands per day .
leap years need to be provided for .
num year calendar e the ability to alter the programmed on off times of these signs .
onoff time programming f the ability to have selfdiagnosis and error reporting functions .
g the ability to change the display number .
h the ability to blank the display if the loss of a number of leds causes the displayed speed to become unclear or incorrect .
error reporting display number loss of leds num .
the sign firmware shall be configurable to not support any possible speeds greater than the maximum for the road .
maximum speed in firmware num error reporting num .
monitoring fault logging and reporting functions shall comply with as num clause num with the addition of reporting as num clause num a an angle alarm acknowledging that the sign has been moved past a numdegree angle from vertical .
angle alarm num communications system num general num .
the group controller shall communicate to the tms via suitable hardware as per clause num .
remote communications main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num num .
the master sign shall communicate with all slave signs within its group .
the slave signs shall be able to communicate to their master sign but not with any other sign in their group .
group communication s num .
the communications hardware shall include for synchronising the flash sequence of all signs facing the same approach hardware capability num communications protocol num .
master and slave signs shall securely communicate with one another via a local wireless link .
local wireless link num .
the communications protocol shall support the full functionality of the sign as described in this specification and the functionality described in as num appendix b .
supports full functionality asnum appendix b num clock num .
the sign shall be fitted with a realtime clock which provides time and date with accuracy and details as specified within as num .
clock accuracy num .
adjacent signs shall have their clocks synchronised to within a minimum of numth of a second .
synchronisation num group controller num .
the group controller shall have no hardware differences to other signs .
all differences shall be software only .
num .
the group controller shall act as a master sign controller for its local slave signs .
the group controller shall only control on group of signs .
num .
the group controller shall have the following characteristics as a minimum controller characteristics a be able to support at least three slave signs .
b continually monitor each connected sign and log any errors or abnormal events .
c periodically monitor log and report the operation of each connected sign individually .
the frequency of the log shall be configurable and schedulable .
d command signs to display only the permissible frame combinations for that respective site .
e allow local and remote reset of individual slave and master signs f accept or reject valid or invalid commands made by the tms and phcs .
g generate a unique electronic identification for each sign .
main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num num markings num .
all markings shall be marked and labelled with durable and weatherproof materials in accordance with as num .
num requirements for mains powered signs num .
the sign shall be provided with a mains supply unless otherwise specified .
num .
the sign shall convert mains power to extralow voltage levels for internal use in accordance with asnzs num .
extralow voltage num backup battery num .
the sign shall be equipped with a battery backup and it shall comply with the requirements of clause num .
battery backup num requirements for solar powered signs num .
where mains power is not available the sign shall be provided with a solar power supply .
num .
the sign shall be equipped with a battery and it shall comply with the requirements of clause num battery num solar panel num .
the solar power specific requirements shall comply with requirements of as num as num and as num .
num .
the solar panel shall be securely connected to the sign post at the top of the pole on an adjustable theft resistant mount and positioned to receive maximum sunlight .
the solar panel mounting shall be designed for the wind region in which it is to be installed .
the mounting arrangement shall be securely locked in position and tightened sufficiently to prevent the solar panel from becoming missaligned during heavy winds .
solar panel position num .
the post mounting shall be provided suitable for the environmental region and associated post design .
num .
the solar panel shall have suitable impact resistance for the environmental region in which it is to be installed .
num .
the solar panel shall be capable of continuously maintaining normal operation of the sign and full battery charge with exposure to num hours of winter sunlight .
charge maintenance num .
the solar panel shall be capable of fully charging the battery from the low charge level cutoff point in direct winter sunlight in a maximum of four operational days .
charging num .
the solar panel shall be rated to allow for degradation in performance of num per year for a period of ten years .
panel rating main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num num battery requirements num .
the battery shall comply with the requirements of as num and as num .
standards num .
the battery shall be provided with a charge controller that a prevents the battery from being overcharged .
b prevents damage to the battery from over discharge .
c prevents damage due to overheating .
d prevents discharge back through the solar panel even if the panel is defective .
charge control num battery num .
the battery shall be sized such that it will illuminate the sign message for a period of num hours per day for two days and provide all communications and control functionality continuously for the same two days from a normally operational charged state without receiving any further charge from the solar panel battery capacity num .
the battery shall have a charge rate of cnum or greater to provide a maximum charge period of num hours at rated maximum charge current .
battery charge num .
the batterys shall be either an agm or proven lithium based rechargeable type .
the batterys shall have a minimum life expectancy of num years under all anticipated environmental conditions and minimum operational conditions as defined in num point num .
battery type num static signs and supplimentary plates num .
tags and signs used shall be of retroreflective class num sheeting conforming to all design parameters detailed in specification num and as num .
num .
tags and signs are to be positioned as shown in annexure num a .
num .
school zone signs shall have the following signs and tags attached a the school zone metallic panel shall be securely attached to the pole above the vdu and display the words school zone as indicated in annexure num a .
school zone tag b the times of operation metallic tag shall be securely attached to the pole below the vdu as indicated in the annexure num a and display the times of school zone operation which will correspond to the times the vdu shall be turned on .
times of operation tag c the end school zone sign shall display the words end school zone and be securely attached to the pole at the rear of the vdu .
end school zone sign main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num num .
when the school zone is in a speed zone other than num kmhr the relevant speed limit sign shall be installed under the end school zone sign .
speed limit sign num test sign num .
a master and slave test sign shall be provided to main roads western australia for testing and examination .
provision of the test sign will not be required if an identical sign has previously been tested and passed by main roads or if main roads specifies otherwise .
test signs num .
the test signs shall be provided complete with all communications devices firmware control software installation and operation manuals and other to provide a fully functional master slave group to allow verification of form function and integration requirements .
num .
the test signs are to be supplied with solar panels and batteries as well as an alternate main power supply .
power test num .
the test signs shall be provided ahead of production units delivery for approval by the main roads representative .
this approval is required prior to the release of delivery of the production units .
hold point num num not used installation num general num .
before commencing any work the type and location of all surface and underground utility services at the work site shall be fully determined .
if the signs are to be solar powered then the surrounding overhead vegetation and high structures need to be taken into account for the positioning of the sign to reduce the amount of shadowing on the solar panel .
location of services num .
the contractor shall take all precautions necessary to avoid interference with any underground surface or overhead utility services .
precautions num .
suitable barriers shall be erected around excavations .
if access is required across them the excavations are to be covered instead .
public safety barricades num .
earthworks shall be carried out in accordance with specification num .
earthworks num .
disturbed pavement surfaces for nonmotorised traffic such as concrete or brickpaved areas and pathways shall be reinstated to original condition to the satisfaction of the main roads representative .
surface reinstatement num .
any surplus or waste materials including offcuts packaging etc .
shall be removed from the site by the contractor who shall also be responsible for all cartage and tipping charges .
cleanup main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num num .
installation of post mounted units on a bridge structure shall be to main roads structure engineers approval .
the main roads representative shall be given notice at least num hours prior to the installation .
hold point num .
the sign shall be installed so that it meets main roads clearance requirements for that road as per drawing num .
clearance num .
the vdu shall be securely attached to the signpost .
vdu attachment num .
the vdu shall be aimed towards oncoming traffic numm down the carriageway from the vdu .
signs installed on the left hand side of the roadway shall be aimed at the centre of the left most lane of oncoming traffic .
signs installed on the right hand side of the roadway shall be aimed at the centre of the right most lane of oncoming traffic .
after aiming all aiming bolts on the mounting arrangement shall be securely locked in position and tightened sufficiently to prevent the vdu from becoming missaligned during heavy winds .
vdu aiming num .
static signs shall be oriented as per asnum appendix d static sign aiming num .
each sign shall be supplied preprogrammed by the contractor to operate between the specific times and calendars for the planned site .
the preprogrammed times for the signs will be advised by the main roads representative .
preprogramming num .
each site shall be assigned a site asset number group number and each sign a sign number .
the numbers shall be made up of nummm black characters on a nummm x nummm background of adhesive class num yellow retroreflective material as per asnzs num part num .
asset numbering num .
the numbers shall be fixed vertically to the sign post nummm below the bottom of the lowest static sign and face towards the road .
num .
the asset number shall be read from top to bottom site number top most followed by the group number and ending with the sign number below .
num communications num .
each electronic speed limit sign shall be connected to the current main roads control system via an approved communication connection .
approved communication s num .
the sign shall be able to be fully incorporated into and remotely monitored and controlled via main roads current control software for electronic speed limit signs .
further details can be obtained from the main roads representative .
monitor and control num .
if an electronic sign is within numm of main roads optical fibre or an existing scats adsl site it shall be incorporated into this existing communications infrastructure where possible .
optical fibre num .
the contractor shall give the main roads representative a minimum of two weeks notice if a sim card is required for the signs .
the main roads representative can then arrange the supply of the required number of sim cards to the contractor .
sim card main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num num traffic management num .
provision is to be made for vehicular traffic and pedestrians during the works in accordance with specification num and the traffic management for road works code of practice and australian standard as num .
at all times the safety of the public and the persons carrying out the works is paramount .
num .
prior to installation works being carried out on site the contractor shall certify to the main roads representative that adequate planning and provision has been made for traffic management in order to conform to the requirements of the specification .
hold point num num not used as built and handover requirements num testing num .
all equipment shall be subjected to factory acceptance tests by the sign vendor before delivery to ensure compliance with performance requirements as stated in this document and in asnum .
a suitable documented quality plan shall be in place to ensure consistency of testing .
the main roads representative shall be notified of testing num days in advance to allow for a main roads nominated representative to be present at testing .
factory acceptance testing num .
the sign vendor shall be present to perform the site acceptance testing and systems integration acceptance testing of a minimum of the first two sites installed unless specified otherwise .
presence of the vendor will not be required if an identical sign has previously been installed tested and passed or if main roads specifies otherwise the contractor shall provide for all consumables and tools necessary for installation and testing .
on site testing num .
the signs shall be subject to site acceptance testing of all their functions before commissioning including but not limited to a power supply b display performance c local communications and d reporting .
site acceptance testing main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num num .
the signs shall be subject to systems integration acceptance testing of all functions between the sign and the tms before commissioning including but not limited to a communications and remote access facilities via the tms b reporting c programming d scheduling and e fault management .
systems integration acceptance testing num .
an inspection and test plan detailing each stage of the fat sat and siat tests shall be submitted for review and approval by the main roads representative prior to release of the signs for delivery .
hold point num .
documentation is required showing the results of tests performed on each electronic sign during testing .
this documentation is to include the type of test performed the component or process being tested and the outcomes of the test and signed off for release for delivery .
testing documentation for each sign shall be attached within the packing or enclosed within the sign and be in a sealed envelope or similar .
testing documentation num manufacturer specific software num .
the vendor shall provide any software required for the configuration of the signs to main roads wa prior to the site acceptance testing and systems integration acceptance testing .
configuration software num as built documentation num .
the contractor shall provide full documentation in the form of drawings as per main roads electrical infrastructure asset drawing guidelines .
num .
final documentation is to consist of electronic and hardcopy sets including final documentation a a complete inventory of all components installed in each sign at each site .
b installation operation and maintenance manuals for all equipment .
om c drawings and datasheets for all equipment .
main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num num .
the inventory of components shall include for each sign at the site all fields required for the main roads electrical service esls database including but not limited to a sim number b phone number c ip address d battery details make model voltage capacity e solar panel details make model size rating the vendor shall confirm specific inventory requirements with the main roads representative prior to commencing the installation works .
inventory data num drawings num .
drawings are to be asconstructed .
each drawing should be supplied in two num anum paper copies and two num electronic copies one in portable document format pdf and one in autocad rnum format .
as constructed num .
drawings are to consist of a general arrangement drawings in num scale .
these are to include i all equipment installed above and below ground ii equipment asset numbers iii the location and route of any installed conduits iv all electrical and communications cable sizes cable runs and points of attachment and v the general background such as kerb lines .
b communications cabinet drawings showing i electrical equipment including power supply and surge protection and ii communications equipment including transceivermodem terminations and cables .
c electrical wiring diagrams including interconnections and interfaces between all equipment .
d updated electrical layout drawings where installed near other electrical assets such as traffic signals street lighting etc .
e updated electrical cable charts for any affected existing cabinets reissued to the cabinet .
num installation operation and maintenance manual num .
the operations and maintenance manual supplied with the signs shall meet the minimum requirements of as num clause num with the following changes a occupational health safety ohs instructions shall be in line with occupational safety and health act and regulations for western australia main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num num .
the installation manual supplied with the signs shall include as a minimum a a description of the method of installation of all hardware and software .
b details of all settings for hardware including torques and software .
num training num .
the contractor is to provide basic training to relevant main roads personnel on the installation operation and maintenance of all installed equipment .
this is to include the correct use of remote access and be additional to the training manuals to be provided .
during training main roads will provide suitable office and workshop facilities .
basic training num .
field training will include installation and the sat of two sites as detailed in num including assistance with commissioning .
field training num .
basic and or field training will not be required if an identical sign has previously been installed or if main roads specifies otherwise .
num maintenance during defects period num .
any failure of or damage to an electronic school zone sign or component shall be fixed before the start of the next school zone period as long as the failure is not reported to the contractor by main roads or the sign itself less than num hours before the start of the next school zone period .
in such cases the failure shall be fixed prior to the commencement of the following school zone period .
school zone service level requirements num .
any failure of or damage to an electronic speed limit sign or component that is not a school zone sign shall be fixed within num hours of the fault being reported to the contractor by main roads or the sign itself .
nonschool zone service level requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num first clause title other clauses see specification guidance notes num num not used if there are no requirements main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num annexure numa main roads standard drawings the following main roads standard sign drawings are available on the main roads web site .
drawing no .
ref .
description num mrwa drawing variable speed limit sign mrrsnum num mrwa drawing sign footing details for variable speed limit signs num mrwa drawing standard school zone sign all regions except northern regions mrrsnum num mrwa drawing standard school zone sign northern regions mrrsnum num mrwa drawing supplementary plate to enhance school zone signs mrrsnum num mrwa drawing location details for one post sign main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num specification num guidance notes delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference all edits to downloaded tdp documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
deletions shall be struck through e.g .
example .
insertions shall be in italics e.g .
example .
if all information relating to a clause is to be deleted then the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review and approval prior to printing the final document .
when the document is approved the tracked changes option shall be turned off .
the custodian of this specification is the electrical engineer contract specific requirements to add or delete the following clauses are to be placed under contract specific requirements as required .
none at this time main roads western australia specification num electronic speed limit signs page num of num contract xxxxxx document num issue num specification amendment checklist specification num electronic speed limit signs number title of specification amended by name signature date verified by independent verification name signature date contract number description of contract item description initial note all changesamendments on the standard model specification must be shown in tracked change mode until approved .
num .
specification was reviewed and amended where required .
num .
contract specific requirements are identified and incorporated where required .
see specification guidance notes .
num .
any new materialsproducts in addition to those stated in the specification have been approved by the custodian .
provide details at num .
num .
amended standard clauses obtained endorsement from the custodian and approved by manager contract management practice .
num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
new or amended inspection testing parameters included in specification have been checked by custodian .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
as built and handover requirements incorporated where required .
num .
proposed alterations to the standard method measurement smm have been reviewed and approved by specification and contracts officer .
num .
confirmed that the completed specification reflects the intent of the design .
num .
specification format and styles checked .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num supporting information prepared and submitted to team leader or senior project manager for review and approval .
further action necessary see attached documentation .
approved by main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num traffic control equipment software copyright main roads western australia main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num traffic control equipment software revision register date clause number description of revision authorised by num whole document ngen version updated rms and austroads references updated annexure numh updated ee num whole document rgen software replaced with ngen ee num guidance notes change of specification custodian tesm num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num personnel num num qualified programmers num num num not used num software compatibility num num adaptive engineering system num num equipment compatibility num num communications num num num not used num documentation num num general num num timing chart num num scats masterlinkflexlilink details num num special features documentation num num job description sheet num num num not used num software format num num general num num source code language num num ngen file num num num not used num software content num num general num num ngen uniformity num num flexilink num num special scats features num num eprom or personality card copy num num num not used num testing and debugging num num general num num testing facility num num initial software testing num num scats testing num num independent testing num num testing by main roads wa num num traffic signal controller testing num num soak test num num num not used num main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num post commissioning adjustments num num commissioning num num scats connection num num post commissioning num num changes to personalities num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num traffic signal personalities wa standard num annexure numb num special operation modes num annexure numc num mode entry for conflict checking num annexure numd num table of maximum time settings num annexure nume num dimming table num annexure numf num special condition definitions num annexure numg num manufacturers data num annexure numh num traffic signals personality software checklist num annexure numl num site post commissioning checks num specification num guidance notes num specification amendment checklist num main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num traffic control equipment software general num scope num .
the work and services under this specification consist of the programming and testing of traffic signal controller equipment software operational fitting on site and provision of all technical documentation for traffic signal installation commissioning and maintenance .
num .
traffic control equipment software shall be prepared to implement the phase sequence timings and special features shown in the traffic signal design drawings and software documentation .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num manual of uniform traffic control devices part num traffic signals other standards rms traffic signal design standards rtatcnum rms rms standard personality reference manual rtatcnum rms ngen num personality generatoreditor rtatcnum rms traffic signal practice design rms nsw num guide to traffic management part num traffic operations austroads num .
main roads standards mrwa traffic signal document standards i.e .
phasing detectors etc .
num definitions rta roads and traffic authority of new south wales scats sydney coordinated adaptive traffic system num num not used main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num personnel num qualified programmers num .
software shall be prepared documented and tested by personnel with a minimum of three year experience in programming and integration of traffic control systems to rtatcnum the rms ngen num .
the contractor shall submit a copy of a resume detailing the proposed programmers past experience and demonstrating that the above requirement is met .
ngen experience num num not used software compatibility num adaptive engineering system num .
all software shall be produced using the version of ngen used by main roads wa and must be fully compatible with the main roads wa database .
ngen version num .
an overview of the modifications to the standard ngen personality file to meet wa requirements is provided in annexure numa .
ngen modifications num .
the personality revision number shall be nominated by the programmer based on the design changes and personality history .
revision number num equipment compatibility num .
the software shall be compatible with all of the traffic signal controller equipment and its components .
compatible with controller num communications num .
the software shall be compatible with all scats communications protocols .
compatible with scats num num not used documentation num general num .
documentation shall include document a description of operation of the software and hardware including flexilink fallback operating modes and special features .
b instructions for installation maintenance and commissioning .
main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num c electronic ngen file .
d results of testing and commissioning .
e as constructed information including intersection plans cable charts phase sequence charts conflict chart detector chart timing chart and special feature documentation if any .
num .
all documentation is to be in the latest version of microsoft word used by main roads western australia .
microsoft word num .
copies of such documentation shall be provided as listed below number of copies a two paper copies b one electronic copy num .
the documents shall be delivered to the superintendent five num working days before the commissioning of the traffic signals .
hold point num timing chart num .
provide a timing chart in the main roads wa standard format detailing the time settings and parameters used in the software and their purpose .
the chart is also to provide the personality checksum in hexadecimal format .
time settings num scats masterlinkflexlilink details num .
scats masterlinkflexilink details will be provided to main roads as a part of the phase chart .
the standard format lists scats masterlink and flexilink operational details such as the allocation of scats flags and flexilink release flags .
flexilink num special features documentation num .
special features incorporated into the software or any additional information that is not detailed on the other charts shall be documented .
examples of such information is a parallel pedestrian protectionoperation .
special features b advance warning sign operation and timing design .
c railway controller wiring details .
d emergency vehicle operation .
e flashing no right turn sign operation .
f ups monitoring details num job description sheet num .
a job description sheet shall be provided to list specific intersection details as well as signed completed checks .
num num not used main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num software format num general num .
the format of the source code shall be clear and concise .
num .
remarks shall be provided in the source code outlining the purpose of each line or section of the code when necessary .
num source code language num .
software for traffic signal controllers shall be the australian industry standard c mnemonic language .
software for other controller equipment shall use australian industry standards wherever possible and shall retain uniformity adopted for existing controller equipment .
c source code num ngen file num .
the relevant ngen file named pyyyyyms.mnum where yyyyy is the five digit intersection lm number shall be supplied to main roads wa no less than num working days prior to the planned commissioning .
num .
existing ngen personality files are named xyyyyms.mnum where yyyy is the four digit intersection lm number .
ngen file num num not used software content num general num .
the software shall meet the requirements of austroads guide of traffic management part num traffic operations for all traffic engineering designs and practice .
num .
the software shall meet the requirements of traffic signal practice design rms nsw num in the majority of applications except where main roads practice should be in accordance with annexure numa traffic signal personalities wa standard .
annexure numa num ngen uniformity num .
traffic signal controller software shall be prepared using the existing standard tables in ngen .
where this is impossible the principals instructions shall be sought .
num flexilink num .
traffic signal controller software shall provide for a flexilink mode of operation when scats coordination fails .
the flexilink shall compensate for the intended operation under full scats control to the extent possible .
the flexilink shall also be used to operate special features .
main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num special scats features num .
the software shall include any special scats feature such as xsf bits and mss bits and special facility signals required by scats .
num eprom or personality card copy num .
the software will be provided to main roads western australia on either an eprom for wintraff single controller version num to personality on pc and supplied by rms .
num .
an eprom personality card or xpm dongle copy of the software shall be prepared in suitable form to be installed directly into the personality module or logic processor card respectively .
the eprom window is to be covered by a purpose made foil backed label to provide protection from the effect of light and for use as device identification .
a label is also to be placed on the cover of the personality module .
both labels shall provide the following information eprom or personality cards eprom labels a intersection site number i.e .
lm .
b intersection revision letter .
c checksum of personality in hexadecimal format .
d date eprom or personality card was programmed .
num num not used testing and debugging num general num .
software shall be thoroughly tested and debugged following the procedures outlined below to verify phase sequence timings fault modes and exclusion of dangerous operating modes such as display of conflicting control signals .
the contractor must prepare a checklist detailing all checks carried out at each stage of testing and who under took them .
the completed checklist must be provided to main roads wa prior to the commissioning of the traffic signals .
test sequence num testing facility num .
the contractor shall prepare a testing facility incorporating a test traffic signal controller for the purposes of thoroughly testing and debugging software .
the facility shall have suitable output and input devices that simulate the final environment in which the software will operate including a connection to scats .
test bed num initial software testing num .
the software shall be tested on the contractors testing facility without the scats connection being in place against all aspects of the design documentation .
if any faultserrors are found the software shall be corrected and completely retested again .
this process shall be repeated until no errors are found .
verify basic operation main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num scats testing num .
the software shall be tested on the contractors testing facility with the scats connection in place and in conjunction with the traffic operation centre scats personnel against all aspects of the design documentation .
if any faultserrors are found the software shall be corrected and completely retested again i.e .
starting at the test in clause num .
this process shall be repeated until no errors are found on any test .
verify scats operation num independent testing num .
the software shall be further tested on the contractors testing facility as described above by a person independent of the programmer .
if any faultserrors are found the software shall be corrected by the programmer and completely retested again i.e .
starting at the test in clause num prior to resubmission for independent testing .
this process shall be repeated until no errors are found on any test .
validate independently num testing by main roads wa num .
following completion of the above tests the relevant ngen file shall be supplied to main roads traffic operation centre for review no less than num working days prior to the planned commissioning .
the testing checklists completed to that time must also be provided to main roads wa .
if any faultserrors are found main roads the software shall be corrected and completely retested again i.e .
starting at the test in clause num .
this process shall be repeated until no errors are found on any test .
hold point num traffic signal controller testing num .
for new traffic signal installations or traffic signal modifications that require the installation of a replacement traffic signal controller the software shall be tested in the controller prior to installation in the field .
if the traffic signal controller is not to be replaced then a similar test traffic signal controller must be used .
the testing shall be completed with all hardware in place and configured in accordance with the designed controller configuration .
if any faultserrors are found the software shall be corrected and completely re tested again i.e .
starting at the test in clause num .
this process shall be repeated until no errors are found on any test .
documentary evidence of test results must be provided to main roads wa prior to any further testing being carried out .
testing of replacement controllers num soak test num .
if a new traffic signal controller is to be installed then in addition to the testing outlined in clause num the new software shall be test run in the new traffic signal controller on site for a minimum period of num hours with traffic signals off prior to commissioning .
if any faultserrors are detected during this period they must be corrected and if they relate to software then the software shall be corrected and completely retested again i.e .
starting at the test in clause num .
this process shall be repeated until no errors are found on any test .
burnin test main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num num not used post commissioning adjustments num commissioning num .
the operation of the equipment including the software shall be inspected for a minimum period of num minutes following commissioning to confirm safe and efficient operation under actual traffic .
if any faultserrors are detected during this period they must be corrected and if they relate to software then the software shall be corrected and completely retested again i.e .
starting at the test in clause num .
this process shall be repeated until no errors are found on any test .
verify operation at site num .
complete documentation shall be provided to main roads wa within five num working days of commissioning .
documentation num scats connection num .
verify that the personality checksum has been entered and communications has been established with main roads traffic operations centre .
check scats connection num post commissioning num .
upon commissioning the contractor must check inclusive of num x morning peak and num afternoon peak traffic flow periods the operation of the traffic signals for a minimum period of num hours during normal weekdays to ensure that timings and other software parameters selected are optimum .
the contractor shall also check the operation of the signal during an off peak period during minimal traffic flows .
particular attention shall be paid to the variation in normal traffic flow due to a nearby shopping centre sporting centre or other venue that generate varied traffic flow at a particular time such as a thursday night or saturday morning .
monitor operation and traffic flow num .
the contractor must adjust detector settings for sensitivity and presence time for each detector input according to the location and demand requirements for the specific lane .
complete detector settings record card supplied with the controller including input mapping information .
adjust detectors num the contractor must check with the traffic operations centre for the existence of any scats alarms and investigate and rectify any such problems .
check for alarms num .
the contractor must adjust such parameters where required produce a new eprom personality card or xpm dongle and new documentation to reflect these changes .
the software shall be corrected and completely retested again i.e .
starting at the test in clause num .
retesting num .
the contractor shall carry out a complete check as listed in annexure numl .
main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num changes to personalities num .
the time allowable for the contractor to complete any software changes shall be as follows a timing change requirements changes that can not be made in ram num hours b timing changes copied from ram into eprom or personality card num days c phasing changes num hours d additional scats features num hours e emergency personality changes due to incorrect or faulty operation num hour num. .
the updated timings will result in a new sft file being created .
if this results in a new checksum then the eprom or personality card in the controller must be replaced .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numa traffic signal personalities wa standard the ngen is a standard personality generator program that provides the user with the option of creating a new traffic signal personality editing an existing traffic signal personality or examining an existing traffic signal personality .
ngen forms part of the ngen adaptive engineering system that was created by the roads and traffic authority of nsw and used by main roads western australia .
the version of ngen currently used in western australia is version num .
it must be noted that this version has been modified to meet western australia requirements that are listed below .
num .
mode numanum num the mode entry allows variations to the controller operation to be specified .
num this entry specifies the operation particular to a country or locality e.g .
western australia .
refer appendix numb .
num .
cmode num num it is necessary to specify the nominal mains voltage to allow the controller to set up correct voltage thresholds for conflict monitoring .
the controller is also able to provide voltage control and dimming .
refer appendix numc .
num .
maxtab table of maximum time settings spare num pres num num pres num num pres num num specials num num the maximum limits for the controller time settings are fixed by the entries in the maxtab table .
refer appendix numd .
num .
cdef indexed condition definitions cdef num fdb pstatram ped x in delay walk or clearance num .
fdb numc cdef num fdb pstatram ped x in delay walk or clearance .
fdb nume note that each pointer references the base address of an array of locations which may be tested .
the test value to be used in each condition test immediately follows the pointer for the particular condition test .
num .
pointers to sunrise and sunset times dimpr fdb dimdatpers num .
manufacturers data specpr fdb mandatpers num .
pointers to tables main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num redrpr fdb redrunpers num .
dimdat dimming data dimdat equ sumdwn fdb num fdb num winris fdb num fdb num winset fdb num fdb num sumdsk fdb num fdb num refer appendix nume .
num .
conflict characteristic matrices for conventional signal groups cftabnum pelican vehicle vs pedestrian pedestrian group with flashing dont walk for clearance flashing off is conflict num .
signal group type tables for conventional signal groups pelveh equ num pelican vehicle group type num .
special condition definitions comms equ dnum scats communications mzneg equ num scats master zneg nmzneg equ dnum no scats master zneg ncomms equ num no scats communications filtrnum equ num lsb bit num set in scats xsf message nfiltrnum equ dnum no lsb bit num set in scats xsf message mzpos equ num scats master zpos nmzpos equ dnum no scats master zpos filtrnum equ num lsb bit num set in scats xsf message nfiltrnum equ dnum no lsb bit num set in scats xsf message specto equ afnum special timer num timed out nspecto equ efnum not special timer num timed out refer appendix numf .
num .
mandat manufacturers data mandat equ changes the lamp threshold to num watts refer appendix numg .
num .
pointers to flexilink tables main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num pointers to flexilink tables fcalpr fdb num frelpr fdb relprnumpers pointer to flexilink release table flexi sequence selection fdb flexiypos fdb selseqnum fdb else fdb selseqnum flexilink tables flexilink release data relprnum fdb snumrelpers sequence num fdb snumrelpers sequence num snumrel equ fdb end auto release phases fdb end r release phases fdb end r release phases fdb end q release phases fdb end q release phases fdb end auto release groups fdb end r release groups fdb end r release groups fdb end q release groups fdb end q release groups snumrel equ fdb end auto release phases fdb end r release phases fdb end r release phases fdb end q release phases fdb end q release phases fdb end auto release groups fdb end r release groups fdb end r release groups fdb end q release groups main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num fdb end q release groups num .
programmers details name ____________________________________ address ____________________________________ ________________________________________________ tel ________________ email ________________ num .
special features the programmers shall provide any special features related to the supplied software e.g .
source of code etc .
main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numb special operation modes the mode entry allows variations in the controller operation to be specified .
this entry specifies the operation particular to a country or locality .
the bits in the mode are defined as follows bit num num unused num unused bit num num to select flexilink daycodes for muslim countries num to select standard flexilink daycodes bit num num for flexilink reference at midnight numam hong kong num for flexilink reference at last plan change time bit num num for no restart from fault mode num for restart from fault mode up to limit in fails bit num num for overriding num second minimum for minimum green times num for zero minimum limit permitted for minimum green times bit num num reserved for hardware clock as master for flexilink num reserved bit num num for one second cycle generator steps in flexilink num for two second cycle generator steps in flexilink bit num num for new zealand ped feature dw extinguished until ped demand num for normal pedestrian operation bit num num for flashing yellow and all red start up sequence num for starting green start up sequence bit num num for maximum green timed from start of minimum green num for maximum green timed in extension interval only bit num num for starting redyellow before green num for normal green following red bit num num for restart by lamps on eg y under scats operation num for no restart when lamps switched on bit num num for flashing walk for pedestrian clearance num for flashing dont walk for pedestrian clearance bit num num for flashing green before yellow for vehicle displays num for normal yellow vehicle displays bit num num for operation with numhz mains frequency num for operation with numhz mains frequency bit num num to disable loading time settings into eeprom num to enable loading time settings into eeprom notes num .
bits num and num are normally specified together num .
bits num and num may not be specified together special operation mode mode fdb numanum main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numc mode entry for conflict checking it is necessary to specify the nominal mains voltage to allow the controller to set up correct voltage thresholds for the red yellow and green lamps for conflict monitoring .
the controller is also able to provide voltage control to the lamps to protect lamps against over voltage supply which shortens lamp life .
the controller is also able to provide dimming to reduce lamp intensity at night .
the cmode entry allows either none one or two levels of dimming to be specified as the default .
the function of the bits in the cmode entry for conflict checking is bit num set for quartz halogen vehicle lamps bit num set for quartz halogen pedestrian lamps bit num set to enable dimming note num bit num set to enable second level of dimming note num bit num set to enable voltage regulation bit num bit num code for mains supply voltage see below bit num i.e .
nominal lamp supply voltage bit num set for alternate control of wait outputs bit num set for delayed lamp fault reporting bit num set to disable checking yellow displays bit num set for light sensor not used or disregarded bit num set for yellow outputs used for wait indicators bit num set for keyboard password enabled bit num set to enable xsfnum control for special facilities bit num set for xsf flags according to communications status mains voltage code mains supply voltage bit num bit num bit num num num num unused num num num unused num num num numv rms num num num numv rms num num num numv rms num num num numv rms num num num numv rms num num num numv rms notes num .
with the mains voltage code specified for num volts level num dimming corresponds to a num reduction in lamp supply voltage and level num dimming corresponds to a num reduction in lamp supply voltage .
different percentage reductions for the dimming levels may be applicable for other mains supply voltages .
refer also to discussion for the dimdat table .
num .
bit num being set in the cmode entry disables checking of conflicts with yellow for all signal groups for the secondary conflict monitor only .
mode entry for conflict checking cmode fdb num main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numd table of maximum time settings the maximum limits for the controller time settings are fixed by the entries in the maxtab table .
normally this table would not need to be altered however the option is available should the need arise .
the table entries are expressed in tenths of seconds table of maximum time settings maxtab fdb num spare fdb num lsgrn fdb num min grn fdb num inc fdb num max initial fdb num max fdb num eco grn fdb num amber fdb num all red fdb num special all red fdb num gap num fdb num gap num fdb num gap num fdb num gap num fdb num hway num fdb num hway num fdb num hway num fdb num hway num fdb num waste num fdb num waste num fdb num waste num fdb num waste num fdb num ped delay fdb num walk fdb num clrnum fdb num clrnum fdb num pres num fdb num pres num fdb num pres num fdb num special movements fdb num specials num fdb num specials num main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure nume dimming table dimming table dimdat equ sumdwn fdb num earliest summer dawn hours fdb num earliest summer dawn minutes winris fdb num latest winter sunrise hours fdb num latest winter sunrise minutes winset fdb num earliest winter sunset hours fdb num earliest winter sunset minutes sumdsk fdb num latest summer dusk hours fdb num latest summer dusk minutes main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numf special condition definitions special condition definitions comms equ dnum scats communications mzneg equ num scats master zneg nmzneg equ dnum no scats master zneg ncomms equ num no scats communications filtrnum equ num lsb bit num set in scats xsf message nfiltrnum equ dnum no lsb bit num set in scats xsf message mzpos equ num scats master zpos nmzpos equ dnum no scats master zpos filtrnum equ num lsb bit num set in scats xsf message nfiltrnum equ dnum no lsb bit num set in scats xsf message specto equ afnum special timer num timed out nspecto equ efnum special timer num not timed out adjust rmb num adjust to num byte boundary tail fdb ff checksum for entire personality fdb ff checksum corrector end main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numg manufacturers data these modifications to the personality change the lamp threshold to num watts manufacturers data specpr fdb dimdatpers enter mandat table below dimdat table mandat equ fdb numcnum identifies this as a philips personality fdb ffff assumes detector setting tables are not used fdb ffff no options fdb numf lamp threshold num watts numf num decimal fdb num end table terminator main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numh traffic signals programming process receive approved drawings software request check drawing mistakes or clarification yes send back for review or amendment no fill in job description timing chart phase sequence detector chart conflict chart cable chart miscellaneous notes charts createload personality with ngen createedit test personality with wintraff .
documents and personality checked by other team member and by traffic systems manager to approve and sign on job description sheet complete document packages for client downermouchel file and on site folder .
client to be handed documents and personality package and to sign job description sheet .
check all functions faults yes no compile load to eprom card or dongle main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num traffic signals personality software check list lm rev intersection confirm lm intersection name and the revision number .
for existing sites upgrades or checking someones work .
check documentation and compare with drawings e.g .
number and type of phases number of signal groups detectors and peds .
also any special features awfs ups railway etc .
load and start program using wintraff or a workstation .
note the startup phase sequence and the revert phase .
check all programmed times with the timing chart and posted speed limits .
modify scats ram times as required flexi callbacks for diamonds and repeat phases .
check detector operation note approach numbers ped demands overlaps and callaway phases .
if possible check input mapping and peds via external inputs .
check signal phasing as well as overlaps of all signal groups as per chart .
verify signal phasing notes where possible e.g .
late starts minimum offgreenstates callback flags via flexilink check all signal conflicts and confirm with drawing and chart .
check conflict chart against drawings and program settings confirm special movements during diamonds and emergency calls .
confirm pedestrian protection and test for conflicts at various bst intergreen stages .
run phases and signals in random order noting overlaps and pedestrian protection see phase chart .
place ped demands during intergreens .
check cable charts against supplied drawings .
check for additional documentation e.g .
filter detector operation railway charts ups information advanced warning signs data timer protected ped information check for standard chartdocument formatting with up to date logos headers footers confirm personality operation on a loaded workstation or test controller if possible with a scats comms connection for testing scats features .
confirm total checksum as per timing chart and tested personality .
check and complete job description form for valid data and drawing numbers .
confirm all documentation has been copied to the inters network folder including program file .mnum timing file .hex and compiled file .sft amend and mark any errors on charts drawing in red if possible create fill out data in the downer signals database .
notes name signature date main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num initial software test lm intersection required actions on site remarks result visual check of site num .
lines and signage correctly installed yesnona num .
visual check of lamp displays completed and all correct yesnona num .
lamps poles correctly aligned yesnona controller check num .
lamp relearn carried out wattages checked yesnona num .
loops activating correctly yesnona num .
loops sensitivity frequencies ptim settings set correctly and detector settings sheet completed yesnona num .
nrts tested and nrt lamps operational yesnona num .
new documentation installed yesnona num .
relevant old paperwork transferred to site folder yesnona num .
confirm ups tested and operational yesnona num .
confirm ammended red ink markup drawings are in the folder yesnona num.confirm ammended site inventory form is in folder yesnona num .
push buttons physically tested yesnona num .
railway call early and late calls are operating correctly yesnona num .
communications to site confirmed with toc yesnona notes name signaturedate main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numl site post commissioning checks upon commissioning the contractor must check the operation of the traffic signals as listed below num l.num operations check ensure that all vehicular and pedestrian movements are executed safely .
ensure that all signal groups are operating as per design drawing and as specified in the phase sequence chart .
verify the operation of all signal groups overlap as specified .
ensure that the pedestrian protection time separation short arrow and full protection is adequate and operating correctly .
check that all software documentation in controller folder is up to date and accurate .
num l.num timing checks check that the minimum value is displayed for a safe minimum time for vehicles to enter the intersection .
check that the maximum green values are correct for isolated operation in peak periods .
check the yellow values are set according to the posted speed limit and the road gradient .
check that the allred values allow a safe clearance of vehicles within the intersection .
check that the gap headway waste values are adequate for each approach .
check the pedestrian clearance times are adequate .
check the advanced warning flashing signs awfs times are adequate .
timings can be adjusted in ram through the kdu or scats .
when all the timings are finalised the timings are burned in a new eprom or personality card and installed on site .
num l.num demands and extension ensure that all pedestrian pushbuttons demands are registered and activated to service the corresponding crossing .
ensure that all the loops demand and extensions operate as per design and detector chart to demand and extend the corresponding movement .
num l.num scats checks ensure that scats communications are correctly established .
scats masterlinkflexilink features operate as specified .
check that the scats controlled operation is correct with special flags and xsf bits correctly set and cleared .
check that all special functions under masterlink or flexilink control are operating correctly .
main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num guidance notes delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference all edits to downloaded tdp documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
deletions shall be struck through e.g .
example .
insertions shall be in italics e.g .
example .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted then the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
the custodian of this specification is the electrical engineer .
num .
scope num this specification primarily covers the requirements for new traffic signal software .
num where modifications to existing traffic signals are proposed then the scope clause num will need careful editing to clearly outline the extent of the works .
num this specification is not suitable for traffic signals installations undertaken by public transport authority .
num .
traffic signal contracts num where this specification is used in a contract that is solely or predominantly for the installation of traffic signals inclusion of and crossreferencing to other relevant specifications is likely to be required such as specification num general requirements specification num earthworks specification num concrete general works specification num antigraffiti contract specific requirements to add or delete the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
none at this time .
main roads western australia specification num traffic control equipment software page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification amendment checklist specification name no num revision no _____title traffic control equipment software project manager name ____________signature ___________date________ checked by name ____________signature _______________date________ contract no _____contract description ___________________________________ item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked change mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materialsproductsclauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from mcp .
num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection testing parameters included in spec num test methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date _______________ main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num traffic signals copyright main roads western australia main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num traffic signals revision register date clause number description of revision authorised by num num num updated traffic signal specification scope to reference vehicular signals design guidelines and changes made to traffic signal clearance requirements tseee num whole document editorial and clauses added tseee num num num updated temporary works requirements and detector loop tail length ee num num reference to correct colour code pnum replaced with tnum ee num whole document whole document ee num num annexure item num added formatting ee num num give way to pedestrian signs ee num num to num .
annexure d clauses renumbered and new items num and num were added .
annexure d added .
ee num numc appendix c added ee num num clause amended ee num num all previous clauses replaced ee num num items num num have been added ee num amended table num amended main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num as constructed drawings num num workmanship and licensing requirements num num power supply num num cooperation with others num num temporary works num num communication systems num num num not used num products and materials num num cables num num conduit and fittings num num traffic signal controllers num num uninterrupted power supply num num lanterns num num pedestrian push buttons num num pits and cable markers num num traffic signal posts and mast arms accessories num num termination enclosures num num not used num survey num num setting out num num num not used num underground works num num excavations num num pavement reinstatement procedure num num controller footing installation num num conduits not under roads num num num not used num electrical and communications conduits num num installation of conduits num num star system of wiring num num pit system of wiring num num post conduits num num cleaning of conduits num num num not used num cable installation num num installation and termination of cables num num cable pits num num num not used num vehicle detector loops num num general num main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num cutting of slots num num installation of loop cable num num loop sealing num num loop cables and loop feeders num num connection of electrical supply num num num not used num above ground works num num installation of traffic signal posts and mast arms num num lantern installation num num lantern mounting heights num num lantern aiming num num post top connections num num target boards num num pedestrian pushbutton assemblies num num audiotactile facilities num num earth connections .
num num lantern connections num num covering of lanterns num num num not used num installation of controller num num controller preparation num num controller num num temporary sinage num num num not used num installation testing requirements under new and improvement works at signalised intersections num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num traffic signals general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and installation of all components accessories and associated operational features of traffic signal facilities including testing and commissioning .
num .
this document is to be read in conjunction with the main roads western australia vehicular signals design guidelines and drawings published online .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num steel tubes and tubulars for ordinary service as num hotdip galvanized coatings on threaded fasteners iso metric coarse thread series as num metal finishing preparation and pretreatment of surfaces chemical conversion treatment of metals as num set manual of uniform traffic control devices as num road signs specifications as num pedestrian pushbutton assemblies as num traffic signal posts and attachments as num traffic signal controllers physical and electrical compatibility as num colour standards for general purposes as num vehicle loop detector sensors as num textilescoated fabrics for tarpaulins as num traffic signal mast arms as num traffic signal lamps lamps for a.c. operation at extralow voltage main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num australiannew zealand standards asnzs num conductors in insulated electric cables and flexible cords asnzs num setnum structural steel welding set asnzs num lightning protection asnzs num retroreflective materials and devices for road traffic control purposes retroreflective sheeting asnzs num set conduit and fittings for electrical installations asnzs num traffic signal lanterns asnzs num cables for traffic signal installations multicore power cables asnzs num cables for traffic signal installations feeder cable for vehicle detectors asnzs num cables for traffic signal installations loop cables for vehicle detectors asnzs num guide to the protection of structural steel against atmospheric corrosion by the use of protective coatings asnzs num plastics method for exposure to ultraviolet lamps asnzs num australian new zealand wiring rules including amendments asnzs num electrical installations selection of cables cables for alternating voltages up to and including num kv typical australian installation conditions asnzs num safety of power transformers power supply units and similar particular requirements for isolating transformers for general use asnzs num safety of power transformers power supply units and similar particular requirements for safety isolating transformers for general use asnzs num paints for steel structures organic zinc rich primer asnzs num steel utility services poles asnzs num hotdip galvanized zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles asnzs num electromagnetic compatibility emc general standards immunity for industrial environments other standards energysafety wa electrical requirements rtatcnum scats communications reference manual main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num main roads standards mrwa traffic management requirements for works on roads mrwa electrical infrastructure asset drawing guidelines part num general part num traffic control signals main roads specifications specification num traffic control equipment software specification num closed circuit television cctvmonitoring cameras specification num cable conduits for intelligent transport systems specification num concrete general works specification num antigraffiti num as constructed drawings num .
the contractor shall be responsible for record changes a updating existing as constructed drawings to reflect the site and all changes to the installation for existing sites .
b compile as constructed drawings for all new installations .
c compile as constructed drawings for site where there are no as constructed drawings .
num .
the as constructed drawings shall be amended and completed in accordance with mrwa design and drawing presentation and the mrwa electrical infrastructure asset drawing guidelines and forwarded to the superintendent within twenty days of practical completion of works .
num .
the supplied as constructed drawings shall be in a electronic in autocad format and b anum hard copy in accordance with main roads requirements .
available on main roads website .
num workmanship and licensing requirements num .
all works carried out under the contract shall comply with the requirements of asnzs num and the local supply authority and energysafety regulations .
asnzs num energysaftey num .
all workmanship shall comply with all lawful directions and requirements under the trade practice act num and shall be carried out by duly qualified personnel holding an appropriate electrical or cabling licence where required .
num power supply num .
the contractor shall submit all necessary notices required by the local supply authority to supply power to commission the traffic signals at the site .
main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the contractor shall make all arrangements with the local supply authority for the location of point of attachment and determine whether it is to be above ground or underground electricity supply .
the requirements of the drawing shall be met .
num .
where power supply from nearest street light switchboard is available it shall be the preferred supply where practicable num .
the underground point of attachment shall be at an underground service pillar supplied and installed by the local supply authority .
the contractor shall install the consumer mains from the controller into an underground isolation fuse pit within the controller apron area and on to the underground service pillar ready for the local supply authority to connect .
the consumer mains shall be nummm red black and earth double insulated round orange cable and shall be enclosed in a nummm orange pvc conduit .
the isolation fuse pit shall be an un metered supply pit meeting the requirements of the local supply authority may be sourced from the local supply authority enclosing a numamp authority and numamp customer hrc fuse .
the fuses shall be housed in separate waterproof fuse holders labelled as western power isolating point numa fuse and customer isolating point numa fuse respectively .
the labels shall be waterproof .
an underground pillar is not necessary in the event that an ums pit is installed whether the supply originates from the local supply authority or a lighting switchboard .
num .
the contractor shall forward copies of the local supply authority preliminary notice and notice of completion to the superintendent within num days of submission of notices to the service authority .
num cooperation with others num .
the contractor shall cooperate with other contractors working on site .
the contractor shall not delay other contractors works while working on site .
num temporary works num .
where the contractor is to modify the existing traffic signals the existing traffic signals shall be kept in an operational state for traffic management for the duration of the works .
num .
the existing traffic signal detection system or alternative detection system shall be fully operational for the duration of the works unless prior written approval to dispense with this requirement has been obtained from main roads traffic operations centre .
num .
the traffic control signals shall maintain an operational connection to the main roads traffic control network for the duration of the works unless prior written approval to dispense with this requirement has been obtained from main roads traffic operations centre .
main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the existing traffic signals shall have the minimum number of signal faces maintained as per as num section num for the duration of the works unless prior written approval to dispense with this requirement has been obtained from main roads traffic operations centre .
num .
electrical and operational safety shall be maintained at all times .
num .
the contractor shall liaise and coordinate all works with any associated sign road marking and road works to maintain the safety and integrity of the traffic control system at the work site .
num .
some signal layout changes may be necessary to accommodate some of the staged construction activities .
num ..
the contractor shall advise the superintendent five num days notice in writing of any temporary modifications to the existing signal installation .
num .
the contractor shall advise the superintendent in writing of any changes made to the controller timings .
num .
all works shall comply with asnzs num and wa electrical requirements .
num communication systems num .
the contractor shall coordinate all works associated with the installation of the communication systems and associated connections required at each site with the systems development manager or traffic engineering officers from the main roads traffic operations centre on num .
num .
the traffic signal controller is required to communicate with the traffic operations centre toc by way of an approved communication system .
num .
arrange and pay all costs associated with installing the communications cable to the controller and connect it to the assigned equipment terminals on the appropriate hardware inside the controller cabinet .
num .
purchase all necessary communication hardware equipment and install it inside the controller cabinet .
num .
ensure the site is communicating with toc at least num business days prior to the signals being commissioned .
num num not used products and materials num cables num .
multicore power cables shall comply with as num and shall be of the following types power cable as num a num cores consisting of num x num mm and num x num mm main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num copper conductors of numkv pvc insulated pvc sheathed .
b num cores consisting of num x num mm and num x num mm copper conductors of numkv pvc insulated pvc sheathed .
c num cores consisting of num x num mm and num x num mm copper conductors of numkv pvc insulated pvc sheathed .
num .
vehicle detector feeder cables shall comply with asnzs num and shall consist of screened twisted balancedtwin feeder cable nummm nummm plain annealed copper core conductors each polyethylene insulated tinned annealed copper drain conductor all polyethylene insulated and pvc sheathed .
asnzs num num .
vehicle detector loop cables shall comply with asnzs num and consist of one conductor num mm num mm tinned annealed copper polypropylene insulated .
asnzs num num .
other cables shall have copper conductors double insulated with vnum pvc insulation rated for numkv .
colours of cable cores shall be in accordance with table num of asnzs num for recommended identifying colours except for asnzs num a identifying colours for active wires to pedestrian push buttons and audio tactile driver unit shall be brown the supply power for the walk signal cable shall be orange and the neutral cable shall be blue .
the cable shall comply with the requirements of as num .
push buttons as num b identifying colours for active wiring to the red yellow and green aspects shall be red orange and white respectively .
colour c all conductors shall have adequate cross sectional areas to match the full current ratings of the connected equipment with less than num voltage drop as measured at the load .
the voltage drop to comply with the requirements of asnzs num wiring rules .
voltage drop num .
core identification shall be colourfast permanent non conducting compatible with the colour of the cable insulation and suitable for the location .
cable insulation num conduit and fittings num .
conduit and associated fittings shall be manufactured from orange rigid heavy duty unplasticised polyvinyl chloride upvc material in accordance with asnzs num .
asnzs num num .
the conduit interior shall be kept free from obstructions and sharp edges likely to damage electrical cables upon introduction or withdrawal from the conduit .
jointing surfaces shall be free from defects .
sharp edges num .
the dimension form and entry of conduit fittings such as couplers and bends shall be in accordance with as num .
conduit bends shall only be used and elbows shall not be used .
the supplied lengths and diameters shall be in accordance with asnzs num .
size asnzs num num .
all conduit lengths and fittings shall be clearly marked with marking main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num manufacturers name nominal size and heavy duty hd in accordance with the requirements of as num .
num .
one end of the conduit shall be formed or fitted with a socket to enable connection to conduit of the same design .
the dimensions for sockets and plain conduit entries shall be as specified in asnzs num .
conduit ends and sockets num .
all conduit and associated fittings shall comply with the requirements of asnzs num saa wiring rules and the requirements of energysafety western australia .
asnzs num num traffic signal controllers num .
the traffic signal controller shall either be an aldridge or tyco tscnum traffic signal controller or an equivalent to be approved by mrwa .
controller types num .
the traffic signal controller electrical and physical compatibility shall be as stipulated in as num .
as num num .
the traffic signal controller shall operate with scats sydney coordinated adaptive traffic system .
scats num .
the traffic signal controllers shall operate on all voltages within the range numv ac to numv ac and frequencies within the range num hz to num hz .
operating voltage num .
should the voltage subsequently fall correct operation is to be maintained to approximately numv .
below this voltage the controller shall go into power fail mode i.e .
flashing yellow .
a restart shall not occur until the voltage is within the specified range as per clause num where the controller shall restart .
control failure num .
the startup sequence shall be as follows flashing yellow startup all red a phase green or any other phase as programmed complete one full cycle as per the intersection personality if any fault is detected in the control logic the flashing yellow is to be displayed and the startup sequence terminated .
after a mains failure the startup sequence is to be automatic on the restoration of power to within the tolerances given in clause num .
start up sequence num .
the traffic signal controller shall be capable of operating continuously within the ambient temperature range numc to numc and at up to num relative humidity .
ambient temperature num .
the traffic signal controller shall be immune to radio frequency interference transients and surges on the mains supply in accordance with asnzs num asnzs num num num .
the traffic signal controller shall maintain all timings and the status of essential circuits e.g .
clock in the event of a power fail .
where battery backup is necessary to achieve this a minimum of twentyfour num hours reserve shall be provided .
an automatic battery charger must be fitted to maintain this reserve .
batteries where needed shall be supplied as part of the controller .
battery backup num .
the traffic signal controller shall provide the following main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num components main switch neutral and earth links num x twin sso with integral numma type num rcd circuit breakers to protect the following lamps num a detectors num a gpo num a flashing yellow num a ancillaries num a spare numa a suitable surge device shall also be provided .
num .
the traffic signal controller shall contain a generator supply kit to enable the connection of an external power generator comprising num x num x position switch numa rotary ipnum rated cw num x led indicators .
switch to be marked mains gen off num x numamp appliance inlet num flat pins numamp ipnum numhz grey clipsalnumainum or approved equivalent with hinged clear perspex cover ..
generator plug num .
all spare cables inside the controller shall be earthed as per annexure d. earthing of spare cables num control functions num .
the minimum number of phases required is seven num and each phase shall be capable of conditionalalternative signal group displays producing a capability of at least sixteen num options .
minimum number of phases num .
each phase shall be made up of a number of independently timed periods as detailed in annexure numa and it shall be possible to specify the colour of each signal group during each of these periods e.g .
late startminimum greenvigrestearly cut off eco yellowyellowall red .
each timed period shall have the minimum timing ranges and increments as detailed in annexure numa .
the accuracy of all timings shall be num .
phase periods num .
signal groups shall be arranged for vehicle bicycle or pedestrian displays .
the power feed to each signal display aspect shall be a nominal numv ac numhz potential .
each vehicle signal group shall be capable of displaying only red or yellow or green or off .
transitions from one display to any other may occur except green to red .
each pedestrian signal group shall be capable of displaying only dont walkcycle steady or dont walkcycle flashing or walkcycle or off .
transitions from one display to any other may occur except walkcycle to dont walkcycle steady .
signal groups num .
the controller shall be able to record traffic counts on a detector by detector basis in num minutes intervals and transmit this data on request via a serial communication link .
traffic count main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
other information which shall be available from an operating controller is as follows a current or running phase b position of a controller within a phase c next phase to be serviced d which phases have been demanded e which detectors are producing demands f operation of pedestrian movements g timings which have been set in the controller h which timers are operating at any given time i operational status of all power supplies j status of external lamps num controller housing num the enclosure shall be fully equipped for a minimum of twelve num signal groups expandable to a minimum of sixteen num signal groups .
all equipment necessary to switch a minimum of eight num signal groups shall be fitted .
the controller shall have facilities for an integral twentyfour num channel detector complement as a minimum .
all equipment necessary to operate a minimum of sixteen num detector channels shall be fully fitted .
the housing shall be suitable for mounting on a flat concrete surface having four num mnum studs set in a rectangular pattern with num mm x num mm centres and protruding num mm from the concrete base .
each of these studs shall be grade num stainless steel and come complete with nuts spring washers and flat washers of the same grade .
housing num the enclosure shall be fabricated from marine grade aluminium sheet of not less than nummm thickness .
all internal and external panel surfaces shall have an orbital sanded finish .
the controller housing shall be thoroughly cleaned etched primed and finished to a smoke blue no .
tnum in accordance with asnum .
neoprene door seals shall be fitted to ensure that water moisture and dust can not enter the interior of the enclosure giving ipnum degree of protection .
the seals shall be such that new seals can be fitted at a later date without the necessity of removing any equipment other than the old seals .
a clear antigraffiti coating shall be applied in accordance with specification num .
finish colour as num antigraffiti num .
the access door shall be hinged and it shall be possible to lock it in the num or more open position .
the door shall be secured in the closed position by two num triangular headed bolts which shall fit the key shown on mrwa standard drawing num .
the head of these bolts shall be fully recessed into the door .
access door num .
a document pocket minimum size of nummm wide x num mm high x num mm capacity shall be fitted to the inside of the door .
document pocket num .
a three num position vehiclepedestrian detector control switch to select simulated permanent demand or off or control switch main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num normal shall be provided .
num .
a two num position arterial switch shall be provided for each phase to select on or off or via user friendly interface facility .
arterial switch num .
an australian communications and media authority acma approved cabling line termination unit complete with isolation transformer and a separate access door shall be fitted to the controller housing .
a numxnummm white conduit and numxnummm white conduit for the communications service provider line shall be installed between the base of the controller and termination unit .
all equipment such as a communication card necessary to operate the controller from the scats computer shall be provided with the controller .
where controllers are connected to a dial up interrogation facility the appropriate public switching network communication card is required .
the hardware and software shall provide a compatible interface with the scats regional computer through the scats dial in system .
the scats communications channel shall comply with rtatcnum requirements and requirements of clause num .
comms .
link rtatcnum num .
all terminal strips components detectors etc .
shall be accessed from the front .
adequate provision shall be made for the outgoing lantern supply cables feeder cables and incoming power supply cable .
a separate access door shall be provided for a communications connection .
access num .
terminal blocks shall be klippon type saknum or equivalent .
the terminals shall be capable of accepting a minimum of num x num cables per aspect and num x num cables per loop feeder end .
the terminals for the loop feeders shall be separated from the other terminals .
each terminal shall be permanently and clearly labelled .
terminal block num .
a durable diagram showing the layout function and type number of all equipment within the housing shall be firmly attached and clearly displayed inside the housing .
layout diagram num .
if the signals are starwired and more than num posts are required a dummy controller housing is required to provide space for the connections .
dummy controller requirements num detectors num .
detectors shall be in accordance with as num as qualified hereunder .
asnum num .
the output shall be either a relay or a solid state device suitable for switching num volts ac or shall be integrated into the central processing system .
output voltage num .
loop isolation transformers shall be used to individually isolate each loop .
loop isolation transformer num .
the detector must be capable of being set to a presence time of at least num minutes if connected to scats .
if the controller is isolated i.e .
not connected to scats then the presence time shall be main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num set to a time of at least num minutes .
num .
all racks power supplies and other equipment necessary for the operation of detectors are to be supplied and fitted .
fitted equipment num .
one continuous detector loop feeder cable shall be installed between the controller and the assigned loop pit .
num lamp switching num .
lamp switching shall be solid state .
the current rating of each individual lamp circuit each colour of each signal group shall not be less than num amps continuous .
lamp switching num .
for any allocated group or groups which conflicts with another conflict monitoring shall ensure that only one group or groups can display green or yellow at any one time except when the flashing yellow facility is in use .
conflict interlocks shall be applied in both software and hardware .
conflict shall require that all red and green signals will be switched off within numms .
conflict monitoring num .
the controller shall monitor the failure of any one lamp of any colour in any signal group and indicate the wattage before and after failure as a pointer to the size of lamp that has failed .
lamp failure monitoring num .
the controller shall be capable of monitoring the supply voltage and within the range numv to numv shall regulate the lamp supply voltage to numv num .
voltage regulations num .
the controller shall suitably reduce the lamp supply voltage for dimming the traffic signal lamp output produced at night .
the dimming shall be initiated by either condition set in the personality or via scats .
a light sensor shall differentiate between night and day .
lamp dimming num .
a flashing yellow facility shall be provided which can be initiated by either the controller logic or the flash position of the facility switch .
the circuitry to generate this flashing yellow is to be self contained and separate from the controller logic .
it shall be possible to remove the controller logic module and still maintain the flashing yellow display .
flashing yellow num programming and operation num .
the traffic controller shall be programmed in accordance with specification num traffic control equipment software .
num .
the controller shall have the ability to reset detectors via the scats system without the need for special personality provisions num railway crossings num .
at rail crossings the applicable rail authority shall supply the cable to connect between the traffic control signal and the railway signal equipment .
the connection details shall be provided in the controller documentation .
main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
when a new traffic signal controller is to be installed at an existing site the railway interface device should be completely upgraded to current applicable technology i.e .
omron relays type lynumn with led powertran type mnuml transformer all of which shall be housed in a suitable enclosure with a transparent front cover .
the front cover shall also incorporate num x rda switch with onoff escutcheon and a metal operating lever num x rdb switch with onoff escutcheon and a metal operating lever num x numv numa fusenum x numv numa fuse .
the use of old existing technology such as sprecher and schuh relay based systems are not to be reused num uninterrupted power supply num .
uninterrupted power supply ups shall be supplied and installed in locations selected by main roads as per main roads specification num uninterrupted power supply .
ups num lanterns num general num .
lanterns shall be complete with num volt light emitting diodes led and transformers .
where indicated on the drawings directional arrow masks and louvres shall be fitted to the relevant aspects .
two mounting straps shall be supplied and fitted to each lantern .
visors shall be fitted to each lantern as per the design drawings .
the lanterns shall comply with the requirements of asnzs num and this specification .
led lanterns asnzs num num .
all lanterns on new traffic control signals sites shall only be fitted with led lanterns .
new sites num .
all lanterns are to be replaced with led lanterns where any work at the site involves work fitting or refitting existing lanterns .
modifications num lantern types num .
general purpose vehicular lanterns shall have a lens or apparent light source nominal signal diameter of nummm .
vehicular lanterns num .
pedestrian lanterns shall have two aspects of a nominal signal diameter of nummm .
pedestrian lanterns num .
lanterns shall be capable of being supplied with one two or three aspects .
aspects num optical system num .
lanterns shall meet the requirements of asnzs num for colour luminance intensity chromaticity and sun phantom .
photometric tests num mechanical and physical requirements num .
the lantern and constituent components shall have a service life in excess of num years when operated within the ambient temperature range numc degrees celsius to numc degrees celsius .
this does not include the lamps and gaskets .
life num .
plastic components must be constructed from first grade asnzs num main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num material which in turn must be moulded from pure nonrecycled or non reground stock .
the plastic shall be ultra violet stabilised as per asnzs num for a minimum of num years life where the component is partly or fully exposed to sunlight .
num .
gaskets where used shall be of a resilient material having a continuous temperature rating of not less than numc degrees celsius and be capable of being replaced in the field with the lantern installed .
gaskets num .
the door of each aspect shall be capable of being unlatched and latched from the front by a simple onehanded operation .
for doors secured by screws it shall not be necessary to use a tool or to turn the screws more than half a turn to secure or release the door .
the door shall be such that it can be hinged both on the left or right .
doors shall be fitted with antitamper inserts .
door antitamper inserts num .
lanterns shall be provided with facilities to enable them to be effectively secured between two parallel mounting straps spaced apart as shown in figure num of asnzsnum .
two mounting straps top and bottom shall be supplied with each lantern .
mounting asnzs num num .
the straps shall be manufactured from marine grade austenitic stainless steel num grade to as num and shall have a good quality surface finish free from protrusions sharp edges and abrasive surface blemishes .
mounting straps asnum num .
target boards visors and arrow masks shall be in accordance with asnzs num and main roads standard drawings .
aluminium target boards shall be made from nummm thick aluminium .
blanking plates shall be made from nummm thick aluminium .
the aluminium shall be of grade num hnum matt face .
it shall be from mill cut sheets and not from coils .
asnzs num accessories num led aspects num .
led arrays and the print circuit boards they are mounted on shall be in accordance with asnzs num .
num .
.led circuit boards as per clause num including those encapsulated in removable aspects shall be separately removable from the lantern .
num .
the maximum operational power consumption of led aspects will be as follows red aspect numw yellow aspect numw green numw num .
all other operational requirements of led aspects shall be in accordance with asnzs num .
num lantern wiring num .
wiring shall be terminated with crimp lugs and insulated boots .
the connecting wires shall be nummm with vnum pvc insulation or better and be colour coded as follows active red aspect red cable colours active yellow aspect orange cable main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num active green aspect white cable neutral black cable earth greenyellow cable num .
terminals shall be provided in an accessible position in the upper most aspect of the lantern assembly .
the terminals shall be legibly and durably identified either on or immediately adjacent to the terminals .
for screw type terminals the strands of the conductors shall not be clamped directly by the terminal screws .
terminals num transformers num .
transformers shall operate on a num volt num hertz single phase supply .
the secondary voltage shall be num volts with num volts input when supplying the nominated load .
the transformers shall comply with asnzs num .
insulation shall be minimum class h and the vacuum impregnation method shall be used to impregnate the transformer windings with the insulating resin .
the transformers secondary voltage shall not compromise luminous intensity .
asnzs num num .
transformers shall be accommodated within the lantern body with one transformer per aspect .
each transformer shall be mounted such that it can be removed mechanically and disconnected electrically and replaced in the field without the necessity to remove the lantern from its normal position .
all connections to the terminal block must be accessible and the removal and replacement of leads to the transformer or incoming supply must be able to be made without removing the transformer .
the mounting shall be such that in the event of a vehicle colliding with a traffic signal post the transformer will remain attached to the body of the lantern and the mounting bracket and not become a projectile .
the transformer shall be earthed .
transformer mounting earthing transformer num pedestrian push buttons num .
the pedestrian push buttons shall comply with australian standard as num and generally conform to the requirements of the roads and traffic authority nsw traffic signal equipment specification no .
atsnum and specification no .
pbnum except where qualified in this specification .
as num num .
pedestrian push buttons shall be capable of being mounted to the traffic signal post and shall allow manual operation by pedestrians using a nonlocking jam proof push switch .
it shall contain a maximum of extra low voltage .
mounting num .
audio tactile units shall be capable of being mounted near the top of the traffic signal post and shall contain the driver circuitry for the detector .
audio tactile units shall provide a suitable audible locating tone when the walk signal input is inactive to allow pedestrians to locate the unit .
the fundamental tone frequency shall be num numhz .
the tone shall pulse with a repetition rate of num numhz .
audio tactile units shall change tone at the commencement of the walk signal input becoming active to alert pedestrians of the commencement audio tactile units main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num of the crossing period .
the change tone frequency shall decay exponentially from numhz to num numhz .
the duration of the change tone shall be numms numms .
following this the unit shall provide an audible crossing tone for the duration of the walk signal input being active to alert pedestrians of the duration of the crossing period .
the fundamental crossing tone frequency shall be num numhz .
the tone shall pulse with a repetition rate num numhz .
the unit shall provide a touched sense crossing when the walk signal input is active to alert visually impaired pedestrians to the cross period .
num .
audible signal levels shall be automatically adjusted for consistent movements in ambient noise level .
in addition a three position switch labelled normal high and low shall be provided within the unit to allow the output audible signal level to be increased or decreased respectively .
signal levels num .
the design for generating the crossing signal shall be fail safe to ensure that the signal can not be emitted unless the walk signal input is active interlocking num .
the pushbutton shall provide a switch mechanism normally off and actuated when depressed .
the button shall be a minimum of nummm in diameter .
the buttons travel shall be nummm num mm .
the activating and restoring forces of the pushbutton shall comply with asnum .
the push button shall be actuated by movement of the button through num of its travel from its rest state to its fully depressed state .
the push button shall be deactuated by movement of the button through num of its reverse travel from its fully depressed state to its rest state .
the switch shall have a minimum numma current rating .
the switching shall be compatible with an mrwa approved traffic signal controller .
button num .
a combination visualtactile single head arrow shall be displayed on the front of the push button assembly indicating to the pedestrian the direction of the associated crossing .
the arrow shall be distinctive both visually and by touch .
the arrow shall be able to rotate in the vertical plane .
the arrow shall provide the tactile signals .
arrow the pedestrian pushbutton assembly shall be attached to the post using the predrilled holes provided in the post or by drilling and tapping new holes in an existing post such that the height of the push button places the centre of the button nummm above ground level .
height except for medians the pedestrian push button face shall be either parallel with the kerb of the associated crossing or parallel with the pedestrian crossing road markings as shown on the drawing and to suit the intended design of the crossing .
the pedestrian push button face shall be parallel with the pedestrian crossing road markings where fitted on posts within median islands as shown on the drawing .
the single headed arrow disc shall point in the direction of pedestrian travel .
where pedestrian pushbutton assemblies are installed on median island posts the standard singleheaded arrow disc shall be replaced push buttons on main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num with a twoheaded arrow disc pointing to each direction of pedestrian travel as indicated on the drawing .
the medians on each post where a pedestrian pushbutton assembly is installed a selfadhesive explanatory label shall be affixed above it .
care is to be taken to ensure the correct label is fitted jpednum type for exclusive pedestrian movements jpednum for combined vehiclepedestrian movements and jpednum for combined pedestrianbicycle movements .
selfadhesive labels num .
the components shall be housed in durable weather proof housing with an ipnum protection rating .
the housing shall be of sufficient mechanical strength to withstand vandalism .
the housing shall be manufactured from corrosion resistant materials .
the unit shall be designed to be aesthetically pleasing .
it shall be arranged to prevent any injury to pedestrians and maintenance staff .
the pedestrian push button assembly shall not exceed numkg .
the audio tactile driver shall not exceed numkg.the driver unit shall be capable of being securely mounted to the post using a single u bolt mnum x nummm thread arrangement supplied with the unit .
the u bolt shall be supplied with num x mnum hex nuts num x mnum thin hex nuts and num x num flat washers all of which are hot dip galvanized in accordance with as num .
housing mounting tactile driver unit as num num .
the pedestrian push button shall have a service life in excess of ten years with a minimum of ten million actuations when operated continuously in the western australian environment .
design life num .
the audio tactile driver shall provide the following wiring connections num .
when parallel walks with time delay protection are installed new or upgraded sites .
mrgtnum turning vehicles give way to pedestrians signs to be installed as primary displays on posts nearest to the left or right turn movement where the rule applies .
signs to be removed after three months .
type colour length earth connection cable green yellow num mm electrical supply cable brown num mm electrical neutral cable blue num mm walk signal cable orange num mm bicycle walk cable orange num mm wiring give way to pedestrians signs num pits and cable markers num .
the design and construction of the pits and lids shall prevent the ingress of rain and surface water when installed .
the pits and constituent components shall give a service life in excess of num years when installed in a temperature range of numc degrees celsius to numc degrees celsius and within the environment condition of western australia num .
the preferred material for all pits is polymer plastic however glassfibre reinforced concrete pits will be accepted for termination pits and double lid cable pits .
the sides of the pit shall have sufficient strength to resist soil pressures of minimum numkpa .
the pit shall have a maximum nummm deformation when installed and surrounding soil suitably compacted .
the termination pit shall have material main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num sufficient mechanical strength and stability to withstand vehicular traffic when installed .
the termination pit and lid shall be rated at a minimum numkg wheel load .
other pits shall have sufficient mechanical strength and stability to withstand pedestrian traffic load of minimum numkg when installed .
the pits and lids shall not be deformed and disturbed when compacting the surrounding soil .
num .
the pit walls shall be of uniform thickness and shall facilitate the installation of up to eight nummm with outside diameter of nummm in accordance with asnzsnum hd pvc conduits .
limits of conduit cut outs shall be marked on the pit walls .
conduit entries num .
the preferred material for all lids is polymeric plastic however precast concrete lids will be accepted .
all pit lids shall be fitted with suitable lifting arrangements designed to resist tampering by the general public .
an industry standard plastic plug shall be installed to plug the lifting hole to help alleviate water and sand ingress .
each pit shall also be fitted with an industry standard plastic gasket under the lid to reduce the entry of foreign material into the pit .
any pit lid shall fit all pits of the same type of pit .
there shall be no gaps between the lid and edge of the pit that cause hazards for members of the public wearing high heels or similar footwear .
lids num .
termination pits shall conform to the form and dimensions shown in mrwa drawing num .
the termination pit lid shall be constructed extending past pit sides and to fit securely over the pit opening with a suitable water seal .
for termination pits two opposing pit walls shall provide a shoulder or fixture for the termination box and support tray .
the support tray and termination box shall be easily removed from the pit .
termination pit num .
double lid cable pits shall conform to the form and dimensions shown in mrwa drawing num .
the double lid cable pit shall be designed for a double lid assembly supported by a t bar as detailed in the drawings .
the t bar shall be aluminium and designed to suit the pit and lid .
the double lids shall sit flush with and be contained within the pit surrounds .
double lid cable pit num .
cable draw pits shall be a viscount vipit range model pnum cable pit or similar .
cable draw pit num .
loop and earth pits shall be a viscount vipit range model pnum cable pit or similar approved .
communication pits shall be viscount vipit model or similar approved pnum cable pit .
loop earth and comms pit num .
all conduit locations shall be marked at their ends at footpath level with cable route markers set in concrete .
the cable marker shall be embossed with mrwa electric cable and an arrow showing the direction of the conduit and cable .
num mm diameter aluminium cable markers with the words mrwa electric cable embossed into the disk and num x nummm long hooks for casting into concrete shall be cast into the concrete surround to identify the direction of all conduit runs using the embossed arrow .
conduit and cable markers num .
to identify the location of underground electric cables nummm wide orange danger tape shall be installed nummm above the conduits .
orange danger tape num .
the pits shall have a good quality surface finish free from finish main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num protrusion and abrasive surface blemishes .
all edges shall be rounded with a nominal radius of nummm .
polymer plastic pits or lids shall have a uniform black colour .
glassfibre reinforced concrete pits shall have a uniform grey colour .
colour num .
for all termination double lid cable cable draw and loop pits the wording mrwa electric cable shall be moulded into the top of the pit lid and shall be centrally located .
the height of lettering shall be nummm .
lid identification num .
for all earth pits the wording mrwa earth shall be moulded into the top of the pit lid and shall be centrally located .
earth pit lid num .
for all communications pits the wording mrwa comms or mrwa communications shall be moulded into the top of the pit lid and shall be centrally located .
comm .
pit lid num .
controller base mouldings shall conform to the form and dimensions shown in the drawings .
controller base num .
where steel work is used it shall be hot dip galvanised in accordance with as nzs num and all welds shall comply with asnzs numpart num .
asnzs num asnzs num num .
electrical pits shall not weigh more than those specified below weight a termination pit lids shall not weigh more than numkg .
polymer plastic termination pits shall not weigh more than num kg .
glassfibre reinforced concrete termination pits shall not weigh more than numkg .
termination pit b cable draw pit lids shall not weigh more than numkg each .
polymer plastic cable draw pits shall not weigh more than num kg .
glassfibre reinforced concrete cable draw pits shall not weigh more than numkg .
cable draw pits c other pit lids shall not weigh more than numkg each .
other pits num traffic signal posts and mast arms accessories num general num .
traffic signal posts mast arms and all accessories shall be of the form dimensions material and finish specified in as num and asnzs num .
mast arms shall be designed in accordance with asnum .
the posts shall be hotdip galvanised inside and outside with a minimum coating of num grams per square metre in accordance with asnum .
all areas of steel exposed during machining including holes and edges shall be touched up with a zinc enriched primer complying with asnzs num as num asnzs num as num as num asnzs num num .
mounting brackets and accessories shall be designed to fit a traffic signal post of nominal outside diameter between nummm and nummm with thickness of nummm in accordance with asnum as num and mrwa standard drawing .
size as num as num num .
mounting brackets and accessories shall be designed to fit a traffic signal mast arm in accordance with as num and mrwa standard drawing num .
mast arm as num num .
traffic signal posts shall be powder coated with exterior traffic signal main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num grade lead free polyester .
the finished colour and specular gloss value shall meet requirements of as num colour golden yellow ynum with antigraffiti finish applied in accordance with specification num anti graffiti .
minimum coating thickness shall be num microns .
post colour as num num terminal assembly num .
the terminal assembly shall allow the termination of num core traffic signal cable and traffic signal lantern cabling associated with traffic control signals including pedestrian push buttons no leftright turn signs and audible pedestrian push button tactile drivers .
the terminals shall be divided into four sections .
each section shall be separated by a klippon ap end section or approved equivalent .
a section num commencing at the top of the rail shall consist of num earth terminals .
b section num shall consist of num terminals dedicated for signal lantern active conductors .
the terminals shall be clearly numbered from top to bottom num to num and gry with terminal labels c section num shall consist of num terminals dedicated for signal lantern neutral conductors .
both terminals shall be electrically connected by a two way jumper bar .
the terminals shall be clearly identified with a blue terminal labels .
d section num shall consist of a single earth terminal .
num .
terminals shall be klippon astnum tsnum mounting polymide num with pushon tab connections or equivalent consisting of num spade terminals horizontally oriented .
the spade terminals shall be tin nickel plated brass or copper alloy angled and compatible with utilux female connectors type hnum and utilux insulators type hnum .
earth terminals shall be klippon earth terminal eknum or approved equivalent .
the terminals shall be secured by a terminal strip locking bar .
num finial cap num .
the finial cap material shall be polymer plastic .
the finial cap form dimensions and degree of protection shall conform to clause num and figure num num of as num .
two mounting slots nummm wide shall be located num apart at the base of the finial cap .
these slots shall be nummm deep .
the cap shall have a ridge around its base to allow the cap to be secured by suitable clamps .
finial cap num .
the finial cap shall be provided with a plastic coated multi strand wire arrestor strap .
the arrestor strap shall be of suitable strength to resist breaking should the traffic signal post be struck .
the arrestor strap shall be nummm long .
the arrestor strap shall be fitted with a connection at either end designed to be secured by an mnum bolt .
arrestor strap num .
the arrestor strap shall be securely fitted to the finial cap and located nummm from one of the mounting slots along the circumference of the finial cap .
the fitting shall be an mnum bolt complete with flat washer shake proof washer and a dome nut .
num .
the arrestor strap connections and cap fitting shall be marine grade num stainless steel .
finish main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the colour of the finial cap shall be black .
colour num termination enclosures num .
the enclosure shall be of rigid and robust plastic material .
the enclosure shall have a clear lid that is removable through bayonet type captive screws .
the screws shall be operated by a quarter turn of a coin or similar tool .
the enclosure shall provide a sealed and suitable environment for terminations and prevent the ingress of water or dust .
silica gel bags or similar shall be provided suitable to absorb moisture .
the silica gel bags num mm x nummm shall contain num grams of silica gel self indicating num mesh .
the bags shall be made of fabric called calico .
for terminating num core cable a klockner moeller box part no mrnumxjp and for terminating num core cable a klockner moeller box part no mrnumjp .
any other equivalent terminating core cable used to be approved by the principal .
enclosures silica gel bags num .
the support tray shall be nummm thick marine grade aluminium plate suitably moulded to fit into the termination pit and rest securely on the lip provided .
the tray shall allow the enclosure to be fixed and be located appropriately within the pit .
support tray num .
nummm mounting rails tsnum klippon part no num or similar shall be used .
rails num not used survey num setting out num .
the contractor shall mark out the position of all signal components in accordance with the drawings .
contractor to mark out num .
the contractor shall in the course of the works verify by careful excavation the location of all services and objects likely to conflict with the works and if necessary modify the post conduits pits and controller locations .
contractor to verify location num .
the contractor shall advise the superintendent in writing of any modifications to the location of posts conduits pits and controller from the drawing .
num .
the contractor shall further check with the service authorities that the modified positions of components are clear of underground or overhead services .
the marked location of each post and controller approved by the superintendent prior to excavation of foundations shall constitute approval to the sitting of the post or the controller position only and shall in no way relieve the contractor from his obligations under this clause .
contractor to check num num not used main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num underground works num excavations num .
the excavation depth shall be such that all conduits have a minimum cover from top of the conduit to the finished surface of num mm and a maximum cover of nummm .
the minimum excavation depth for consumer main shall comply with wa electrical requirements .
conduit cover num .
all excavations shall be kept to a minimum .
the excavation width shall not exceed nummm .
all open pits excavations trenches and bores shall be fenced off or protected from vehicular traffic and pedestrians during the progress of the work .
excess spoil shall be removed at the end of each day .
extra care must be taken not to damage the sides of trenching .
excavation width kept to minimum num .
the lines of trenches shall be as shown on drawings .
before any pavement excavation is commenced the limits of the trench shall be precut with a diamond concrete saw to a depth of not less than nummm .
line of trenches num .
where excavation of reinforced concrete areas is carried out care shall be taken not to damage the steel reinforcing rods or mesh which shall be cut through only at the centre of the trench .
in the course of excavation the steel reinforcing may be bent aside but shall be replaced and bars lapped in their original positions when the trench is backfilled .
reinforced concrete num .
prior to any excavations on bridges or structures the contractor shall notify the superintendent in writing .
hold point num .
where shown on the drawings conduit junction pits and detector pits shall be provided .
any subsoil drains disturbed during the excavation or laying of conduits shall be reinstated to the satisfaction of the responsible authority .
pits drains num .
conduits to be installed so that they enter through the side of cable pits .
conduit entry num pavement reinstatement procedure num backfill material num .
backfill shall be excavated material free from rocks clay stones sections of pavement material or organic and perishable matter and shall be of uniform composition and moisture content .
under trafficable paved areas clean sand shall be used as backfill .
backfill num bedding num .
prior to backfilling the conduits shall be bedded on and surrounded by an nummm layer of clean yellow sand .
num placing num .
backfill materials shall be placed in layers not exceeding num mm loose thickness prior to compaction .
layer thickness main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num compaction num .
the material shall be compacted to the bottom of the pavement under trafficable areas or natural surface in other areas to a characteristic dry density ratio cddr of num or num num blows using the perth sand penetrometer .
in the event that other than perth sand is used for fill compaction shall be num characteristic dry density ratio .
compaction num .
if a penetrometer is used a calibration certificate from a nata registered laboratory shall be provided in respect to the material tested .
the maximum test depth of the penetrometer is not to exceed num metres .
where fill depths exceed num metres multiple testing shall be carried out during the backfilling operation with clear documentation provided detailing such testing .
testing num .
the contractor shall provide compaction certificates showing the location number of tests and depth ranges for each line .
the dry density ratio shall be determined at six locations per line .
the locations shall be selected in accordance with mrwa test method wa num random sample site location and the characteristic dry density ratio calculated in accordance with mrwa test method num .
num pavement num .
the sub base shall be nummm laterite gravel or nummm single layer limestone compacted to num cddr .
sub base num .
the base course layer shall be nummm laterite gravel or num bituminised stabilised limestone compacted to num cddr .
base course num .
the primerseal shall be a two num coat seal using crs num cationic rapid setting class num bitumen emulsion covered with granite aggregate in the following combination primerseal a numst coat num lm covered with num mm aggregate .
b numnd coat num lm covered with num mm aggregate .
primerseal width is to be set out so as to allow for any insitu kerbing to be cast on the primerseal surface .
num .
the asphalt shall be nummm thick dense graded granite num mm intersection mix for intersections or nummm dense graded granite nummm mix for other areas .
the contractor shall ensure not to damage the side of trenching .
asphalt num .
the finished surface shall be between nummm to nummm above the existing surface .
finished surface num if the final asphalt is not placed the same day as backfilling num bsl shall be used laid to nummm above the pavement surface .
same day asphalt num controller footing installation num .
the traffic signal controller shall be installed on a concrete footing or smooth pavement material that matches the surrounding pavement .
the orientation of the base shall be such that the back of the controller when mounted shall face into the intersection .
orientation num .
the top of the controller base shall be smooth and level to prevent twisting of the controller frame and poor door alignment .
the walls of the pits shall be left in a smooth finish to prevent damage to level main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num electrical cables .
num .
a double lid cable pit shall be installed in front of the controller .
the number of conduits to be installed between the double lid pit and the controller footing shall be eight .
they shall be installed in two rows each consisting of num x minimum nummm orange conduits .
the main earth electrode shall be installed in its own earth pit and connected directly to the controller earth link .
cable pit num .
after installing the controller footing the pit opening shall be capped and adequate barricading to be maintained until the controller housing is installed .
num .
the concrete apron around the controller shall be nummm x nummm minimum and shall be installed in one of the following ways a slabbed concrete apron comprising minimum nummm thick slabs .
b poured concrete apron .
the concrete shall be laid in one continuous pour of nummm thickness and with a broomed finish .
if this method is chosen the contractor shall be responsible for making sure that any communications provider that gains access to the communications pit to install its conduit and cable without disturbing the concrete hardstand .
c smooth pavement material that matches the surrounding area .
dimensions num .
the finished concrete surface shall comply with specification num concrete general works .
num conduits not under roads num .
trenches shall be backfilled as per clause num except that clean yellow sand shall be used as the backfill .
backfill num .
the top nummm of backfill material in unpaved areas is to be of selected material from the site of the same soil composition as the original surface material or material of a type approved by the superintendent as suitable .
top nummm num .
in footways paved with paving blocks or slabs no asphaltic material shall be used but the contractor shall replace the paving blocks or slabs on sand compacted and levelled .
footways num num not used electrical and communications conduits num installation of conduits num .
the completed underground electrical conduits with cable installed shall comply with the requirements of australian standard asnzs num for category a underground wiring systems in addition to any other requirements contained in this contract .
conduit compliance num .
couplings and bends used for pvc conduit shall be of sufficient length to allow the pipe to be inserted with a penetration couplings bends main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num equivalent to the nominal bore of the pipe .
couplings shall have a moulded stop in the centre to ensure equal engagement of conduits from both ends .
before insertion the interior of the fitting and the end of the conduit shall be thoroughly cleaned then liberally coated with a conduit manufacturers approved bonding agent .
num .
conduits shall be installed generally in the locations as shown on the drawings .
conduits shall be installed so that they enter the cable pit from the side within the specified depth .
installation details num .
conduit ends shall be capped at the time of installation to reduce the possibility of sand or other foreign material entering the conduits .
num .
these conduits shall cross the centre islands in the locations shown on the drawings .
when crossing slip lanes the in conduits shall be laid above the out conduits .
num .
where conduit is cut for median island posts the end not used shall be plugged with a conduit manufacturers approved cap glued in place to ensure dirt or sand does not enter the conduit .
if there are three or more lanes the right and centre lane loop detector cable shall be run to the median and a loop pit installed .
the single nummm conduit for the loop detector cable shall then be cut and both ends terminated in the loop pit .
conduits to be plugged num .
all conduit locations shall be marked at their ends at footpath level with cable route markers set in concrete .
num star system of wiring num .
the standard arrangement for conduit installation using the star system of wiring requires each traffic signal post to be individually connected with nummm conduits to the controller .
star wiring system conduit num .
for loop pits there shall be one loop feeder nummm conduit per direction linked in and out of the loop pits .
maximum of num loop feeder cables in a single nummm conduit .
install additional numxnum mm conduit for next set of loop feeder cables .
num .
from the controller to the first intermediate pit num x nummm spare orange conduits and num x nummm spare white conduit shall be laid .
from the intermediate pit to the last post num x nummm spare conduit shall be laid .
spare conduits num .
the conduits shall be laid out side by side in a common trench in the following order a outer conduit num x nummm white for communication cables linked from controller to each immediate pitpost .
b second outer conduit num x nummm for loop feeder cables linked in and out of the loop pits .
c third and fourth from outer conduits num x nummm orange spare conduit .
d inner conduits num x nummm for post cables in ascending order of each post number .
e dummy controller shall be installed next to main controller subject to sites constraints .
install conduits dummy controller main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num between the main and dummy controller as per below i install minimum of num x num mm conduit between the controller and dummy controller including feeder loop cable requirements .
ii install minimum of one num core cable between the two controllers .
f install num x num mm spare orange conduit for each corner island under the give way signs .
num pit system of wiring num .
the standard arrangement for conduit installation using the pit system of wiring requires num x nummm and num x nummm conduits to be laid in a ring around the intersection .
the ring shall start in a clockwise direction leaving the controller as the out conduits and finish at the controller as the in conduits .
the conduits shall be laid side by side in a common trench in the following order pit wiring system conduit installation a outer conduit num x nummm white for communication cables linked in and out of the termination pits to form a ring back to the controller b second from outer conduit numx nummm for loop feeder cables linked in and out of the loop pits .
c third from outer conduit num x nummm for ring main cables linked in and out of all termination pits .
d fourth from the outer conduit num x nummm for spare linked in and out of all termination pits .
e inner conduit num x nummm for post cables linked in and out of all termination pits .
num post conduits num .
between the conduit and the traffic signal post an orange num mm corrugated flexible conduit shall be used .
the corrugated conduit shall be pushed inside the nummm conduit for a minimum of nummm and into the post so as to be nummm above ground level .
corrugated conduit num cleaning of conduits num .
all conduits must be thoroughly cleaned internally prior to installing cables in the conduit .
this shall be done by pulling a swab or similar through the conduit .
cleaning of conduits num .
all conduits must have smooth edges to prevent cable damage when pulling cable through the conduit .
smooth edges num num not used cable installation num installation and termination of cables num general num .
all cable sizes and wiring arrangements shall comply with cable sizes main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num the provisions listed below unless otherwise specified on the drawings wiring arrangements a at intersection traffic signals using a star system of wiring the posts shall be connected by a num core cable direct to the controller through the cable draw pits in accordance with the drawings .
star system b at intersection traffic signals using a pit system of wiring the controller termination pits and all cable pits adjacent to the traffic signal posts shall be connected by a num or num multicore ring main circuit as detailed on the drawings .
a num core cable shall be used to connect the post to the cable pit .
pit system c at intersections with bad drainage where the main road is floodway and where pits hold water for a long time posts shall be connected to the controller using post top ring main assembly and the installation shall be in accordance with the drawings .
post top ring main assembly d at all installations pedestrian push buttons shall be connected to the terminal strip by multicore vnum cable having two core and earth num nummm .
e for all works one continuous detector feeder cable for each detector loop shall be drawn through conduits from the loop detector pit near the detector loops to the controller .
the use of inline cable joints or repairs is unacceptable .
an approved cable joint is only allowed for loop cables in the loop pit .
num .
interconnecting cables shall be drawn through conduits .
it shall be possible to remove and replace any cable without the need for the disconnection of other cables with the exception of loop feeder cable .
cable replacement num .
any cables in which the insulation or sheathing is damaged before or during installation shall be replaced by the contractor at his own expense .
powdered soapstone talc or other approved lubricant may be used as required when pulling the cable into conduits .
particular care must be taken when the outer or inner sheath is being removed and only appropriate stripping tools shall be used at all times .
damaged cable num terminations num .
the following terminals or similar shall be used .
a earth terminals eknum klippon part no num terminals b end bracket ewknum klippon part no num c terminals sakrnum klippon part no num d partition hpnum klippon part no num e cross connect qb comb klippon part no num f end plate ap klippon part no num g terminal markers klippon part no dekafix num main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
cable glands shall be qed stb num stb num or stb num or similar .
cable glands num .
the nummm and nummm cable cores shall be connected using the following crimplugs crimp lugs a black bootlace crimp no num size din nummm individual type or no num size din nummm magazine type .
b red bootlace crimps no num size standard nummm individual type or no num size standard nummm magazine type .
c blue bootlace crimps no num size nummm magazine type .
num .
the following colour coding for bootlace crimps shall apply a all nummm ring main out cores black bootlace crimps .
lug colours b all nummm ring main in cores red bootlace crimps .
c all nummm post cable out cores at controller and termination pits black bootlace crimps .
d all nummm cable cores blue bootlace crimps .
num .
the crimplugs shall be applied using the crimping tool stipulated in this specification or alternatively one specified by the crimplug manufacturer for the particular crimplug .
crimping num .
cable cores that are nummm namely the neutral the grey and the earthwires contained in the numcore cable may be directly terminated without the use of crimplugs .
nummmnum cable cores num .
all earth stud connections shall be made using nummmnum x nummm num hole earthing lugs .
earthing num .
alternative methods of electrical connection will not be accepted unless the superintendent gives prior written approval .
num cable joints num .
the use of inline cable joints or repairs is not acceptable .
joins in the num num and num core cables are not permitted .
similarly joins are not permitted in loop cables or loop feeders except where the loop detector cable joins the loop feeder cable .
joints num cable ties num .
only black uv stabilised cable ties shall be used .
colour num cable chart num .
the controller shall contain a copy of the cable chart .
it shall show the connection details for controller all pits and posts .
all termination pits shall contain a copy of the cable chart .
it shall be laminated and fixed to the inside of the termination box lid so as to be visible without removing the lid .
for existing post top ring main sites one copy of the wiring chart shall be placed in the controller .
cable chart main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num direction of ring main cable num .
all out cable cores shall be loomed in black spiral wrap and all in cable cores shall be loomed in white spiral wrap for identification .
all cores of individual cables shall be contained in one loom and shall be separate to the cores of other cables .
each individual core of cables shall be brought out of the loom separately .
only non flammable num mm spiral wrap shall be used .
spiral wrap num cable pits num general num .
all termination pits shall be mounted sufficiently below ground level so that their lids sit flush to ground level when fitted .
double lid cable pits loop pits earth pits and communication pits shall be installed with the top of their walls flush to ground level .
all pits that are not set within a concreted area shall have a concrete surround .
the termination pit and double lid draw pit shall have steel reenforced concrete surround .
the surface of the concrete skirt surround shall be flush to ground level .
the dimensions of the concrete skirt shall be nummm wide and nummm thick .
a nummm clearance shall be allowed between the lid and surround to permit removal of the lid during maintenance .
pits that are not set within a concreted area shall have a concrete surround nummm wide and nummm thick .
loop pits shall be mounted one metre back from the kerb face to provide maintenance workers with a safe working distance from the carriageway .
pits to be flush reenforced concrete surround num .
termination pits shall be installed in accordance with the drawings .
termination pits num .
where the conduits enter the cable pits a neat hole shall be cut using a hole cutter or similar tool .
pits with holes knocked in with a hammer or similar tool are not acceptable .
prior to backfilling around the pits the conduits are to be sealed to the outside of the pit using a num sandcement mortar .
any excess mortar inside the pit must be removed .
alternatively the conduit may be sealed to the inside of the pit using silicone sealant .
holes and fractures in the pit wall are not acceptable .
conduits to be terminated to the side of the pits without use of conduit bends and elbows .
conduits shall enter the pit with nummm of conduit penetrating into the pit .
making holes num termination box preparation num .
the contractor shall prepare and install in all termination pits a termination box of the size specified in the cable chart .
termination pit num .
the termination box assembly shall include the installation of the following bridging wires termination box a earth wire an earth wire bridge same size conductor as the ring main earth cable core shall be connected between the a rail earth terminal and the b rail earth terminal in the num core termination box and between the x rail y rail and z rail earth terminals in the num core termination box .
earth wire b neutral a neutral bridge wire same size conductor as the ring main neutral cable core between the x rail neutral wire main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num and z rail neutral terminals in the num core termination box .
num .
the termination box shall be fitted to the aluminium support tray using four only nummm x nummm cadmium plated screws .
the support traytermination box assembly shall be placed on the ledge provided within the termination pit .
support tray num .
ipnum rated waterproof cable glands shall be used where a cable enters and exits a termination box .
cable glands num termination box ring main connection num .
ring main cables shall enter and exit the termination box from the underside .
num .
for num core ring main cables the in cable shall enter the termination box under the right side of the x terminal rail and the out ring main shall exit under the left side of the z terminal rail .
ring mainnum core cable num .
for num core ring main cables the in cable shall enter the termination box under the right side of the a terminal rail and the out ring main cable shall exit under the left side of the a terminal rail .
num core cable num .
the cable cores within the termination box shall be neatly formed and laced to allow individual conductors to be connected and disconnected to the appropriate numbered terminal in accordance with the cable connection chart .
the cores of different cables shall not be laced together in the same loom .
the cores of the in ring main cable shall be wrapped with white spiral wrap and the cores of the out ring main cable shall be wrapped with black spiral wrap .
the numbered or colour coded in core shall be connected to the left most hole of its assigned terminal the corresponding out core shall be connected to the next hole to its right of the same terminal number .
in the numcore termination box it leaves the right most terminal of the same terminal number empty .
the bunching and tying of cores shall be arranged such that all terminal labelling remains visible allowing individual cores to be conveniently disconnected from any terminal for subsequent maintenance .
cable cores num .
all cables shall have sufficient slack to enable the completed termination box to be lifted out of the termination pit and placed on the ground without placing undue strain on the cables .
the surplus cable shall be coiled inside the pit in such a manner that it shall not prevent the support tray from sitting in its correct position or cause the cables to kink .
slack cable note all ring main cable cores shall be connected in the termination pits regardless of the controller type .
however for controllers with lamp conflict monitoring only the cores specified on the cable chart shall be connected to the controller terminals .
to complete the ring main circuit at the termination pits the incoming and outgoing terminals shall be bridged using a two pin bridging link e.g weidmuller qsnum or similar approved pin bridging link .
where there are three posts per signal group connected in one termination box a num pin bridging link e.g weidmuller qsnum plug or similar shall be used .
the use of two qsnum plugs in this situation is not acceptable .
main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num termination box post connections num .
post cable entries into the termination box post cable a each post cable shall have num metres of slack cable coiled in the bottom of the termination pit .
b the post number shall be clearly labelled with brady cable markers or similar approved by the superintendent around the sheathing close to the entry of the termination box .
c post cables shall enter num core termination boxes from the sides .
d post cables shall enter num core termination boxes from the front .
e each post cable shall be separately loomed using black spiral wrap and each core exits the loom separately .
f the post number shall be marked on each core of the post cable close to the terminal using brady cable markers or similar approved by the superintendent .
num .
post cable connections in the terminations box a the terminations shall be made according to the cable chart .
b the grey common on all post cables shall be connected for maintenance test purposes even if it is not required for pedestrian push buttons .
c unused post cable cores shall be kept to a sufficient length for future connection insulated and contained within the same post cable loom .
d there are three terminals for each output in the numcore termination box and two terminals for each output in the numcore termination box .
num cable connections num .
annexure numb shows typical connections in the terminal box for a numcore cable ring main system and numcore post cable .
the num core cable ring main system is similar but uses six terminals for each signal group that is two red two yellow and two green .
terminal box num .
detector cables are connected in a loop pit as detailed in clauses num .
detector cable num telecommunications cables num .
an insulated drawwire shall be installed in the telecommunications conduit between the terminal box on the side of the controller housing and the communications pit .
num earthing num .
all posts lanterns transformers and controller shall be earthed as required by as num and energysafety western australia .
an earth stake for the main earth shall be driven through the earth pit as num main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num into the soil and connected to the earth bar in the controller .
num cleaning of pits num .
pits are to have all foreign material removed and be cleaned by vacuum cleaner prior to all tests being completed and accepted by the superintendent .
num num not used vehicle detector loops num general num .
vehicle detector loops shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the drawings in the positions indicated .
loops num .
detector loops are normally set to the presence mode .
passage mode will be specified in the controller documentation when required .
num cutting of slots num .
the road pavement shall have slots cut to a depth of nummm minimum using a single nummm wide diamond saw .
the use of two thinner blades to cut the slot is not permitted under any circumstance .
cutting loops num .
the slots shall be overrun so as to be full depth at all corners .
the corners shall be rounded full depth minimum radius nummm so as not to present a sharp edge to the loop cables .
before cables are placed the slot shall be clean and dried so that no moisture detritus dust and other foreign matter remains in the slot .
num .
a nummm grey corrugated conduit shall be installed between the end of the saw cuts in the pavement and the loop pit behind the kerb .
at the point where the loop cables enter the corrugated conduit at road level the surplus room in the conduit shall be plugged with an easily removable filler for future reuse and then sealed over .
num installation of loop cable num .
cables shall not be placed until the superintendent has inspected the slot .
hold point num .
loop cable shall be installed at the bottom of the saw cut so that there are no kinks curls or stretching of the cable .
care shall be taken not to damage the insulation when placing the cable .
metal implements such as screwdrivers shall not be used to seat the cable down .
the ends of the loops are brought into a loop pit located near the kerb .
num .
a conduit must be installed between the end of the saw cuts in the pavement and the loop pit .
before the loop cables are jointed and before application of sealant to the sawslots the contractor shall carry out a wiring check .
wiring check num .
when it has been determined that the loop cable has been retainers main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num correctly installed the cable shall be retained in the slot at approximately nummm spacing and nummm from each corner with suitable plastic retainers such as plastic wall plugs .
each cable end in the loop pit shall be labelled with brady cable markers or approved equivalent cable marker .
the convention in labelling shall be that the loop cable shall be labelled s num a for start of loop num section a and f num a for finish of the same loop .
similarly s num b is the start of loop num section b .
the a section of the loop is that section closest to the stop line in accordance with drawing num .
num loop sealing num .
scotec or a suitable bitumen emulsion e.g .
thormac applied strictly in accordance with manufacturers instructions may be used for loop sealing .
loop sealing num loop cables and loop feeders num .
the loop cables should be cut to length such that they shall be no shorter than nummm and no longer than nummm above ground level .
the loop cables shall be twisted in pairs as below inside the loop pit at the rate of about num turns per metre .
num .
connection of the loop and the loop feeders is as follows loop feeder connection a the finish of section a is connected to the finish of section b. b the start of section a is connected to the white core of the loop feeder .
c the start of section b is connected to black core of the loop feeder .
num .
detector loop cables and feeder cables shall be joined using utilux hnum insulated end crimp connectors crimped using a gs crimping tool model no .
yytnum on the yellow setting .
these joints may be housed in an amp catalogue no num grease pot connector or individually sealed in raychem or approved equivalent nummm pd caps hot glue heat shrink end caps .
where pd caps are used a separate heat shrink sleeve shall be installed to seal the end of the loop feeder cable sheathing .
after completing the joints the slack cable shall be coiled and cable tied .
the amp connector shall be screwed firmly to the wall of the loop pit approximately nummm from the top or alternatively if the connectors can not be screwed to the pit wall the joints are sealed individually and they shall be cable tied to a plastic conduit mounted nummm below the top of the loop pit .
num .
detector loop feeder cables shall be individually wired back to the controller to enable traffic to be detected in each lane separately .
all feeder cables shall be run in the one nummm conduit and cables other than loop feeders shall not be run in the same conduit .
cables shall be terminated with sufficient length to allow for all necessary connections plus an additional one metre of surplus cable at each end .
the surplus cable shall be neatly coiled in the pit adjacent to the controller and in the loop pits .
detector feeder cable main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num connection of electrical supply num .
the contractor shall make all necessary arrangements with the local supply authority for the electrical inspection and electrical supply connection of the installation .
application notices num num not used above ground works num installation of traffic signal posts and mast arms num .
unless otherwise directed by the superintendent no signal posts shall be erected until all other equipment needed for the completion of the signal installation is available to the contractor and until the necessary channelization has advanced to a stage where all components can be installed without creating a traffic hazard .
hold point num .
the contractor shall provide a minimum nummm by nummm sized level hardstand area around all traffic signal posts and mast arms to allow safe ladder access to the post tops .
where posts are installed in paved concreted bituminised or other hard finished surfaces these surfaces shall serve the purpose as long as the area is at least the same size as the specified size area .
if the existing paved area is too small or if no type of paving exists the contractor shall add to it or install the specified size hard stand area using nummm x nummm x nummm concrete slabs and half slabs laid on compacted yellow sand .
alternatively the contractor may extend an existing type of finish rather than extend it with concrete slabs .
the contractor shall leave all ground area around the posts in good condition and to the satisfaction of the superintendent and the local government authority .
hardstand to be provided num .
unless otherwise indicated on the relevant drawing the post height shall be numm above ground level .
posts shall be erected so as to be vertical and the orientation shall be such that when pedestrian push buttons are installed they will be as detailed in clauses num .
the orientation must also suit the slot at the bottom of the post for cable entry .
traffic signal post height num .
posts shall be installed at a standard distance of numm behind the kerb face .
the minimum acceptable clearance for extenuating circumstances is nummm .
prior approval must be gained from the superintendent before any posts are installed at distances less than numm .
posts installed in islands narrower than numm shall be centred between the two kerb faces .
num .
unless otherwise indicated on the relevant drawing the mast arm must have a numm clearance from the lowest part of the traffic signal lantern mounted on the mast arm outreach and the top of the roadway directly underneath it .
mast arms shall be erected so as to be vertical and the orientation shall be such that when pedestrian push buttons are installed they will be as detailed in clauses num .
the orientation must also suit the slot at the bottom of the post for cable main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num entry num .
each post shall be identified with two sets of post numbers according to the numbering on the drawing .
the numbers shall be fixed to the primary and the secondary approach positions on each traffic signal post at a height no more than nummm below any lantern or no more than nummm below the signs in the case where a sign is also fixed to the post and must be easily seen from both approaches .
the numbers shall be made up of nummm black letters on a nummm x nummm background of selfadhesive class num yellow retroreflective material as per as num part num retroreflective materials .
prior to installing the numbers the surface of the traffic signal post shall be thoroughly cleaned with methylated spirit or similar .
numbers to be attached as num num .
when the connections at the top of each traffic signal post are completed the contractor shall cover the terminal block using a clear plastic bag at least num microns thick and with at least ten nummm breather holes .
the finial cap shall be installed with the two clamps and with the arresting wire secured in place .
post top finial cap num .
installation of posts shall be in the soil with a concrete surround as shown on the standard drawings .
the concrete surround shall be nummm x nummm and nummm thick .
the concrete surround area shall be installed separate to the rest of paved area .
if the post is installed within a slabbed area the concrete that surrounds the post may be equal to the size and shape of a half slab with a half slab installed adjacent to it .
concrete shall be added at the peg level to ensure that the post is locked .
concrete surround num .
the following concrete mpa ratings shall apply when installing traffic signal equipment a traffic signal posts nummpa b small pit surrounds and slab fill in sections nummpa c mast arms nummpa d controller base nummpa e termination pit and double lid cable pit surrounds nummpa f aerial supply pole nummpa num lantern installation num .
lanterns shall be installed complete with accessories at the locations designated on the drawings .
where designated signal aspects shall be fitted with symbolic masks andor white lenses .
all primary lanterns are to be fitted with short open primary visors and secondary lanterns fitted with secondary or long closed visors in accordance with standard drawings .
lanterns num .
lanterns shall be vertically mounted with red aspects uppermost yellow aspects in the centre and green aspects lowermost .
a maximum of two lanterns may be joined side by side to form a double lantern arrangement consisting of four five or six aspects .
the arrangement of such signal faces shall always comply with as num table num .
all coloured symbols such as arrows bicycles etc .
must never be mounted alongside an aspect of a different colour but must as num main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num retain the standard orientation for red yellow and green .
target boards shall be fitted to the requirements of the drawings .
num .
for led aspects all individual leds must be the same nominal colour for each aspect .
num .
the top and bottom of each lantern must be firmly attached to the mounting straps which in turn must be firmly attached to the mounting brackets on the designated post .
each lantern shall be attached to its supports so as to achieve the least obstructed line of sight to the traffic which it controls .
lantern attachment num .
lanterns mounted on mast arms shall be mounted on the appropriate lugs provided on the vertical section of the pole to achieve the correct orientation and mounting heights .
lanterns mounted on the mast arm outreach shall be fixed to the lugs on the vertical section of the outreach .
lanterns on mast arm outreach num .
lanterns and ancillary attachments shall be mounted a maximum distance back from the kerb alignment .
the minimum clearance from the lantern equipment to kerb face must be nummm irrespective of the post location .
distance from kerb num .
all brackets must be spaced correctly to prevent any stress on the plastic body or section joints of the lantern .
standard length mounting straps shall be used unless otherwise approved by the superintendent .
the contractor shall use where necessary extra lower mounting brackets spacers or offset straps to satisfy this requirement .
brackets num lantern mounting heights num .
signal lanterns shall be mounted at the heights specified on the standard drawings unless otherwise specified on the drawings .
num .
the following also applies a num aspect and numaspect lanterns shall be mounted at a height equal to the mounting height of the same colour aspect of an equivalent size num aspect lantern .
b num aspect bicycle lanterns shall be mounted to the right and at the same height as pedestrian lanterns .
c lanterns fitted with white lens aspects shall be mounted at the same height as an equivalent size lantern with a green lens aspect in place of the white lens aspect .
d internally illuminated signs shall be mounted at the height as detailed on the drawings .
e traffic signs attached to traffic signals posts shall be mounted at the height as detailed on the drawings .
f where indicated on drawings the contractor shall make associated arrangements with the owner of the veranda and the local government authority to accommodatemodify the veranda to accommodate the lanterns posts .
g all other traffic signal equipment excluding push buttons shall be mounted such that there is at least numm from main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num the underside of the traffic signal equipment to the final pavement or ground surface at the post or supporting structure .
the mounting heights set out above may be varied with the approval of the superintendent but there must always be at least numm from the underside of the target board or any other traffic signal item to the final pavement or ground surface at the post .
where local obstructions preclude mounting of lanterns in the stipulated manner the contractor shall refer the matter to the superintendent for a direction .
num lantern aiming num .
every vehicle lantern shall be attached to the post so as to enable it to be aimed at a point located at a height of numm above the pavement surface .
the aiming distances from the stop line towards the centre of the approach lanes for stopping and for warning function are as detailed in table num and shall be in accordance with asnzsnum .
after aiming all aiming bolts shall be securely locked in position .
the upper and lower mounting bracket bolts shall be tightened sufficiently to prevent the lantern from becoming missaligned during heavy winds .
if missalignment can not be prevented through normal means then the contractor shall install the locking mechanism detailed in asnum appendix c. asnzs num as num main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num table num lantern aiming distances approach speed kmh metres from stop line primary lantern secondary lantern stopping warning num numm numm num metres behind stop line at centre of approach .
num numm numm num metres behind stop line at centre of approach .
num numm numm num metres behind stop line at centre of approach .
num numm numm num metres behind stop line at centre of approach .
num numm numm num metres behind stop line at centre of approach .
num .
every pedestrian lantern shall be attached to the post so as to enable it to be aimed at the centre of the appropriate foot crossing at the opposite side of the roadway .
num post top connections num .
the numcore cable shall be run from pit system terminal block in the termination pit or the controller and brought up the interior of the traffic signal post and terminated on the terminal assembly .
the cable shall be firmly supported in such a manner that the weight of the cable shall not impose mechanical strain on the electrical connections .
this cable shall be attached to the terminal rail between the terminal strips and the post with two num heavy duty nylon cable ties such that the outer sheathing is above the top of the post but below the lowest terminal .
cable num .
in terminating the cables white spiral wrap is to be used with two cores being taken through each turn of the spiral wrap .
cores are to be cut at approximately nummm long to allow for future re terminations .
the numbered cores are to be connected to the corresponding number on the terminal strip starting at number num at the top .
the grey core is to be connected to the grey terminal the black neutral to the blue terminal at the bottom of the strip .
all star and pit system posttop terminal connections shall be made using utilux hnum clear insulating boots and utilux hnum crimps .
num .
for standard star and pit system posts the cores shall be loomed to their allocated positions using white spiralwrap .
each core shall be connected to its matching right side terminal according to its number or colour code .
main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
for old post top ring main system and spur post installations the in cores shall be loomed to their allocated positions up one side of the terminal strip using white spiralwrap and using utilux hnum clear insulating boots and the out cores shall be loomed up the other side of the terminal strip to their allocated positions using black spiralwrap and utilux hnuma black insulating boots .
the two looms shall be kept separate .
each core shall be connected to its matching right or left side terminal according to its number or colour code .
num .
each core shall be left with sufficient slack at the terminal to allow for three reterminations .
num target boards num .
target boards shall be fitted where shown on the drawings in accordance with mrwa standard drawings and the requirements of as num .
in this regard specific attention shall be paid to the requirements of clause num of as num as to the gap between the lantern body and the internal edge of the target board .
cutting num .
where there are lanterns installed with other than three aspects the target boards shall be fitted with matching blanking plates .
these plates are to be pop riveted in place using aluminium pop rivets .
num .
target boards shall be installed flush with the front of the lantern and a minimum clearance of numm below any target board shall apply .
minimum clearance from target board num pedestrian pushbutton assemblies num .
the pedestrian pushbutton assembly shall be attached to the traffic signal posts and mast arms using the predrilled holes provided in the post or by drilling and tapping new holes in an existing post such that the height of the push button places the centre of the button num mm above ground level .
pedestrian push button height num .
the contractor shall orientate the arrow disc on pedestrian pushbutton assemblies to point in the direction of pedestrian travel .
in the case of pushbutton assemblies on median island posts the contractor shall replace the standard supplied singleheaded arrow disc with a special supply twoheaded arrow disc as indicated on the drawings .
orientation num .
on each post on which a pedestrian pushbutton is installed selfadhesive labels shall be affixed in the manner shown on the standard drawings .
before fixing the labels to the post the surface shall be thoroughly cleaned with methylated spirit or similar .
selfadhesive labels num .
when parallel walks with time delay protection are installed new or upgraded sites mrgtnum turning vehicles give way to pedestrians signs are to be installed as primary displays on posts nearest to the left or right turn movement where the rule applies .
signs to be removed after three months .
give way to pedestrians signs num audiotactile facilities num .
where indicated on the drawing the contractor shall equipment main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num install audiotactile facilities .
num .
the audio tactile driver unit shall be mounted to the same post as the pedestrian pushbutton that it is driving in the area between the upper and lower mounting brackets .
the access door shall face away from the road and not be obstructed by any other hardware .
the audio tactile unit lead shall enter the post top terminal assembly excess lead shall be removed prior to connection .
the conduit shall be clamped at the upper mounting bracket and cable tied at nummm spacings on the post .
the two core cable white figure num flex shall be taken down the inside of the signal post and connected directly to the transducer in the audio tactile pushbutton assembly .
the remaining cable cores from the audiotactile driverunit shall be connected to the post top terminal rail .
for electrical connections refer to the drawing .
installation num .
where type num short push button posts are used for audio tactile push buttons the white and blue cores of the ppb post cable shall be connected directly into the audio tactile driver unit in place of the white figure num flex .
the standard core allocation shall be as follows a red pedestrian push button active b black pedestrian push button return c white audio tactile transducer d blue audio tactile transducer e greenyellow earth the supply cable and flexible conduit from audio tactile driver unit shall enter the post top terminal assembly and excess cable and conduit shall be removed prior to connection .
the flexible conduit shall be clamped at the upper mounting bracket and cable tied to the post at nummm spacing along the post .
the white and blue cores of the type num post cable shall be connected into the audio tactile driver unit in place of the flex via the terminations in the assigned pit for the type num post and via the post cable for the separate post with the relevant audio tactile driver unit .
the supply cable from the audio tactile driver unit shall be connected to the post top terminal rail using the appropriate terminals .
for electrical connections refer to the drawings .
num .
where an audiotactile push button assembly is installed on a type num or type num post the twocore audible signal cable white figure num flex shall be run down the inside of the post and connected directly to the transducer in the audiotactile push button assembly .
num .
an induce voltage suppressor ivs shall be installed on psc controllers where led lanterns are used in conjunction with audiotactile facilities .
ivs num earth connections .
num .
the earth wire from the numcore cable shall be directly connected to the upper mounting bracket earth stud .
earth wire num .
a second earth wire from the upper mounting bracket main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num earth stud shall be connected to the body of the post .
num .
a third earth wire from the upper mounting bracket earth stud shall be connected to the earth terminal on the numcore post top terminal rail .
num .
the earth wires from all post mounted electrical attachments such as lanterns pedestrian push buttons audio tactile driver units and flashing no right turn signs shall be connected into individual entries of the earth terminal on the num core post top terminal rail .
pedestrian push buttons num lantern connections num .
the lantern cables shall be connected to the terminal strip fitted to the top of the post as shown on the cable chart .
the cables have been precut fitted with lugs and installed in flexible conduit .
the flexible conduit is to form a loop below the entry point into the lantern .
the flexible conduit is clamped firmly in place by the cable clamp provided ensuring that nummm of the end of the conduit is covered by the finial cap .
no part of any flexible exposed conduit shall be less than numm above pavement level .
when installing audio tactile driver units cables ties shall be used to tie the flexible conduits .
the cable not enclosed by the flexible conduit is to be plaited and any excess cable shall be neatly pushed into the post .
flexible conduit num covering of lanterns num .
immediately after the signal lanterns and those for advanced flashing signals awfs are installed and until the signals are commissioned the contractor shall fit lantern covers on all lanterns neatly attached and securely tied to ensure that they remain in position under all weather conditions .
the entire awfs sign shall be covered the covers shall be made from a material complying with as num and shall be black colour in accordance with as num .
covers as num as num num .
signals not in use signs bolted on the primary and secondary post of each signal display if left unattended .
the signs shall be main roads sign number mrtpnum as detailed on mrwa standard drawing num .
not in use signal sign num upgrades and traffic signal improvements at existing signalised intersections existing sites num .
any modification to existing traffic signals shall comply with the requirements of this specifications and main roads improvements program for signalised intersection .
details could be sought from main roads asset manager traffic systems electrical .
this applies to traffic signal controllers ups and finial caps .
modificati on and improvem ent works num num not used main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num installation of controller num controller preparation num .
controller decals each of three sides of the controller which most face that roadway shall be fitted with a standard controller decal each with the site number and the freecall fault reporting phone number .
num .
pit system controller terminal a controller pit terminal assembly weidmuller part no .
anum shall be installed in the vacant d rail position when required .
a loom shall be made and installed to provide connections to this block and shall be fed from the relevant controller field terminals .
the connections shall be made in accordance with the controller wiring chart .
num .
star system controller terminal a controller pit terminal assembly weidmuller part no .
anum shall be installed in the vacant e rail position when required .
a loom shall be made and installed to provide connections to this block and shall be fed from the relevant controller field terminals .
the connections shall be made in accordance with the controller wiring chart .
num .
earthing extra earthing over and above the manufacturers earthing shall be supplied as follows a convert the common link terminal for cable screens on the loop feeder board into an earth terminal by wiring a num mm earth wire between the link terminal and the chassis earth stud below the switchboard .
b install an men link in num mm earth wire between the bottom terminal of the neutral link and the bottom terminal of the earth link .
one end of this link must be left disconnected during workshop tests to prevent false tripping of the in house safety switch .
the contractor shall be responsible to reconnect the men link and to remove the manufacturers men link not fitted tag from the controller switchboard panel .
c rearrange if necessary the existing earth wires in the earth link to leave the second and third entries vacant .
the second entry is for the main earth wire and the third entry for the aerial p.o.a supply post earth wire .
num .
controller test the prepared controller complete with all the necessary software and hardware shall be thoroughly tested prior to commissioning .
all inputs outputs conflict matrix time settings detector functions and program operations shall be tested .
main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
controller documentation the prepared controller documentation shall be placed in the document pocket provided in the controller housing inside a clear plastic document holder complete with clear plastic inserts and each page of the documentation visible through the insert without taking it out of the insert .
num .
antigraffiti coating an antigraffiti coating shall be applied to the controller housing in accordance with specification num antigraffiti .
num controller num general num .
groundmounted controllers shall be installed on the concrete footing .
the contractor shall make sure that the controller is mounted level so that the door sits square in the frame .
the details of anchor bolts for the controller footing are shown on mrwa standard drawings .
footing num .
the consumers mains shall be brought directly into the controller base pit and sleeved with corrugated plastic conduit from the base entry to the cable support bar .
the main earth shall be brought directly into the controller base pit and sleeved with corrugated plastic conduit from the base entry to the cable support bar .
install num x nummm conduit for telstra or approved communication carrier and num xnum mm white communications conduit for fibre .
all conduits shall pass through the controller concrete base and directly to a communications pit in the controller apron .
the conduit shall include a draw wire from the communications pit to the communication access box in the side of the controller housing .
all other cables shall pass through the double lid cable pit in front of the controller minimum num x nummm conduits or equivalent .
num metres of neatly coiled slack for each cable shall be provided in the double lid pit .
the cables shall then enter the controller base and run to the cable support bar .
cable entries num .
all cables shall be supported by the cable clamp bar using large crosstied cable ties over the double insulation .
the controller manufacturers metal clamping arrangement shall not be used to clamp the cable but may be used to form a support by releasing one of the anchoring points and swinging the bar down .
the ring main the consumer mains the post cables and the main earth conduit shall be fixed to the controller cable clamp bar below the field terminal rails .
the loop feeder cables shall be fixed to the loop termination panel cable clamp .
cable clamping num .
the post cables shall have their respective post numbers indelibly marked on the sheathing immediately below the cable clamp bar .
loop feeder cables shall have their respective loop numbers marked with brady cable markers on the sheathing immediately below the cable clamp bar .
cable labelling main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the consumer mains active shall be connected to the mains fuse .
the consumer mains neutral shall be connected to the main neutral link behind the controller switchboard panel .
the mains earth shall be connected to the earth link behind the controller switchboard panel .
the m.e.n .
connection shall be in nummm earth wire and shall be connected directly between the earth link and the neutral link behind the controller switchboard panel .
num .
the orientation of controllers base shall be such that the back of the controller when mounted is facing the intersection .
orientation of controller housing .
num star system site controller num .
all num core cables shall be enclosed in the cable duct between terminal strips and shall be formed into separate looms .
each individual cable shall connect direct from the cable duct to the terminal block .
the individual cores shall be neatly formed with a loop of sufficient length to make three reterminations .
all cores shall be tied and positioned such that access to the terminals is not obstructed and terminal designations are not obscured .
individual cores sized nummm or less shall be fitted with bootlace crimps and cores nummm and above may be terminated without lugs but with cores twisted .
all spare cores shall be wrapped in the appropriate branch of the loom and taken past the top of the terminal strip insulated and firmly fixed to prevent movement .
each core shall be labelled with its own post number at the entry point to its designated terminal .
cable connections num .
when a star system site includes a dummy controller it shall be connected by a minimum of num core cable to the controller .
the standard branching for cable looms at the controller is as follows cable cores branch location num to num left of a block num to num left of b block num to num left of c block num to num left of d block each core shall be labelled with its corresponding signal group at the dummy controller end at its designated terminal .
num .
the loop feeder cable screens shall be separated from their cables and suitably connected to the earth link on the loop termination panel .
the earth link shall be connected to main earth to comply with asnzsnum .
each pair of loop feeder cores shall be twisted together for their entire length then formed in a cable tied loom with the others .
each twisted pair shall be numbered according to its loop number immediately before the termination point using brady or cabac cable markers on each core .
sufficient slack shall be left at the termination point to allow for three reterminations with bootlace crimps used .
loop feeder cable num .
the combined loop and feeder insulation resistance at the controller has to be greater than numm ohm measures at a main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num numv setting .
num pit system site controller num .
the ring main cables shall be located in between terminal strips and shall be formed into separate looms .
the in cable using white spiralwrap and the out cable using black spiral wrap .
the individual cores shall be neatly formed with a loop of sufficient length to make three reterminations .
all cores shall be tied and positioned such that access to the terminals is not obstructed and terminal designations are not obscured .
individual cores sized nummm or less shall be fitted with bootlace crimps and cores nummm and above may be terminated without lugs but with cores twisted .
all spare cores shall be wrapped in the appropriate branch of the loom and taken past the top of the terminal strip insulated and firmly fixed to prevent movement .
num .
the standard branching for ring main cable looms at the controller is as follows cable cores branch location num to num left of a block num to num left of b block num to num left of c block num to num left of d block num .
the post cable connections in the controller shall be located between the c block and the pit system terminal strip .
the cable cores shall be loomed in black spiralwrap and shall be run between the terminal strip and the c block .
the cable cores shall be connected to the pit system terminal strip located in the vacant d terminal position and shall be connected to terminals specified in the cable chart .
each core shall be labelled with its own post number at the entry point to its designated terminal .
post cable num .
the loop feeder cable screens shall be separated from their cables and suitably connected to the earth link on the loop termination panel .
each pair of loop feeder cores shall be twisted together for their entire length then formed in a cable tied loom with the others .
each twisted pair shall be numbered according to its loop number immediately before the termination point using brady or cable markers on each core .
sufficient slack shall be left at the termination point to allow for three reterminations with bootlace crimps used .
loop feeder cable num temporary sinage removal timeframe shall be consulted with the project team .
num .
modified intersection ahead sign mrtawnum detailed in mrwa standard drawing num shall be installed ahead of the modified intersection as per standards in consultation with the design where clarified with project brief .
modified intersection ahead sign num .
traffic signal work in progress sign shall be attached to the primary traffic signal posts when work is being conducted on the traffic signals .
the signs shall be main roads sign number mr traffic signal work in progress sign main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num tpnum as detailed in mrwa standard drawing num .
num .
caution signals modified signs to be bolted to the primary signal post for num num weeks after works which modify the traffic signals are completed .
the signs shall be main roads sign number mrtpnum as detailed on mrwa standard drawing num num .
caution signals modified sign num num not used installation testing requirements under new and improvement works at signalised intersections num practical completion num .
the contractor shall submit notice of their intention of practical completion for testing and commissioning a minimum of num working days prior to commissioning date .
num .
the notice shall be sent to the maintenance manager electrical maintenance handover team electhandovermainroads.wa.gov.au mrwa customer information centre num num enquiriesmainroads.wa.gov.au and mrwa project manager num general all works carried out at signalised intersections whether new or improvement works shall be inspected and tested to the following minimum requirements specified under clause num .
num contractors tests to acheive practical completion num .
the contractor shall carry out all such inspections and electrical tests as are necessary to ensure that the installation complies fully with the requirements of the contract and western australian electrical requirements and asnzsnum .
the results from all inspections and tests shall be forwarded to mrwa project manager and mrwa lead point of delegate .
the contractor shall carry out the following inspections and tests producing documentary evidence of the test results insulation check a check that all hardware is positioned according to the drawings .
b measure and record the mains voltage at the controller main switch .
c measure and record at the controller the insulation main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num resistance of each loop whilst disconnected from the logic module .
d measure and record at the controller the inductance of each loop .
e check operation of all pedestrian push buttons from the controller .
check that the orientation of the pedestrian pushbutton arrows is correct .
f check that all lantern aiming complies with all applicable drawings .
g check that all signals visors louvres arrow masks and other symbolic masks comply with the drawing .
h check that all signal displays operate according to the drawing during maintenance mode flash testing .
i check that the controller and associated circuitry operates according to the specified controller documentation .
j check that all signal displays and other facilities operate correctly .
k check that all vehicle detectors and pedestrian push buttons function according to the drawing .
l annexures a and b to be completed and signed off for all construction stages m as far as practicable ensure that the site has been left in a clean and tidy condition .
num .
in accordance with asnzs num section num the following mandatory tests shall be made documented and made available to mrwa upon hand over a continuity of the earthing system earth resistance .
each traffic signal post shall be measured from the earth connection at the men to the bare metal of each post .
b insulation resistance between all live conductors and earth .
c polarity .
d correct circuit connections .
e verification of earth fault loop impedence .
f correct operation of rcds .
num .
all control circuits and devices shall be functionally checked to verify correct operation .
num any part of the installation found to be nonconforming shall be replaced with new materials andor components or corrected to the satisfaction of the mrwa lead point of delegate and mrwa project manager the faulty cable sections replaced and retested to confirm that acceptable insulation resistance values have been attained .
main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
prior to the power supply authoritys approval of the installation and connection to the supply mains the contractor shall have completed all tests to the mrwa lead point of delegate satisfaction .
num on completion of the contractors own testing and inspection and rectification of any deficiencies found the contractor shall inform the mrwa lead point of delegate that the supply has been connected and that the installation is ready for tests on practical completion as nominated by the mrwa electrical representative and submit all documents to mrwa project manager .
hold point num inspection and tests on final completion num .
the contractor shall give at least three working days notice that the site is ready for final inspection and shall be present during the inspection .
any change can be agreed upon in consultation with superintendent .
num .
upon receipt of annexure numc commissioning checklist from the contractor the mrwa lead point of delegate will carry out an inspection of the final installation .
the inspection will include the following superintendents inspection a the layout of signal hardware is in accordance with the design and standard drawings b the operation of circuitry in the manner prescribed c verification of correct operation of all signal displays push buttons detectors and other facilities .
dalignment and aiming of lanterns e check all signage exist on site and aligns with the lmb drawing f all line markings have been completed and aligns with the lmb drawing g all as constructed drawings and inventory is completed and is available on site h any other inspection as identified by the mrwa lead point of delegate num asset handover checklist a backfilling and reinstatement excavated areas b concreting .
c site cleanliness d lay out signal hardware is in accordance with the design and standard drawings e check all signage has been completed and align with the onsite drawings f any other inspection as identified by the superintendent or mrwa lead point of delegate or main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num project manager num traffic signal site inventory num .
the contractor shall make a complete inventory of all site equipment at the conclusion of works in order to record any change to the type or quantity of equipment installed .
a copy of the approved inventory sheet shall be left on site in the controller cabinet when the site is commissioned .
the original document shall be forwarded to the mrwa lead point of delegate within seven days of commissioning .
num staged works during traffic signal upgrades num .
it is a requirement prior to commencing any traffic signal upgrades for the electrical contractor to contact traffic systems staff at the traffic operations centre to advise when work will be commencing on site and the duration of works .
num .
all staged works forming part of an upgrade to traffic signals will require the following i .
the electrical contractor must provide a traffic management plan with associated drawings indicating all stages of the works these plans must be endorsed by a roadworks traffic manager as per the requirements of traffic management for works on roads code of practice .
ii .
the approved plans shall be forwarded to the local government authority for their records and a copy of the plans shall be forwarded to main roads three weeks prior to the works commencing .
iii .
at the completion of all works on commissioned traffic signals the electrical contractor is required to complete a controller log book entry indicating the activities completed and the conformance to the relevant traffic management plan at the end of each days work .
num records num .
a copy of the installation records inventory and the as constructed drawings prepared shall be placed in the controller housing .
num not used main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numa phase periods period minimum timing range sec increment sec minimum green num num maximum green num num yellow num num all red num num gap each approach num num timer red arrow termination num num variable initial green vig increment num num maximum vig num num pedestrian clearance num num pedestrian walk num num presence delay time num num late start num num early cut off green num num start up flashing yellow num num start up all red num num main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num active cables for red yellow and green signal aspects from term inal strip to signal pole number num num core num num num num r r y y y g g g qsnum connection if required signal group number and colour also added to the red and yellow term inals num num num cable markers showing pole num ber num core cable to signal pole num num core ring main cable out num core ring m ain cable in out connection in connection qsnum plug num core cable to signal pole num num to signal pole num see note re qsnum above num core cable to signal pole num annexure numb typical core arrangement num core termination box main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numc traffic signals commissioning checklist refer to trim document dnum main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure numd earthing of controllers internal wiring main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num annexure easset inventory form main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num guidance notes delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference all edits to downloaded tdp documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
deletions shall be struck through e.g .
example .
insertions shall be in italics e.g .
example .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted then the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
the custodian of this specification is the electrical engineer .
num .
scope num this specification primarily covers the requirements for new traffic signal software .
num where modifications to existing traffic signals are proposed then the scope clause num will need careful editing to clearly outline the extent of the works .
num this specification is not suitable for traffic signals installations undertaken by westrail .
num .
traffic signal contracts num where this specification is used in a contract that is solely or predominantly for the installation of traffic signals inclusion of and crossreferencing to other relevant specifications is likely to be required such as specification num general requirements specification num earthworks specification num concrete general works specification num antigraffiti main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contract specific requirements to add or delete the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
none at this time main roads western australia specification num traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification amendment checklist specification name no num revision no _________title traffic signals project manager name ______________signature _____________date________ checked by name _______________signature____________ date ________ contract no _______contract description __________________________________ item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked change mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materialsproductsclauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection testing parameters included in spec num test methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date _______________ main roads western australia specification num ups for traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num uninterruptable power supply for traffic signals copyright main roads western australia main roads western australia specification num ups for traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num uninterruptable power supply for traffic signals revision register date clause number description of revision authorised by num custodian change from tciccm to ee ee num various full review tciccm num guidance notes added to the specification tciccm num whole document new specification final review and approval num all mrwa final comments incorporated num all downer mrwa comments incorporated num all for client review main roads western australia specification num ups for traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num mrwa standard drawing numbers num num electricity regulations and authorities num num ups general requirement num num operation modes num num num not used num products and materials num num main ups components num num battery package num num enclosure cabinet num num num not used num design consideration num num protection num num metering and status monitoring num num alarms indications and controls num num earthing num num programmable contacts num num wiring and termination num num name plates and labels num num noise level num num inspection and testing num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num as built drawings num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure a data sheet num annexure b ups arrangement single line diagram num main roads western australia specification num ups for traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num uninterruptable power supply for traffic signals general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and delivery of an uninterruptible power system ups with battery backup capability designed for power supply to traffic signal lights and its control panel .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below acts and regulations title of act regulation etc .
occupational safety and health act num australian standards asnzs num electrical installation asnzs num electric cables polymeric insulated for working voltages up to and including numkv asnzsnum electromagnetic compatibility emc limits asnzs num lowvoltage switchgear and control gear assemblies type tested and partially type tested assemblies as num the control of undesirable static electricity as num conductors in insulated electric cables and flexible cords as num lightning protection as num electroplated coatings on threaded components as num installation maintenance testing and replacement of secondary batteries in buildings as num colour standards for general purposes as num approval and test specification miniature over current circuit breakers as num stationary batteries leadacid as num battery chargers for stationary batteries as num semi conductor converters as num low voltage fuses main roads western australia specification num ups for traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num as num degrees of protection provided by enclosures for electrical equipment ip code as num uninterruptible power systems ups general and safety requirements for ups used in operator access areas as num uninterruptible power systems ups general and safety requirements for ups used in restricted access locations as num uninterruptible power systems ups electromagnetic compatibility emc requirements as num uninterruptible power systems ups method of specifying the performance and test requirements other standards office of energy wa electrical requirements rtatcnum scats communications reference manual main roads standards mrwa traffic management requirements for works on roads mrwa electrical infrastructure asset drawing guidelines part num general part num traffic control signals traffic management for works on roads code of practice main roads specifications specification num occupational health and safety specification num environment specification num quality specification num antigraffiti examples of previous solutions used by mrwa mrwa standard drawing numbers num num num num num num num num num num num electricity regulations and authorities num .
the works shall be carried out in accordance with the office of energy wa electrical requirements asnzs num australianew zealand wiring rules the requirement of western power synergy horizon or any other authority having jurisdiction over the installation power supply authority .
electricity act num .
all notices and application required by the power supply authority shall be submitted and any required fees paid notices num .
the power supply is as detailed on the datasheet attached .
all equipment shall be designed to operate at the correct voltages prior to installation .
all equipment shall be suitable for the maximum prospective short circuit current specified on the datasheet and confirmed for the specific application at the point of installation .
power supply main roads western australia specification num ups for traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num ups general requirement num .
engineering design supply manufacture testing and delivery of a ups system rated in accordance with the data sheet in annexure a and in compliance to the environmental and site meteorological data set out in the data sheet .
general requirement num .
automatic voltage regulated power to the load shall be maintained while losing input power and its return within specifications or until the batteries have been discharged to the level specified in datasheet .
a reliable ups arrangement shall be provided to ensure correct operation in all modes as specified in clause num below .
continuity of supply num .
the complete ups system shall be enclosed inside a naturally ventilated outdoor cabinet as specified in the datasheet and in clause num below .
enclosure num .
the ups module shall be rack mounted and the protection control and alarm circuitry shall be wired on a chassis below the ups module .
circuit breakers control switches and indication shall be laid out on a control panel providing ease of operation and fault finding .
the batteries shall be housed on telescopic rail mounted drawers providing ease of maintenance and replacement .
general layout num .
the supplier shall provide detailed cabinet general arrangement and internal layout drawings as well as schematic and wiring diagrams for review before commencement of fabrication and assembly of the ups system .
design drawings num .
the ups circuit shall be designed and equipped with all necessary internal circuits protection and alarm outputs as well as manual transfer and bypass control switches .
circuit num .
the ups shall be equipped with rsnumrsnum and ethernet communication capabilities for programming access and remote monitoring of operation diagnostics and event recorder data .
communication capability num operation modes refer to the proposed ups arrangement single line diagram in annexure b .
single line diagram num normal num .
the ups shall continuously supply automatic voltage regulated power within the voltage frequency and harmonic distortion limits specified in the data sheet in annexure a to the traffic signal controller and all supplied loads .
continuous power num .
the charger unit shall supply temperature compensated dc power to batteries .
it shall maintain the batteries in a fully charged state while the input supply is within specified range .
normal operation main roads western australia specification num ups for traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num input power failure num .
upon failure of incoming mains and with generator power not connected the ups shall switch automatically over to battery power and when mains return the ups shall switch automatically back to mains .
there shall be no perceptible interruption to the loads upon failure or restoration of the input ac power source input failure num .
the ups shall have the facility for connection of a portable generator to supply power to the ups during extended mains outage .
with the ups operating from generator power and on return of mains power the ups shall switch automatically over to mains .
generator backup supply num recharge num .
upon restoration of the input ac power source the ups shall automatically return back to its normal operation specified in clause num .
the ups shall have the facility to set a time delay before returning to normal operation upon restoration of input power supply .
time delay return num .
if the batteries were discharged to the dc cutoff point before input source restoration the ups shall automatically restart to normal operation including recharging the batteries .
dc cutoff num maintenance bypass mode num .
if the batteries or ups are to be taken out of service for maintenance the ups shall be manually switched to the standby input and then a makebeforebreak transfer switching by closing the maintenance bypass switch and opening the standby input switch .
manual switch over num .
with the load supplied via the maintenance bypass it shall enable removal and replacement of the ups without shutting down the traffic control system i.e .
hot swap capability .
hot swap num num not used main roads western australia specification num ups for traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num products and materials num main ups components num .
surge diverters the ups shall be protected from power surges introduced either from the input power grid supply or from the load circuits connected to the output of the ups .
surge and lightning protection num .
chargerrectifier the charger shall rectify the input ac power to a regulated dc wave form to provide the charging power for discharged batteries .
the chargerrectifier shall be rated in accordance to the specification in the data sheet attached .
the manufacturer shall provide comments on the data sheet indicating conformance to the specified values or propose alternative data for evaluation .
charger rectifier num .
inverter upon losing input ac power the inverter shall supply the needed ac power of the loads by converting dc power from the batteries .
the inverter shall be rated in accordance to the specification in the data sheet attached .
the manufacturer shall provide comments on the data sheet indicating conformance to the specified values or propose alternative data for evaluation .
inverter num .
generator input the generator supply kit shall enable the connection of an external power generator comprising numposition switch ipnum mainsoffgenerator with led indicators appliance inlet num flat pins numamp ipnum numv numhz grey .
the appliance inlet shall be mounted inside a separate compartment on the side of the cabinet accessible without opening the cabinet door and provided with a dedicated lockablehinged cover .
generator connection num .
display the ups shall include a front panel screen and navigation pushbuttons to show real time measurement of various parameters and also status of the system as specified in more detail in clause num .
display screen num battery package num .
the battery strings shall be comprised of extreme temperature withstand rechargeable maintenance free type batteries .
the batteries shall be rated in accordance to the specification in the data sheet attached .
the manufacturer shall provide requested data for its proposed batteries and comments on the data sheet indicating conformance to the specified values or propose alternative data for evaluation .
the batteries shall be arranged on withdrawable racks inside the ups cabinet and designed to facilitate replacement of a faulty battery without disturbing the remaining batteries in the battery bank .
batteries main roads western australia specification num ups for traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num enclosure cabinet num layout num .
the arrangement and layout of all equipment shall provide adequate and safe means of access and working space for installation and maintenance purposes .
access num .
all equipment shall be installed such that removal replacement or repair of each and every component may be carried out with standard electrical trade tools .
standard tools num .
particular attention shall be given to the location and clearance of handles levers switches etc .
in respect to the safety of personnel operating the equipment .
location clearance num .
to allow for ease of maintenance in darkness a fluorescent lead light shall be installed in the cabinet .
the light shall be switched on via a limit switch when the door is opened .
the light shall adequately illuminate all internal components .
alternative lighting arrangements would be subject to approval .
the lighting shall be rcd protected .
lead light num .
minimum numoff general purpose outlets supplied from the mains input power shall be mounted inside the cabinet for use of maintenance tools and test equipment on site .
the gops shall be rcd protected .
gpo num material and structure num .
the enclosure structure and mounting shall generally be in accordance with as num clauses num and num note that clauses num num and num are not applicable .
num .
the door shall be secured in the closed position by two num triangular headed bolts which shall fit the key shown on main roads drawing num .
the head of these bolts shall be fully recessed into the door .
num num not used design consideration num protection num .
overcurrent and short circuit protection shall be provided to the ups system by input and output circuit breakers suitably rated .
main circuit breakers num .
the ups system shall be protected against lightning and have surge suppression in accordance to as num requirements .
lightning num .
the battery banks strings shall be protected with circuit breakers suitably rated for use in dc applications .
battery circuit breaker main roads western australia specification num ups for traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the batteries shall be protected against over charging by a dedicated temperature sensor to provide the battery temperature feedback for ups .
temperature sensor num metering and status monitoring num .
the ups shall include a front panel screen to show real time measurement of various parameters and also status of the system .
as the minimum it shall cover display measurement a the input ac parameters including voltage frequency current power .
b the inverter outputload ac parameters including voltage frequency current power .
c the battery parameters including voltage current capacitycharging level .
num .
the operation status of the ups shall be indicated on the front panel either on the screen or with led indicators .
as a minimum they shall cover display status a inputbypass power availability b chargerinverter units operational c battery power is available d batteries on boost charge e ups in maintenance mode f internal fault num .
the ledlcd indications shall be clearly visible and readable at all times .
ledlcd display num .
the ups shall be capable of providing the above mentioned measurementparameter and operation status to remote control and monitoring system via the ethernet communication .
remote indication num alarms indications and controls num .
as a minimum the following alarm conditions shall initiate an audible alarm single failure output and be displayed on ups front panel screenindication lights display alarm a overload b over temperature c inverter not synchronised d battery circuit is open e charger off or failed f maintenance mode g load on batteries h main input failure main roads western australia specification num ups for traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num i loads on bypass j battery capacity below num k low battery l emergency shutdown num .
alarm and warning indications shall automatically reset when condition returns to normal .
alarm reset num .
the ups shall be capable of providing the above mentioned alarms to remote control and monitoring system via the ethernet communication .
communicating alarms num .
the following control switches shall be available on the ups front panel control switch a alarm resetsilence shall cancel an audible alarm but leave actuated alarm indications illuminated until rectified b inverter onoff switch .
c the transfer control switch for manual source selection and switching .
num earthing num .
a dedicated numxnummm copper earth bar with minimum length of nummm shall be installed in the cabinet located close to the gland plate and all earth wires shall be terminated to this earth bar .
each hole shall have two num fixing screws .
earthing num .
the earth bar shall have suitable provision for the installation of the men link num .
all non current carrying conducting parts like doors battery trays etc .
shall be connected to earth bar .
num programmable contacts num .
the ups shall include a set of num programmable voltfree changeover contacts to be wired to a terminal block in order to assign different alarms as required for remote monitoring and future controls .
the contacts shall be rated numvdc or numvac numa for continuous loads .
output contacts num .
as the minimum requirement they shall cover a ups on b battery below num charge c low battery d any cabinet door open num wiring and termination num .
all conductors shall comply with asnzs num requirements .
cables material num .
wiring for control protection metering alarm and indication shall be not be less than nummm num strand copper conductors control cables main roads western australia specification num ups for traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
cable sizes for power circuits shall comply with the ratings specified in as num .
cable size num .
where more than one item is connected to a common feed such as fuses or circuit breakers the minimum conductor size of the common feed shall match the arithmetic sum of the connecting equipment full current rating capacities .
common feed num .
the insulation and colour coding of wires shall be as follows colour coding a coloured grey for voltages below numv ac .
b coloured red white or blue for active phase .
c coloured black for all neutrals .
d coloured greenyellow for earth wiring .
e any colour not previously allocated for dc voltages .
num .
all wiring shall be terminated by crimp type terminal lugs fitted by the lug manufacturers recommended crimping tool .
num spare terminal space shall be considered for possible future modifications .
termination num .
numbered ferrules corresponding to wiring diagram numbering shall be fitted to each end of all wires .
they shall be weatherproof and not be affected by damp or corrosion and shall be clearly and permanently marked .
cable numbering num .
all insulated wiring within the cubicle shall be run in horizontal and vertical lines .
each group of wiring shall be strapped in neat bundles with nylon cable ties or plastic wire trunking .
wiring runs num .
wiring shall comply with the following wiring rules a no joins between terminal blocks .
b no tee off branches between terminal blocks .
c only one wire per terminal .
if there is a requirement for more than one jumper pins shall be used .
d pin crimped terminations shall be used for tunnel type terminal blocks .
e wiring or cable larger than nummm shall be terminated with appropriately sized terminal lugs using a hydraulic crimper .
num .
all d.c. service wiring shall use tinned stranded copper conductors .
num name plates and labels num .
all equipment labels shall be manufactured from white blackwhite traffolite with engraved black letters on a white background or redwhitered with white letters on a red background .
alternatively metal photo type labels shall be used with black print on photographic anodised aluminium substrate .
letters main roads western australia specification num ups for traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
all equipment labels shall be firmly fixed using suitable non ferrous rivets or threaded fasteners self tapping screws are not suitable .
num .
as far as practicable all labels shall be of the same overall dimensions with identical mounting holes .
the minimum size of letters shall be nummm upper case .
sizes num .
all final subcircuit circuit breakersfuses shall be labelled with ipa coloured and numbered markers .
labelling num the cabinet number shall be clearly shown on the outside of the door of each cabinet .
the main cabinet number shall be made up of nummm black characters on a nummm x nummm background of adhesive class num yellow retroreflective materials as per asnzs num part num .
a further label of the same material consisting of num lines of nummm black characters shall be placed nummm below the switchboard number .
line num shall read num num num num and line num main roads wa .
numbers num noise level num .
noise levels of the assembly under normal operation shall be within limits set in the national standard for occupational noise nohsc num and shall not exceed an eighthour equivalent continuous aweighted sound pressure level laeqnumh of num dba .
the laeq numh is to be determined in accordance with asnzs num .
num inspection and testing num .
factory testing of the ups system shall be performed in accordance with asnzs num which details the testing requirements for ups units to make sure achievement of the kw and kvar and load steps necessary to demonstrate and verify the designated steady state and transient frequency and voltage responses .
num .
mrwa reserves the right to examine the equipment at any time during manufacturing or use the services of a third party inspection service .
num .
a site acceptance test shall be witnessed that shall prove the correct functioning of all indicators and alarms minimum four hour ups site support without mains supply available and main functional requirements .
a sat procedure shall be provided for mrwa review and approval at least four weeks prior to ups commissioning .
num .
all test reports shall accompany the equipment at time of delivery .
num maintenance and operation manuals shall be provided as two hard copy and one pdf soft copy containing num .
all main component data sheets num .
ups unit manufacturer maintenance and operation manual num .
wiring diagrams num .
recommended maintenance schedule main roads western australia specification num ups for traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num num not used as built and handover requirements num as built drawings num .
the test results shall be recorded and all test reports shall be included in the design drawings .
test result num .
as built drawings shall comply with main roads as constructed drawings presentation requirements .
num .
as built drawings shall be signed certifying that the drawings accurately depicted the installations .
certify as built num .
as built drawings shall be submitted at the latest two weeks after goods delivery .
as built submission num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used main roads western australia specification num ups for traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num annexure a data sheet this data sheet shall be read in conjunction with the above standard specification the manufacturers infocomments column shall be populated and returned as part of a response to a request for quotation rfq .
if the manufacturers infocomments are acceptable this form can then be submitted as part of the purchase documentation .
applicable to rfq purchase for unit site n required note the manufacturervendor shall only enter information in the manufacturers infocomments column the manufacturer shall provide information and comments indicating conformance to the specified values or propose alternative data for evaluation .
text shown in red provides guidance as to what information is required from the manufacturervendor for that item .
item specification manufacturers info comments rectifier charger unit num input voltage num vac single phase num num frequency num hz num num recharge time num hrs to num capacity num dc output manufacturer to enter selected battery charging voltage v dc num ac input power failure alarm required relay output num dc voltmetervi digital meter num accuracy required range via lcdled display num dc ammeter ai required range via lcdled display inverter unit igbt num output voltage num vac single phase num num frequency num hz num num overload at num manufacturer to enter rated withstand times at num num num overload min .. sec sec num current limit manufacturer to provide sc capability num harmonic distortion num max num load power factor num inductive to num capacitive num wave shape wlinear load sinusoidal num ac voltmeter vo digital meter required range via lcdled display num ac ammeter ao digital meter required range via lcdled display num frequency meter f num hz digital meter range via lcdled display num battery half discharged alarm required relay output num battery minimum alarm contacts required num efficiency num main roads western australia specification num ups for traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num item specification manufacturers info comments battery unit num type a lead acid maintenance free gel type num b other vendor to provide option details num no of cells minimum num hours backup time at full load num nominal cell voltage manufacturer to enter selected battery individual cell voltage volts num no of parallel sets of cells manufacturer to enter quantity of parallel strings calculated to achieve the specified backup time num float volts per cell manufacturer to enter float voltage and tolerance volts num boost volts per cell manufacturer to enter boost voltage and tolerance .
volts num life expectancy manufacturer to enter battery rated life expectancy and conditions based upon .years num capacity manufacturer to enter selected battery ah capacity per cell .. ampere hours per cell num normal operating load as site requires a num peak operating load as site requires num mounting inside cabinet on drawout trays dimensions num temperature probe required num temperature withstand extreme range from numc to numc vendor to confirm requirement per cabinet thermal calculations miscellaneous num protection device as specified in spec .
num transfer time max numms num method of cooling natural air flow .. num noise level numdb .. db at num heat dissipation heat load required kw num ingress of protection ipnum .to as num num mimic on unit per specification num finish colour to asnzs smoke blue to mrwa spec num num dimensions mass manufacturer to enter cabinet overall dimensions and weight h x w x d kg num nominal rating as site requires va num power consumption normal manufacturer to enter power losses rating va num type of configuration single nonredundant refer to annexure b num battery backup duration num hours minimum num earth bus integral with panel required num client personnel training rate required with bid .
contractor to allow for maintenance training for three num technicians .
num preferreled interconnection cables to batteries and between cabinets with lugs all required cables to be supplied main roads western australia specification num ups for traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num item specification manufacturers info comments num witnessed tests sat main roads western australia specification num ups for traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num annexure b ups arrangement single line diagram main roads western australia specification num ups for traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num guidance notes delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference all edits to downloaded tdp documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
deletions shall be struck through e.g .
example .
insertions shall be in italics e.g .
example .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted then the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
the custodian of this specification is the electrical engineer .
num .
scope num this specification primarily covers the requirements for new uninterruptible power supplies at existing traffic signals .
num this specification is not suitable for traffic signals installations undertaken by westrail num traffic signal contracts num where this specification is used in a contract that is solely or predominantly for the installation of traffic signals inclusion of and crossreferencing to other relevant specifications is likely to be required such as specification num general requirements specification num earthworks specification num concrete general works specification num antigraffiti main roads western australia specification num ups for traffic signals page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification amendment checklist specification no num revision date _________title ups for traffic signals project manager name ______________signature _____________date________ checked by name _______________signature____________ date ________ contract no _______contract description __________________________________ item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked change mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materialsproductsclauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from mcp .
num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection testing parameters included in spec num test methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date _______________ specification num excavation backfill for structures copyright main roads western australia specification num excavation backfill for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date num num num num num scope extended specification num deleted num added compaction requirements changed perth sand penetrometer calibration requirement added reference to specification num instead of num compaction requirements changed sdse num whole document reformatted sco num num asnum deleted sdse num num clause num amended and reference to asnum deleted num clause num amended num note below table num deleted whole document specification reviewed by custodian no changes made sdse num minor formatting and updated revision date in footer to reflect document reviewed scoa whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num excavation backfill for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num num not used num operations num num clearing num num survey num num excavation in general num num footings on rock num num footings on soil num num dewatering num num acceptance of foundation surface num num make up and blinding concrete num num backfill num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num construction staging num specification num excavation backfill for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num excavation backfill for structures general num scope num .
the work to be executed under this specification covers general earthworks associated with bridgeworks and highway structures including road and pedestrian bridges underpasses noise walls and standalone retaining walls .
this includes all earthworks required for the construction of abutment and pier and retaining walls and for the approach embankments all as detailed on the drawings .
num .
earthworks for roadworks are covered under specification num earthworks .
num .
backfill for mechanically stabilised earth walls is covered under specification num mechanically stabilised earth walls .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num methods of testing soils for engineering purposes soil strength and consolidation tests determination of the penetration resistance of a soil with a perth sand penetrometer test .
main roads test methods wa num particle size distribution sieving and decantation method .
main roads specifications specification num general requirements specification num environment specification num clearing specification num earthworks specification num mechanically stabilised earth walls specification num concrete general works specification num excavation backfill for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used products and materials num num not used operations num clearing num .
clearing shall be undertaken in accordance with specification num clearing .
clearing num survey num .
survey shall be undertaken in accordance with specification num survey control .
survey num .
prior to excavation a survey of the existing ground surface shall be carried out and approved by the superintendent .
hold point num .
prior to excavation in rock a survey of the rock surface shall be carried out and approved by the superintendent .
hold point num excavation in general num .
excavation in general shall include scope a. bulk excavation at bridge site b. local excavation for installation of substructures retaining walls and footings c. excavation for protection works d. excavation for river channelisation works all as shown on the drawings .
num .
excavation in rock shall comprise excavation of material in place whether solid or not that can not be ripped and excavated by a tracked excavator with an operating mass not less than num tonnes and net engine power not less than numkw in good condition .
the excavator shall be capable of exerting a minimum breakout force of numkn at the bottom of the excavation with a num mm wide bucket fitted with rock teeth .
definition of rock excavation num .
excavation in all other classes of material shall be termed common excavation .
num .
bore information drawings included as information for tenderers give indications of materials to be excavated .
they also show ground water levels at the date of drilling .
the contractor must expect and allow for seasonal variations to these levels .
information for tenderers specification num excavation backfill for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the drawings show approximate locations of services in the vicinity of the works .
the contractor shall contact all service authorities to confirm location before commencing earthworks .
all excavation works shall be carried out with caution and shall comply with all requirements of the service authorities .
services num .
in general the actual dimensions for excavation shall be no more than that required for the placement of protective works if necessary and any working space required .
dimensions num .
unless otherwise specified all surplus excavated material shall become the property of the contractor and shall be disposed off site to the contractors spoil sites or other authorised waste disposal sites .
disposal of surplus excavation num .
the contractor shall give the superintendent num hours notice on completion of common excavation for confirmation of the rock surface levels .
hold point num footings on rock num .
the pier and abutment footings have been designed to be founded on sound rock .
the founding levels given on the drawings are based on available borehole information and are subject to confirmation by the superintendent .
founding on rock num .
excavations for pier and abutment footings shall be to the net projected area of the footings .
overbreak shall be kept to a minimum and the adjoining material disturbed to the least possible extent .
num .
footing concrete below the level of the rock surface shall be poured directly against the sides of the excavation so as to completely fill any overbreak which may exist .
num .
the contractor shall complete all excavation in common material down to rock over the entire area of the footings and clean the rock surface of all loose andor compressible material for inspection and direction by the superintendent before commencing any rock excavation operations or placing any concrete .
hold point num .
where the bottom of the excavation is generally on undisturbed solid rock but has local soft seams or pockets such soft seams or pockets shall be excavated to sound undisturbed rock and backfilled with makeup concrete .
num .
makeup concrete may be used to accommodate surface irregularities below accepted founding levels .
the makeup concrete where used shall extend to the sides of the excavation and shall comply with specification num concrete for structures .
num .
mechanical rock breaking equipment only shall be used in the excavation of rock .
blasting will not be permitted .
num .
final trimming of the excavation shall be by hand held equipment .
specification num excavation backfill for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num footings on soil num .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings soil shall be finished horizontally care being taken to avoid disturbing material below foundation level .
all loose material shall be removed before placing the blinding concrete .
num .
the contractor shall compact the bottom of the excavation to num of modified maximum dry density ratio to a depth of numm below the base of the footing .
the geotechnical engineer may require overexcavation where loose sand or fill is encountered .
compaction num .
when foundations in perth sands have been excavated the contractor shall compact the bearing surface and test the compaction with a standard perth falling weight penetrometer in accordance with as num .
num .
the penetrometer shall be calibrated to the soil being tested at each bridge site by using a laboratory registered with the national association of testing authorities to carry out the penetrometer calibration tests .
num .
the minimum acceptable blow count shall be the number of blows that correspond to num modified maximum dry density ratio .
num .
the minimum acceptable blow count determined in the calibration test shall be achieved for the whole of the soil depth from num mm to num mm below all footings .
num .
for bridge foundations and underpass base slab the specified compaction shall be achieved for a horizontal distance of num m beyond the edge of the footing .
perth sands num dewatering num .
where excavation for foundations is at or below insitu water table levels the excavation shall be dewatered by pumping or well point dewatering in accordance with specification num environment .
water table level num acceptance of foundation surface num .
prior to carrying out any work on the pier or abutment footings the contractor shall certify that the foundation complies with specified levels dimensions and compaction requirements .
superintendent approval is required before any concrete blinding or makeup operations are commenced .
hold point num make up and blinding concrete num .
the exposed bearing surface at the bottom of each excavation shall be adequately protected from disturbance by the contractors operations or by the action of storm water or ground water .
specification num excavation backfill for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
for footings founded on soil immediately after the foundation bearing surface has been trimmed it shall be covered with a layer of blinding concrete .
the blinding layer shall be formed and placed and screeded off to the level of the underside of the footing .
num .
for the abutment and pier footings blinding or makeup concrete shall be placed as required and agreed by the superintendent and as referenced on the drawings .
num .
blinding and makeup concrete shall be as specified in specification num concrete general works and shall be the class specified on the drawings .
num backfill num .
the contractor shall backfill around piers abutments retaining walls including footings to the levels shown on the drawings using selected granular fill material .
backfill in general num .
all fill shall be placed in continuous horizontal layers of not more than nummm uncompacted thickness .
num .
selected granular fill shall be supplied by the contractor and shall be cohesionless sand or sandy limestone complying with the following requirements fill material a .
particle size distribution wa num table num particle size distribution selected granular fill sieve size passing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num b .
linear shrinkage the portion of the sample which passes the nummm sieve soil mortar shall have a linear shrinkage not exceeding num .
specification num excavation backfill for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name c. oversize material the material shall be free from boulders having any dimension greater than nummm .
excavated material shall not be suitable to use as selected granular fill .
num .
backfill shall be placed on all sides of piers abutment and retaining wall footings so as not to damage the concrete .
num .
all fill including embankment fill material shall be selected granular fill compacted to a minimum num of modified maximum dry density ratio for its full depthor as shown on the drawings .
compaction num .
within num metres of structural members including abutment walls piers retaining walls and footings only hand operated vibratory compacting equipment shall be used .
hand operated equipment num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used annexure numa construction staging num .
insert sketches and diagrams as required refer guidance notes .
specification num excavation backfill for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
num .
footings on soil clause num num footings on soil relates to granular materials .
if footings are designed to be founded on rock then clause num should be used otherwise the wording needs modification .
alternative specification may be required for other materials .
num delete the unwanted clause .
num .
construction staging clause num num if required add clause num in contract specific requirements including text to suit .
add stages and sketches as required in a suitably structured annexure .
num .
preloading clause num num if required add clause num in contract specific requirements including text to suit .
num .
passive anchor testing clause num num if required add clause num in contract specific requirements including text to suit .
an example text is included for guidance .
num .
dewatering clause num num dewatering requirements have been transferred to specification num environment specification guidance notes for inclusion within that specification when required .
if dewatering is required ensure that the dewatering clause within specification num specification guidance notes is included in the contract specific requirements section of that specification .
specification num excavation backfill for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num construction staging num .
spillthrough abutments and guidebanks shall be constructed for the bridge as follows stage num insert value text stage num insert value text etc .
num .
refer to annexure numa for staging sketches and diagrams .
sketches num preloading num .
preloading shall be in accordance with the following insert text to suit num passive anchor testing num .
the contractor shall test a minimum of num anchors on each footing to a proof load as specified on the drawings .
anchors to be tested will be nominated by the superintendent .
in the event of an anchor failing the test it shall be replaced and the contractor shall test a further num anchors in that footing at no expense to the principal .
specification num excavation backfill for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title excavation backfill for structures revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num mechanically stabilised earth walls copyright main roads western australia specification num mechanically stabilised earth walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num num url to the list of approved rsw systems amended sdse num num url to the list of approved rsw systems shown asdse num num electrochemical properties of reinforced fill materials included sdse num whole document specification reviewed by custodian no changes made sdse num minor formatting and updated revision date in footer to reflect document reviewed scoa num accept use of polymeric reinforcing straps sdse num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num mechanically stabilised earth walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num component materials num num cement stabilised layer num num electrochemical properties of reinforced fill materials backfill num num num not used num design num num general num num tender submission num num full design documentation num num num not used num installation num num commencement num num installation num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num borehole information num specification num mechanically stabilised earth walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num mechanically stabilised earth walls general num scope num .
the work to be executed under this specification consists of the design manufacture and construction of mechanically stabilised earth mse walls reinforced earth walls for use in bridge abutments and associated retaining walls .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num methods of testing soils for engineering purposes soil strength and consolidation tests determination of the penetration resistance of a soil perth sand penetrometer test as num earthretaining structures as num bridge design main roads specifications specification num quality systems specification num rock protection specification num excavation and backfill for structures num num not used products and materials num component materials num .
only mse systems composed of precast concrete facing panels shall be considered for acceptance .
facing panels num .
all metallic reinforcing strips shall be galvanised .
metallic strips num .
polymeric material used as reinforcing strips for load bearing reinforced soil structures shall satisfy the following conditions polymeric strips specification num mechanically stabilised earth walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name i the reinforced soil wall rsw system shall be a roads and maritime services nsw approved system available from httpwww.rms.nsw.gov.aubusinessindustrypartners supplierstenderscontractsapprovedrswsystems.html ii there shall be nummm minimum clear cover from the front of the concrete panel to the geosynthetic reinforcement embedded in the panel and iii the material shall be demonstrated by testing as sufficiently strong stable and durable to satisfy the performance and design requirements .
refer specification num quality systems for details of the required testing .
iv the reinforced soil wall system shall be approved by the main roads western australia senior engineer structures num .
no less than num weeks prior to the installation of any polymeric strips the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the contractor has met all the requirements of clause num .
hold point num cement stabilised layer num .
where specified the cement stabilised layer below the abutment sill beams shall be selected granular fill complying with the backfill clause of specification num excavation and backfill for structures with the addition of numkg cement per cubic metre of fill .
the cement stabilised layer shall be uniformly mixed and compacted to a minimum of num of maximum dry density .
num electrochemical properties of reinforced fill materials backfill num .
the reinforced fill material shall meet the electrochemical requirements specified in table num .
table num soil property allowable limits ph num chloride content mgkg num dry land num submerged sulphate content mgkg num dry land num submerged resistivity saturated ohm.cm num dry land num submerged notes submerged values shall be used where the structure is permanently or regularly submerged .
otherwise dry land values shall be used .
submergence does not include marine environments .
specification num mechanically stabilised earth walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used design num general num .
the mse system shall be designed in accordance with as num to support the loads from the abutment as shown on the drawings and in accordance with the requirements of as num .
borehole information is provided in annexure numa .
num .
the bridge superstructure shall be independently supported on piles or columns founded below the reinforced soil block so as to support the bridge in the event of loss of mse wall backfill due to washout or any other event .
piers and columns shall be fully fixed at the connection to the sill beam if used and in all cases designed to carry full abutment bending and axial loads with provision for up to numm loss of mse wall backfill under the top of the piles or columns for the full width of the superstructure .
num .
the top of all mse walls and the area adjacent to the abutment including associated wingwalls shall be mortar limestone pitched in accordance with specification num rock protection for numm width to prevent ingress into the reinforced soil block .
num .
geotextile or equivalent membrane approved by the superintendent shall be used to prevent loss of mse wall backfill through facing panel joints .
the membrane design life shall be at least that of the bridge num years minimum .
num tender submission num .
tenderers shall submit with their tenders sufficient details of their proposed mse system to enable a full technical and aesthetic assessment to be made of its suitability .
in particular this should address a. anticipated design life num years minimum required b. anticipated movements over the life of the structure vertical and horizontal c. safety factors adopted for the design d. requirements for fill material e. proposed shape and surface finish of facing panels and f. proposed reinforcing elements with independent supporting evidence as appropriate .
num full design documentation num .
the contractor shall be responsible for the design and preparation of all detailed specifications and drawings for the manufacture and construction of the mse structures .
specification num mechanically stabilised earth walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used installation num commencement num .
at least num weeks prior to carrying out any work on the mse abutments or walls the contractor shall supply to the superintendent full details of the proposed system including four copies of all drawings and specifications together with certification that the design has been checked and verified by an independent geotechnical engineer experienced in this form of construction .
hold point num installation num .
the mse system shall be installed in accordance with the approved documented design .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num mechanically stabilised earth walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa borehole information num .
borehole information is summarised or available as follows specification num mechanically stabilised earth walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
num .
borehole information clause num num where available annexure numa can be used to provide summary details of borehole information .
if this information is extensive particularly if on large format drawings a suitable document to present this type of data is the information for tenderers .
num .
design clauses num to num num the outline details listed should also be included by tenderers in the appropriate tender schedule in the tender submission document .
num full design details and verification shall be supplied by the contractor by the time stated .
specification num mechanically stabilised earth walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num mechanically stabilised earth walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title mechanically stabilised earth walls revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num dismantling demolition copyright main roads western australia specification num dismantling demolition num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date num num editorial change editorial change sdse num whole document reformatted sco num whole document num num num reformatted to corporate branding guide lines new clause added new clause added new clause added sdse num whole document specification reviewed by custodian no changes made minor formatting and updated revision date in footer to reflect document reviewed sdse scoa num whole document complete revision of issue num to new for mat mcp num specification num dismantling demolition num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num planning and preparation for demolition num num permits num num hazardous materials audit num num presence of asbestos num num num not used num operations num num method of dismantlingdemolition num num structure removal num num public utilities and stakeholders num num explosives num num disposal of materials num num underwater inspections num num cleaning up num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num specification num dismantling demolition num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num dismantling demolition general num scope num .
the work to be executed under this specification consists of demolition or dismantling of existing bridges and associated highway structures including services .
for detailed scope of the work under the contract refer to the notes on the bridge drawings .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below acts and regulations building act num occupational safety and health act num explosives and dangerous goods act num building regulations num occupational safety and health regulations num australian standards as num explosives storage transport and use storage as num explosives storage and use use of explosives as num the demolition of structures main roads specifications numseries general requirements numseries management requirements num num not used planning and preparation for demolition num permits num .
prior to commencement all required permits for the dismantlingdemolition shall be sort by the contractor and received specification num dismantling demolition num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
under the western australian building act num western australian building regulations num the required approvals must be received through a municipal building surveyor prior to demolition commencing .
num .
the contractor shall notify worksafe of all class num class num and class num demolition in accordance with asnum at least num working days prior to commencement and provide the superintendent with a copy of the notification .
num hazardous materials audit num .
a hazardous materials audit must be completed by a competent person on the structure prior to demolition .
the hazardous materials audit shall a. identify and assess the presence and condition of asbestos containing materials b. identify and assess other potentially hazardous materials could include the presence of synthetic mineral fibres polychlorinated biphenyls lead based paint smoke detectors gas cylinders etc .
c. provide recommendations to prevent or minimise the risk of exposure to hazardous materials during the proposed works num .
the contractor is to use the hazardous materials audit when developing their method proposal as per num .
num presence of asbestos num .
all asbestos containing materials identified through the hazardous materials audit must be removed in accordance with the occupational safety and health regulations num prior to commencement of demolition .
num .
the contractor shall engage appropriately licensed asbestos removalists in accordance with recommendations details in the hazardous materials audit .
the process for removal is to be documented as a sub clause of the work plan as per num .
num .
a clearance certificate must be issued by a competent person which con firms that an area where asbestos removal has taken place has been cleaned satisfactorily and is safe to be reoccupied prior to demolition work commencing .
num .
worksafe western australia must be notified at least num days prior to the commencement of asbestos removal works via their notification of asbestos removal form which can be found on www.worksafe.wa.gov.au .
num num not used operations num method of dismantlingdemolition num .
the contractor shall dismantledemolish the existing bridges andor as sociated highway structures to the horizontal and vertical limits as shown on the drawings .
specification num dismantling demolition num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
at least num weeks prior to commencement of dismantlingdemolition the contractor shall submit to the superintendent detailed proposals of the method of dismantlingdemolition for the superintendents approval .
hold point num .
the method of demolition shall comply with as num .
num structure removal num .
the substructure shall be dismantleddemolished down to the final excavated ground level as shown on the drawings .
dismantlingdemolition of substructure shall include piles pilecaps and footing foundation supports to substructure components .
substructure cut off level num .
where substructure is in permanent water cut off level for dismantlingdemolition may be under water at river bed level or at low water level refer details on the drawings .
cut off level in permanent water num public utilities and stakeholders num .
the contractor shall liaise with public utility authorities which are affected by the demolition operations .
num .
the contractor shall obtain written confirmation from each public utility authority that disused services on the existing bridge or other structure have been made safe and can be demolished along with the structure .
disused services num .
prior to dismantlingdemolition operations the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the above written confirmation from each public utility authority that disused services on the existing bridge or other structure have been made safe and can be demolished along with the structure has been received .
hold point num .
prior to dismantlingdemolition operations the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that all affected public utilities have been protected or relocated .
hold point num .
prior to dismantlingdemolition operations the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that all stakeholders have been notified and environmental andor waterway regulations will be complied with .
hold point num explosives num .
explosives shall only be permitted for use in demolition operations where explicitly specified on the drawings .
authorisation num .
demolition using explosives shall comply with as num and asnum and the western australia explosives and dangerous goods act num .
regulations num .
explosive operations shall only be carried out by certified qualified personnel .
certified personnel specification num dismantling demolition num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
prior to carrying out demolition operations using explosives the contractor shall provide written evidence of certification of the explosives operator to the superintendent and provide a detailed plan of the method of demolition using explosives .
hold point num disposal of materials num .
all dismantleddemolished material with the exception of that material identified by the superintendent as salvageable material shall become the property of the contractor and shall be disposed off site to the contractors spoil sites or other waste disposal site .
disposal off site num underwater inspections num .
where cut off level of the dismantleddemolished structure is below the permanent water level an underwater inspection shall be carried out to confirm compliance with specified cut off levels .
cut off below water level num cleaning up num .
the contractor shall clean up any spillages at the site or dust contamination to the site or adjacent properties or any other environmental contamination within num week of completion of the demolition and disposal operations .
clean up of the site num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num dismantling demolition num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa insert as required .
include tables diagrams etc .
as necessary .
delete annexures if not required .
specification num dismantling demolition num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
num .
explosives refer clause num num if explosives are not permitted insert clause num where applicable .
num .
substructure removal refer clause num num insert clause num where applicable .
num .
public utilities refer clause num num insert clause num where applicable listing the relevant utilities .
num .
heritage issues refer clause num num insert clause num where applicable .
num .
salvageable materials refer clause num num insert clause num where applicable .
modify the text to suit .
note insert annexures as applicable to any of the above clauses if supporting information is available .
annexures are placed as part of contract specific requirements commencing with annexure numa .
specification num dismantling demolition num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num explosives num .
explosive operations will not be permitted at this site .
num substructure removal num .
the substructure is in permanent water and the cut off level for demolition is the river bed level as shown on the drawings .
num public utilities num .
relocation of the following public utilities have been carried out as shown on the drawings a. e.g .
wang pipeline b. e.g .
water pipes c. etc .
num .
protection of the following public utilities has been carried out as shown on the drawings protection of utilities a. e.g .
wang pipeline b. e.g .
bp oil pipeline c. etc .
num .
the following public utility attachment to the bridge has been cut off relocated and is now disused and has been made safe for demolition .
utility attachments a. e.g .
wang pipeline b. e.g .
bp oil pipeline c. etc .
num heritage issues num .
the timber superstructure is listed as heritage significance by the shire .
prior to any dismantlingdemolition a full photographic record of these elements shall be taken by the contractor .
specification num dismantling demolition num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num salvageable materials num .
all dismantled material including deck timber corbels and stringers shall be inspected by the superintendent to identify any salvageable material .
all salvageable material identified by the superintendent shall remain the property of the principal and shall be delivered to a site to be advised by the superintendent .
all loading transport to the nominated site and unloading shall be the contractors responsibility .
all other material shall be disposed of as specified at clause num .
disposal of salvaged material specification num dismantling demolition num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title dismantling demolition revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num incremental launching copyright main roads western australia specification num incremental launching num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num whole document specification reviewed by custodian no changes made sdse num minor formatting and updated revision date in footer to reflect document reviewed scoa whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num incremental launching num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num tender submission num num num not used num design num num design of temporary works num num design assumptions num num launching girder num num casting bay num num launching bearings num num launching jacks num num num not used num operations num num launching procedure num num casting bay num num temporary anchorage num num installation of permanent bearings num num deck diaphragms num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num specification num incremental launching num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num incremental launching general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the construction of prestressed concrete bridge superstructures by the incremental launching pushout method including the design and construction of any necessary temporary works associated with this form of construction .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num steel structures as num earthretaining structures as num bridge design main roads specifications specification num structural steelwork specification num bridge bearings num tender submission num .
the bridge has been designed for the superstructure to be constructed by the incremental launching method .
num .
tenderers shall submit with their tenders sufficient details of their proposed method of launching to enable a full technical assessment to be made of its suitability .
this should include as a minimum launching method details a. name and relevant experience of consultant who will carry out required design work and independent verification b. method of launching c. method of braking including the secondary braking method in case of failure of the primary one d. form of temporary piers including any special requirements such as piling specification num incremental launching num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name e. details of any changes required in the principals design assumptions and f. source and availability of launching girder .
num num not used design num design of temporary works num .
the contractor shall be responsible for the design of all temporary works including but not limited to the casting bay launching girder temporary piers launching bearings jacking systems braking system and side restraint systems .
all design forces which will react onto the permanent structure and the means of ensuring they are not exceeded shall be clearly identified in the calculations andor on the drawings .
design of temporary works num .
at least num weeks prior to carrying out any work on the deck launching system the contractor shall supply to the superintendent full details of the proposed method of construction including num copies of all drawings specifications and procedures and certification that the proposal has been independently verified by an engineer experienced in this form of construction .
hold point num design assumptions num .
use of the incremental launching method requires the designer to make a number of assumptions about the construction method .
these are detailed on the drawings .
any proposal to vary these could require redesign of the permanent works .
the principal will take account of these costs when assessing tenders .
design assumptions num .
supports for the casting bay temporary supports and the launching procedure shall be such as to restrict differential settlement between adjacent longitudinal supports to the following differential settlement a .
casting bed and temporary support nummm b .
temporary support and abutment nummm c. abutment and pier nummm d. any two piers nummm num launching girder num .
the properties of the launching girder shall be as shown on the drawings .
the connection between the launching girder and the end of the deck shall be as detailed on the drawings .
num .
any changes proposed by the contractor to either the details of the launching girder or the connection between the launching girder and the deck must be approved by the superintendent .
any changes required to the drawings will be carried out by the principal at no cost to the contractor .
specification num incremental launching num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
fabrication of the launching girder shall generally be in accordance with as num and the following specific tolerances .
fabrication tolerances variation along underside of the bottom flange i transversely a .
from connection end to numl where the bottom flange is rigidly restrained by web stiffeners the variation in level from the specified plane shall not exceed nummm .
b .
where the bottom flange is not rigidly restrained by web stiffeners and the web is free to flex the variation in level from the specified plane shall not exceed num of the total width of flange or nummm whichever is greater .
ii longitudinally a .
variation in level from straight connection end to numl nummm remainder nummm b. nil abrupt c. maximum deviation in level from specified plane measured over a length of num metre connection end to numl num remainder num d. variation along side guide variation from horizontal alignment connection end to numl nummm remainder nummm num .
the launching girder welds shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of specification num structural steeelwork .
testing num .
the launching girder shall receive suitable and adequate surface protection to prevent any staining of the permanent work .
surface protection num .
the nose of the launching girder shall include some form of jacking arrangement to enable jacking up of the girder as it reaches the launching bearings to ensure a smooth run on to the bearing .
nose jacks num casting bay num .
tolerances on the top surface of the casting bay shall be in accordance with the following specific tolerances casting bay tolerances a .
variation in level from straight nummm b. nil abrupt c. maximum deviation in level measured over a length of num metre num specification num incremental launching num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num launching bearings num .
launching bearings and associated lateral guides installed on the permanent works shall be installed to the following tolerances installation tolerances i position nummm on specified dimensions relative to actual transverse centreline of pier or abutment nummm on specified dimensions relative to true longitudinal centreline of structure ii level nummm relative to specified levels generally but at any pier or abutment the difference between any two levels on adjacent bearings shall be within nummm of the difference in the specified levels and on any individual bearing the maximum deviation from the specified plane both longitudinally and transversely shall be num measured over a minimum length of nummm .
transverse tolerance at vertical guides nummm .
num .
the maximum bearing pressure on the permanent work from the launching bearings shall be as given on the drawings .
num .
the maximum longitudinal friction shall be num .
num .
the top layer of the bearing elastomer shall be treated to avoid marking of the bridge soffit .
num launching jacks num .
the abutments have been detailed to accommodate special launching jacks as detailed on the drawings .
any changes proposed by the contractor must be approved by the superintendent .
any changes required to the drawings will be carried out by the principal at no cost to the contractor .
launching jacks num num not used operations num launching procedure num .
the detailed planning and execution of the launching operations shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
to prevent damage to the permanent works the following shall be incorporated in the launching procedure launching procedure i .
there shall be one person in overall control of the launch who shall be in twoway communication with each pier or launching bearing location .
ii .
during the launch the contractor shall carefully control and continuously monitor the horizontal jacking force and launching shall be immediately stopped if this force suddenly increases .
specification num incremental launching num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall ensure the deck is adequately restrained against uncontrolled movements at all times before during and after the launching operation .
deck restraining num .
launching shall not be carried out during strong winds as specified on the drawings .
wind load num .
ply or similar formwork shall be reused a maximum of num times before being replaced .
any treatment painting or recoating of formwork shall not be permitted .
num .
at least num days prior to any launching operation the contractor shall provide to the superintendent full details of the proposed launching procedure in the form of drawings and detailed methodology including temporary bearing details .
hold point num casting bay num .
the levels on the casting bay surface shall be taken prior to any launching operations and rechecked after each launch segment .
adjustments shall be made if tolerances from clause num are exceeded at any stage of the launching operations .
casting bay num .
the casting bay must be removed at the completion of launching .
num temporary anchorage num .
on completion of launching the bridge superstructure shall be temporarily restrained against all movement until the permanent bearings and abutment tiebacks can be installed .
temporary restraint num installation of permanent bearings num .
on completion of launching operations and before continuity prestress is applied the weight of the bridge shall be transferred from the launching bearings to the permanent bearings .
the bearings shall be installed as specified on the drawings and to the tolerances given in specification num bridge bearings .
permanent bearings num .
the installation of permanent bearings shall comply with the following requirements a .
the bearings shall be replaced at each abutment and pier in turn commencing with the launching abutment .
b .
the permanent bearings at the launching abutment shall only be installed after the concrete in the diaphragm has attained its design strength .
c. the tieback at the launching abutment shall be installed prior to removal of the temporary restraint .
specification num incremental launching num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name d. jacking of the structure shall be carried out under the beams .
at the piers the structure shall be jacked on both sides of the launching bearings .
approved mechanical collars shall be fitted to the jacks andor packing shall be used which shall follow closely and be capable of supporting the structure without dropping in the event of sudden hydraulic failure or prolonged support of the jacks .
at no time shall the backup system lag more than nummm behind the load .
jacking num .
jacking of the structures shall be carried out with strict observance of the following tolerances jacking tolerances maximum longitudinal differences in level between adjacent piers nummm .
maximum transverse differences in level across any pier nummm .
num .
the contractors system of jacking shall make provisions for both longitudinal movements and rotation of the bridge deck .
num .
the contractor shall install survey platesmarkers on the deck slab over the launching bearing locations to enable accurate monitoring of the levels to be carried out during bearing installation .
num deck diaphragms num .
at the completion of launching operations and after stressing of continuity prestress the contractor shall cast diaphragms to both ends of the superstructure to the details as shown on the drawings .
deck diaphragms num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num incremental launching num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
num .
clause num design assumptions note establish a separate tender schedule to provide the preliminary details of the tenderers incremental launching system to enable costs of redesign of the permanent works to be assessed .
num .
clause num launching jacks note alternate specification may be required for different launching systems to suit design .
specification num incremental launching num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num incremental launching num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title incremental launching revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num driven steel piles copyright main roads western australia specification num driven steel piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num deleted reference to as num and asnzs num inserted references to welding consumables standards asnzs iso num asnzs iso num and asnzs iso num asdse num num references amendment to as num title sdse num num .num num num clauses renumbered num .num num num to correct duplicated number num .
so num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num driven steel piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num steel h piles num num steel circular piles num num num not used num installation num num transportation handling and storage num num welded splices num num pile driving equipment num num pitching and driving num num driving steel circular piles num num dynamic pile testing num num temporary compressions num num acceptance of piles num num tolerances on piles num num cutting off num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num pile driving design assumptions num annexure numb num pile driving test sample num annexure numc num acceptance of piles num annexure numd num pile driving data num specification num driven steel piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num driven steel piles general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of all operations for the steel piling of bridge foundations including the surface treatment of steel piles welding splices all pitching and driving .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num arc welded steel pipes and fittings for water and waste water as num piling design and installation as num non destructive testing radiography of welded butt joints in metal as num non destructive testing ultrasonic testing of fusion welded joints in carbon and low alloy steel as num bridge design australiannew zealand standards asnzs num structural steel welding welding of steel structures asnzs num structural steel hotrolled plates floorplates and slabs asnzs num structural steel hotrolled bars and sections asnzs num structural steel welded i sections asnzs num welding consumables covered electrodes for manual metal arc welding of nonalloy and fine grain steels classification asnzs iso num welding consumables tubular cored electrodes for gas shielded and nongas shielded metal arc welding of nonalloy and fine grain steels classification iso num mod specification num driven steel piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name asnzs iso num welding consumables tubular cored electrodes for gas shielded metal arc welding of creepresisting steels classification iso num mod asnzs iso num welding consumables tubular cored electrodes for gas shielded and nongas shielded metal arc welding of highstrength steels classification iso num mod main roads specifications specification num structural steelwork specification num protective treatment of steelwork num num not used products and materials num steel h piles num hotrolled steel piles piles num .
steel piles shall be universal steel columns grade asnzs num manufactured in accordance with as num and as shown on the drawings .
num .
certification test certificates shall be issued with the columns in accordance with asnzs num relating to tests performed by the manufacturer to establish compliance with the standard .
num .
dimensions and tolerances the universal steel columns shall conform to the manufacturing tolerances specified in asnzs num .
num .
during the storage the columns shall be resting on timber supports in a horizontal plane .
any steel columns damaged or distorted in excess of the above specified tolerances prior to pile driving shall be replaced at the sole expense of the contractor .
num welded steel piles welded steel piles num .
steel piles shall be welded steel columns grade asnzs num manufactured in accordance with asnzs num and as shown on the drawings .
num .
certification test certificates shall be issued with the columns in accordance with asnzs num relating to tests performed by the manufacturer to establish compliance with the standard .
num .
dimensions and tolerances the welded steel columns shall conform to the manufacturing tolerances specified in asnzs num .
tolerances specification num driven steel piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num corrosion protection to h piles num .
steel h piles shall be prepared and hot dipped galvanised as specified in specification num protective treatment of steelwork .
extent of corrosion protection shall be as shown on the drawings .
corrosion protection num steel circular piles num .
steel circular piles shall be designed supplied and fabricated by the contractor .
steel circular piles num .
the steel circular piles shall be fabricated in accordance with as num from grade num steel plate conforming to asnzs num .
plate thickness and size of steel circular piles shall be as specified on the drawings .
the steel circular piles shall be fabricated to the tolerances specified in as num except for the length of the piles which is to a tolerance of nummm .
num .
the thickness shall be chosen to account for the proposed driving methodology .
num corrosion protection steel circular piles num .
steel circular piles shall receive corrosion protection as specified in specification num protective treatment of steelwork and to the extent indicated on the drawings .
corrosion protection num num not used installation num transportation handling and storage num .
the methods of transport handling and storage shall be such as to prevent damage to the steel piles as a result of impact or deflection or the application of load .
num .
during the storage the columns shall be resting on timber supports in a horizontal plane .
any steel piles damaged or distorted in excess of the above specified tolerances prior to pile driving shall be replaced at no cost to the principal .
num welded splices num .
end preparation for welded butt pile splices in the steel piling shall be in accordance with the details shown on the drawings .
the contractor shall cut off the top nummm of the pile already driven to facilitate welding of the new length .
num .
welding of splices shall comply with the welding requirements of specification num structural steelwork .
num .
when welding steel circular piles the vertical seams in adjoining section shall be offset a minimum of nummm .
num .
welded pile splices shall be tested by radiographic andor ultrasonic examination carried out in accordance with as num or as num .
specification num driven steel piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
all welds shall be examined by radiography except that if it can be shown to the satisfaction of the superintendent that ultrasonic testing is satisfactory then num of welds shall be examined by both test methods and the remainder by ultrasonic testing only .
the selection for the different tests shall be made by the superintendent .
num .
the contractor shall allow for any preparatory work including cleaning the piles by wire brushing for nummm above and below each splice to remove all mill scale and for all delays resulting from examination and approval of the welds .
num .
all weld testing shall be carried out by a nata registered company .
num .
all damage to protective coatings caused by site welding shall be repaired by the contractor in accordance with the requirements of specification num protective treatment of steelwork .
damage to protective coatings num pile driving equipment num .
piles shall be held in fixed leads such that the hammer and a braced follower follow the pile and provide support throughout the entire driving period .
the use of swinging leads shall not be permitted .
equipment num .
in general the choice of the hammer shall be in accordance with the recommendations of clause num of as num and shall develop a rated energy of not less than that specified in annexure numa .
num .
a helmet and packing to suit the approved hammer and pile shall be used at all times during driving .
the specification for the driving dolly and packing is given in clause num .
num .
at least num days prior to driving of piles the contractor shall submit details of the proposed hammer to be used including hold point a .
energy rating of hammer b .
details of helmet and dolly c. mass of ram and total mass of hammer d. method of determining the efficiency of the hammer during pile installation .
num pitching and driving num .
piles shall be pitched accurately in position prior to the commencement of driving .
num .
prior to driving any piles the contractor shall supply to the superintendent certification that the piles comply in all respects with the requirements of the specification .
hold point num .
prior to driving any piles the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the plan position and batter of the piles comply with the requirements of the specification and the drawings .
hold point specification num driven steel piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
prior to driving any spliced piles the contractor shall supply to the superintendent certification that the splice complies with the requirements of the specification .
hold point num .
the driving has been designed assuming the details shown in annexure numc .
the contractor should note that the packing requirement is for a minimum thickness at the conclusion of driving .
to ensure compliance excess will need to be inserted at the commencement of driving and it may be necessary to replenish the packing during driving .
in any event the packing shall be replaced after driving each pile or more frequently if necessary .
num .
to avoid the possibility of premature settingup pile driving shall be continuous in the latter stages without deliberate stops except as directed by the superintendent .
delays of as little as num minutes may lead to significant setup in piles .
where premature setup has occurred the contractor shall be required to overcome this by continued driving where resistance to penetration may be significantly greater than normal .
num .
the superintendent may direct that certain selected piles be subject to a setup test .
these piles shall be driven as specified and subsequently re driven num hours after completion of initial driving .
a provisional sum is allowed for this operation .
num .
the contractor shall record the number of blows for each nummm of pile penetration .
details of each pile driven shall be kept on pile driving record forms as shown in annexure numd .
num driving steel circular piles num .
the contractors attention is drawn to the special requirements for driving steel circular piles in particular the varied nature of the foundation material as indicated by the bore logs drawings and the possible need to drive and excavate within and ahead of the steel circular piles to attain the specified penetration .
where the bore logs show layers of hard rock it may be necessary to drill and blast before piles are driven to achieve the penetration .
blasting shall be carried out in such a way that overbreak is kept to a minimum .
driving steel circular piles num .
blasting shall not be carried out inside steel circular piles .
piles which can not be driven to the required penetration without exceeding a set of num blowsnummm using the hammer specified in annexure numa shall be excavated within the pile or ahead of the pile toe as necessary and redriven .
repeated excavation and redriving may be necessary to achieve the minimum penetrations specified .
num .
excavation ahead of the pile toe shall be such as to keep overbreak to a minimum .
where excessive overbreak occurs within numm from the minimum penetrations specified piles shall be extended to the required penetration by socketing as detailed on the drawings .
num .
where the toe of a pile reaches sound rock at a level above the minimum penetration specified and where the bore information indicates that a minimum depth of numm of sound rocks exists below the pile toe then the pile can be anchored into the rock by means of a rock socket as detailed on the drawings .
specification num driven steel piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num dynamic pile testing num .
as an audit the superintendent will select piles as described in annexure numb for dynamic pile testing when the piles are close to the minimum specified set .
the contractor shall cease driving when directed by the superintendent and provide all necessary assistance for attaching the dynamic test recording equipment to the pile .
the pile shall then be re driven .
dynamic testing num .
the contractor shall allow in the rates for pile driving for all necessary assistance required to carry out the dynamic pile tests and for a delay of up to five days for the tests to be carried out and the results analysed before further piles are driven .
num .
all dynamic testing shall be undertaken by the superintendent and all costs met by the principal .
num .
the contractor shall give the superintendent num weeks notice of when pile driving the test sample as described in annexure numb is scheduled to commence .
num temporary compressions num .
the contractor shall take temporary compressions on a minimum of num piles at each pile cap during pile driving .
temporary compressions will normally be taken when the pile is close to final set .
the contractor shall allow for any delays incurred in taking temporary compressions .
alternatively the contractor may use other means of testing in lieu of temporary compressions .
temporary compressions num acceptance of piles num .
minimum toe rls for the piles are shown on the drawings .
the actual driven length may vary based on the driving performance of the piles in each particular foundation .
the main criteria in the acceptance of the piles are that the minimum penetration pile toe rl and the minimum set as shown in annexure numc shall both be attained .
acceptance criteria for driving num tolerances on piles num .
piles shall be driven to comply with the following tolerances tolerances a .
variation from specified position in plan nummm b .
variation from vertical in a numm template nummm c. variation from specified batter other than vertical in a numm template nummm d. variation in specified cutoff level nummm num cutting off num .
on completion of driving piles shall be cutoff to the levels as determined from the drawings .
specification num driven steel piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
prior to cutting off any installed pile the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that all the acceptance criteria of the pile and the tolerances on the pile comply with the requirements of the specification and the drawings .
hold point num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num driven steel piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa pile driving design assumptions driving has been designed assuming the following hammer rated energy insert value kj per blow final set insert value blows per nummm driving dolly insert value mm micarta packing insert value mm pine plywood minimum specification num driven steel piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numb pile driving test sample the contractor shall make provision for the superintendent to carry out dynamic testing on the following piles in accordance with clause num pier no insert value number of piles insert value specification num driven steel piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numc acceptance of piles main criteria for bridge no .
insert number over insert rivercreek abutment no .
insert value over insert value penetration minimum penetration rl insert value minimum set insert value blows per nummm of pile penetration .
pier no .
insert value penetration underside of steel section shall be at a minimum of rl insert value minimum set insert value blows per nummm of pile penetration .
the final sets given above are based on continuous driving using a hammer of rated energy of insert value kilojoules per blow operating at num efficiency with other data as given in annexure numa .
the assumed temporary compression was insert value mm .
specification num driven steel piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name sheet num of num annexure numd pile driving data structure date position in structure contract no pile no contractor ground r l cut off r l type and mass of hammer max kinetic energy per blow driving log depth m blowsnum mm penetration depth m blowsnum mm penetration depth m blowsnum mm penetration num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num final set mmblow toe r l details for payment length driven in ground length between toe and cut off number of butt weld splices signed by contractor main roads western australia signed by main roads file no drawing number specification num driven steel piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name sheet num of num annexure numd pile driving data structure date position in structure contract no pile no contractor ground r l cut off r l type and mass of hammer max kinetic energy per blow driving log depth m blowsnum mm penetration depth m blowsnum mm penetration depth m blowsnum mm penetration num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num final set mmblow toe r l details for payment length driven in ground length between toe and cut off number of butt weld splices signed by contractor main roads western australia signed by main roads file no drawing number specification num driven steel piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
num .
annexure numd pile driving data num adjust the page size for annexure numd as necessary to keep the form on two pages .
this change should not be shown as a tracked change .
specification num driven steel piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num driven steel piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title driven steel piles revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num driven concrete piles copyright main roads western australia specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num num revise wording sdsea num num delete reference to as num correct titles of asnzs num asnzs iso num asnzs iso num and asnzs iso num add references to asnzs iso num and asnzs iso num num substitute reference asnzs num with asnzs num as num with asnzs iso num asnzs iso num or asnzs iso num and as num with asnzs iso num or asnzs iso num .
num add reference to as num for tolerances of pile damage or distortion prior to pile driving .
num deleted reference to as num and asnzs num sdse num inserted references to welding consumables standards asnzs num num num and num num reference to standards clause changed whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num precast reinforced concrete and prestressed concrete piles num num precast composite piles num num reinforced concrete pile extensions num num welded splices num num num not used num installation num num transport handling and storage num num pile driving equipment num num pitching and driving num num driving extended concrete piles num num dynamic pile testing num num temporary compressions num num final set num num acceptance of piles num num tolerances on piles num num cutting off and stripping back num num excess steel sections num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num pile driving design assumptions num annexure numb num pile driving test sample num annexure numc num acceptance of piles num specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numd num pile driving data num specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num driven concrete piles general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of operations for the concrete piling of bridge foundations using reinforced prestressed or composite concrete and casting reinforced concrete pile extensions including handling pitching and driving .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num piling design and installation as num nondestructive testing radiography of welded butt joints in metal as num nondestructive testing ultrasonic testing of fusion welded joints in carbon and low allow steel as num bridge design australiannew zealand standards asnzs num structural steel welding welding of steel structures asnzs num welding consumables covered electrodes for manual metal arc welding of nonalloy and fine grain steels classification asnzs iso num welding consumables solid wire electrodes tubular cored electrodes and electrodeflux combinations for submerged arc welding of non alloy and fine grain steels classification asnzs iso num welding consumables fluxes for submerged arc welding and electroslag welding classification asnzs iso num welding consumables tubular cored electrodes for gas shielded and nongas shielded metal arc welding of nonalloy and fine grain steels classification specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name asnzs iso num welding consumables tubular cored electrodes for gas shielded metal arc welding of creepresisting steels classification asnzs iso num welding consumables tubular cored electrodes for gas shielded and nongas shielded metal arc welding of highstrength steels classification other publications concrete institute of australia precast concrete handbook num main roads specifications specification num quality systems specification num driven steel piles specification num concrete for structures specification num formwork specification num steel reinforcement specification num prestressing of concrete num num not used products and materials num precast reinforced concrete and prestressed concrete piles num general num .
the precast reinforced and prestressed concrete piles shall conform to the dimensions and details shown on the drawings .
all piles shall be precast under factory conditions .
factory precast num manufacture num .
manufacture of the piles shall comply with the requirements of the concrete institute of australia precast concrete handbook num except as amended by this specification .
manufacture num .
casting methods shall be designed to ensure that no damage occurs to the piles .
the ends of all piles shall be free from any grout loss honeycombing cracking or spalling .
a. formwork for piles shall conform to specification num formwork .
formwork b. reinforcement shall conform to specification num steel reinforcement except that the tolerance on the specified cover shall be nummm nummm .
reinforcement specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name c. prestressing shall conform to specification num prestressing of concrete .
strand protruding from the ends of the piles shall be cut off flush with the face and coated with epoxy resin to prevent rusting .
prestressing d. concrete shall be class snum and shall conform to specification num concrete for structures except that where steam curing is proposed to be used then it shall be low pressure wet steaming .
any other form of accelerated curing shall not be permitted .
steaming shall not commence until at least two hours after the last batch of concrete has been placed .
subsequent curing shall be in accordance with specification num concrete for structures .
concrete e. after manufacture all piles shall be clearly marked with their length and date of casting and meet the requirements of identification and traceability of manufactured product as specified in specification num quality systems .
identification and traceability num pile splices num .
where piles require production in segments pile splice joints shall be cast in at time of manufacture and shall be capable of transmitting the full bending and shear capacity of the pile concrete section .
pile jointing num precast composite piles num general num .
composite piles which comprise precast pretensioned concrete with a cast in steel column section shall conform to the dimensions and details shown on the drawings .
all piles shall be precast under factory conditions .
composite piles num steel sections num .
steel sections for composite piles shall be steel columns conforming to specification num driven steel piles .
num manufacture num .
composite piles shall be manufactured in accordance with the requirements of clause num in conjunction with the following requirements for the steel section of the pile i cutting the contractor shall be responsible for cutting the steel sections to the required lengths as detailed on the drawings .
cutting shall be by flame cutting disc grinding or cold cut sawing .
cutting by shearing shall not be permitted .
steel section fabrication ii end preparation the disc grinding method shall be used in the preparation of the exposed end as detailed on the drawings .
specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name iii web and flange holes all the steel sections shall have holes flame cut in the webs and flanges .
the location and size of these holes are detailed on the drawings .
iv welding a .
a number of steel bars shall be joined to the steel sections by welding in position as detailed on the drawings .
all welding shall be category sp structural purpose in accordance with asnzs num. b. qualification of personnel where welding is shown on the drawings the contractor shall produce documentation showing that welders to be employed on the work have qualifications meeting the requirements of clause num of asnzs num. c. weld inspection the inspection of the welds shall be as follows visual inspection of all weld preparations prior to welding visual inspection of quality of all welds and ultrasonic testing d. consumables electrodes used for manual welding shall conform to asnzs num .
tubular cored electrodes used for semiautomatic welding shall conform to asnzs iso num asnzs iso num or asnzs iso num .
electrodes and fluxes used for submerged arc welding shall conform to asnzs iso num or asnzs iso num. e. finish of welds all weld spatters shall be removed from the surface of the weld and the parent metal .
f. defective welds any welds not meeting the requirements of this specification shall be rejected .
the contractor shall submit proposals for correcting defective welds .
all corrective work shall be in accordance to asnzsnum .
repairing or correcting defective welds and any additional work or material required to repair defective welds shall be done at no cost to the principal .
num reinforced concrete pile extensions driven or non driven pile extensions num .
reinforced concrete pile extensions shall be cast in situ and shall be either the driven or nondriven type as shown on the drawings .
specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name a. formwork formwork for reinforced concrete pile extensions shall conform to specification num formwork .
the formwork shall remain in place for not less than three days after the concrete extension has been poured .
b. reinforcement reinforcement shall conform to specification num steel reinforcement except that the tolerance on the specified cover shall be nummm nummm .
c. concrete concrete shall be class snum and conform to specification num concrete for structures .
num welded splices num .
end preparation for welded butt splices in the steel piling shall be in accordance with the details shown on the drawings .
the contractor shall cut off the top nummm of the pile already driven to facilitate welding of the new length .
num .
welded butt splices will be required for all pier piles and all abutments .
welded splices num .
welding shall be carried out in accordance with the relevant provisions of asnzs num .
num .
all welds shall be category sp structural purpose in accordance with asnzs num .
welding shall only be carried out by welders meeting the requirements of clause num of asnzs num .
num .
for manual welding the electrodes shall comply with asnzs num .
depending on the composition of the material tubular cored electrodes used for semiautomatic welding shall conform to asnzs num asnzs num or asnzs num .
num .
at least four weeks prior to commencing any welding the contractor shall submit in writing to the superintendent full details of his proposed welding procedures including evidence that the procedures meet all the requirements of asnzs num section num .
no departure from the approved welding procedures shall be made without the permission of the superintendent .
hold point num .
suitable runon and runoff tabs shall be used for all butt welds .
the tabs shall have the same thickness and preparation as the parts to be joined .
each weld pass shall terminate at least nummm beyond the edges of the parts to be joined .
welds shall be continuous for the full length .
num .
radiographic andor ultrasonic examination of all welds shall be carried out in accordance with asnum or asnum .
testing specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
all welds shall be examined by radiography except that if it can be shown to the satisfaction of the superintendent that ultrasonic testing is satisfactory then num of welds shall be examined by both test methods and the remainder by ultrasonic testing only .
the selection for the different tests shall be made by the superintendent .
num .
the contractor shall allow for any preparatory work including cleaning the piles by wire brushing for nummm above and below each splice to remove all mill scale and for all delays resulting from examination and approval of the welds .
num .
all weld testing shall be carried out by a nata registered company .
num num not used installation num transport handling and storage num .
the methods of transport and handling and storage shall be such as to prevent damage to the piles as a result of impact or deflection or the application of load .
during transport the piles shall be supported at the lifting points only .
transport handling and storage num .
concrete piles shall only be lifted from the specified lifting points .
they shall be lifted using either a full length steel lifting beam or two cranes .
num .
no superimposed load shall be placed on the piles .
however similar length piles may be stacked provided supports are vertically above one another at the specified lifting points .
num .
temporary storage areas shall be carefully cleared and levelled .
the piles shall be supported over their full width at the lifting points only .
temporary supports shall be of timber of a minimum size nummm wide by nummm thick and numm long .
the supports shall be on firm foundations and every precaution taken to prevent subsidence from occurring and to prevent the units bearing other than at the specified support positions .
num .
any pile damaged or distorted in excess of the tolerances as specified by asnum prior to pile driving shall be replaced at no cost to the principal .
num pile driving equipment num .
piles shall be held in fixed leads such that the hammer and a braced follower follow the pile and provide support throughout the entire driving period .
the use of swinging leads shall not be permitted .
equipment num .
in general the choice of the hammer shall be in accordance with the recommendations of clause num .
num of as num and shall develop a rated energy of not less than that specified in annexure numa .
num .
a helmet and packing to suit the approved hammer and pile shall be used at all times during driving .
the specification for the driving dolly and packing is given in clause num .
specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
at least num days prior to driving of piles the contractor shall submit details of the proposed hammer to be used including hold point a .
energy rating of hammer b .
details of helmet and dolly c. mass of ram and total mass of hammer d. method of determining the efficiency of the hammer during pile installation .
num pitching and driving num .
piles shall be pitched accurately in position prior to the commencement of driving .
num .
prior to driving any piles the contractor shall supply to the superintendent certification that the piles comply in all respects with the requirements of the specification .
hold point num .
prior to driving any piles the contractor shall supply to the superintendent certification that the plan position and batter of the piles comply with the requirements of the specification .
hold point num .
prior to driving any piles the contractor shall supply to the superintendent certification that the splice complies with the requirements of the specification .
hold point num .
the driving has been designed assuming the details shown in annexure numa .
the contractor should note that the packing requirement is for a minimum thickness at the conclusion of driving .
to ensure compliance excess will need to be inserted at the commencement of driving and it may be necessary to replenish the packing during driving .
in any event the packing shall be replaced after driving each pile or more frequently if necessary .
num .
to avoid the possibility of premature settingup pile driving shall be continuous in the latter stages without deliberate stops except as directed by the superintendent .
delays of as little as num minutes may lead to significant setup in piles .
where premature setup has occurred the contractor shall be required to overcome this by continued driving where resistance to penetration may be significantly greater than normal .
num .
the superintendent may direct that certain selected piles be subject to a setup test .
these piles shall be driven as specified and subsequently re driven num hours after completion of initial driving .
a provisional sum is allowed for this operation .
num .
the contractor shall record the number of blows for each nummm of pile penetration .
details of each pile driven shall be kept on pile driving record forms as shown in annexure numd .
specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num driving extended concrete piles num .
if any piles require extending then a reinforced concrete extension as shown on the drawings shall be used .
num .
only the driven concrete pile extension type shall be subject to redriving .
pile extensions num .
driving of extended piles shall not be undertaken until the concrete in the pile extension has achieved the nominated strength shown on the drawings .
hold point num dynamic pile testing num .
as an audit the superintendent will select piles as described in annexure numb for dynamic pile testing when the piles are close to the minimum specified set .
the contractor shall cease driving when directed by the superintendent and provide all necessary assistance for attaching the dynamic test recording equipment to the pile .
the pile shall then be re driven .
dynamic testing num .
the contractor shall allow in the rates for pile driving for all necessary assistance required to carry out the dynamic pile tests and for a delay of up to five days for the tests to be carried out and the results analysed before further piles are driven .
num .
all dynamic testing shall be undertaken by the superintendent and all costs met by the principal .
num .
the contractor shall give the superintendent four weeks notice of when pile driving the test sample as described in annexure numb is scheduled to commence .
num temporary compressions num .
the contractor shall take temporary compressions on a minimum of num piles at each foundation during pile driving .
temporary compressions will normally be taken when the pile is close to final set .
the contractor shall allow for any delays incurred in taking temporary compressions .
alternatively the contractor may use other means of testing approved by the superintendent in lieu of temporary compressions .
num .
in addition to the above temporary compressions shall be taken for each trial pile .
num final set num .
the final set of each pile shall be recorded as the number of blows required to produce a penetration of nummm .
num .
when a final set is being measured the following requirements shall be met a .
the exposed part of the pile shall be in good condition without damage or distortion specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name b .
the hammer blow shall be in line with the pile axis and the impact surfaces shall be flat and at right angles to the pile and hammer axis c. the hammer shall be in good condition and operating correctly and d. the temporary compression of the pile shall be recorded as required .
num acceptance of piles num .
minimum toe rls for the piles are shown on the drawings .
the actual driven length may vary based on the driving performance of the piles in each particular foundation .
the main criteria in the acceptance of the piles are that the minimum penetration and the minimum set as given in annexure numc shall both be attained .
acceptance criteria num tolerances on piles num .
piles shall be driven to comply with the following tolerances tolerances a .
variation from specified position in plan nummm b .
variation from vertical in a numm template nummm c. variation from specified batter other than vertical in a numm template nummm d. variation in specified cutoff level nummm num cutting off and stripping back num .
on completion of driving piles shall be cutoff to the levels shown on the drawings .
num .
prior to cutting off any installed pile the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that all acceptance criteria of the pile and the tolerances on the pile comply with the requirements of the specification and the drawings .
hold point num .
composite and prestressed concrete piles shall be stripped back to the extent shown on the drawings to expose the reinforcement and prestressing strands .
only hand held equipment shall be used for this operation .
num .
prior to stripping back the heads of prestressed concrete piles a nummm deep saw cut shall be made on all sides of the pile at cutoff level .
due care shall be taken to avoid splitting of the permanent concrete during the stripping operation .
num excess steel sections num .
after completion of all pile driving excess steel piles shall be disposed off site by the contractor .
specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa pile driving design assumptions driving has been designed assuming the following hammer rated energy insert value kj per blow final set insert value blows per nummm driving dolly insert value mm micarta packing insert value mm pine plywood minimum specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numb pile driving test sample the contractor shall make provision for the superintendent to carry out dynamic testing on the following piles in accordance with clause num on the following piles pier no insert value number of piles insert value specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numc acceptance of piles main criteria for bridge no .
insert number over insert rivercreek abutment no .
insert value over insert value penetration minimum penetration rl insert value minimum set insert value blows per nummm of pile penetration .
pier no .
insert value penetration underside of concrete section shall be at a minimum rl of insert value minimum set insert value blows per nummm of pile penetration .
the final sets given above are based on continuous driving using a hammer of rated energy of insert value kilojoules per blow operating at num efficiency with other data as given in annexure numa .
the assumed temporary compression was insert value mm .
specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name sheet num of num annexure numd pile driving data structure date position in structure contract no pile no contractor ground r l cut off r l type and mass of hammer max kinetic energy per blow driving log depth m blowsnum mm penetration depth m blowsnum mm penetration depth m blowsnum mm penetration num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num final set mmblow toe r l details for payment length driven in ground length between toe and cut off number of butt weld splices main roads western australia signed by contractor file n drawing number signed by main roads specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name sheet num of num annexure numd pile driving data structure date position in structure contract no pile no contractor ground r l cut off r l type and mass of hammer max kinetic energy per blow driving log depth m blowsnum mm penetration depth m blowsnum mm penetration depth m blowsnum mm penetration num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num final set mmblow toe r l details for payment length driven in ground length between toe and cut off number of butt weld splices main roads western australia signed by contractor file n drawing number signed by main roads specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
num .
clause num scope num if supply of piles is by the principal this clause needs amending accordingly .
also delete clause in the products and materials section and adjust accordingly for principal supplied items .
num .
clause num precast composite piles num where no steel piling is included delete reference to specification num and delete the precast composite piles welded splices and excess steel sections clauses and denote them as not used .
num .
annexure numd pile driving data num adjust the page size as necessary to keep this form to two pages .
num .
trial piles clause num num as required clause num should be included in contract specific requirements but is only warranted for large jobs where refinement of design can offset the costs of associated delays .
most jobs require all materials to be ordered at an early stage .
specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num trial piles num .
one trial pile shall be driven at each of the piers of the bridge prior to any other piles being driven at the piers .
num .
the trial pile shall comprise the driving of the lower steel section following by the welding on of the upper composite concrete section .
the complete pile shall then be driven to its final level in accordance with the minimum set and minimum penetration criteria specified in clause num .
num .
subsequent piles driven at the piers shall be adjusted in length on an individual basis based on the trial pile driving data and ongoing driving records .
adjustments shall be made to the length of the lower steel section only .
the contractor shall allow for cutting of the steel piles in the rates .
specification num driven concrete piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title driven concrete piles revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num bored piles without permanent casing copyright main roads western australia specification num bored piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date num each pile changed to every other pile or every num mnum of concrete whichever comes first sdse num num redundant as num asnzs num as num and specification num removed sdse num num selfcompacting concrete added permission for using admixtures deleted every truck changed to each pile as num changed to as num additional concrete samples added measured slump values deleted slump flow requirements added num num clause num rephrased clause num added for number of piles required for testing testing requirement amended whole document reformatted sco num whole document complete review and update asdse num num deleted reference to as num and asnzs num sdse num inserted references to welding consumables standards asnzs num num num and num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num bored piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num competency of piling contractor num num pile installation plan num num not used num materials num num general num num concrete num num reinforcement num num steel pile casings num num drilling fluid num num num not used num operations num num general num num transportation handling and storage of steel casings num num set out num num boring and excavation num num cleaning and inspection of borehole num num placement of reinforcement num num concreting num num casing extraction num num pile cutoff num num pile installation records num num tolerances on piles num pile testing num num general num num integrity testing num num pile dynamic load testing num num static load testing num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num specification num bored piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa num pile installation record num specification num bored piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num bored piles without permanent casing general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of nondisplacement cast in situ bored reinforced concrete piles without permanent casing .
num .
this specification does not cover grouted piles .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num methods of testing concrete as num methods of testing concrete determination of properties related to the consistency of concrete slump flow tnum and jring test as num chemical admixtures for concrete mortar and grout as num piling design and installation as num nondestructive testing radiography of welded butt joints in metal as num nondestructive testing ultrasonic testing of fusion welded joints in carbon and low alloy steel as num supplementary cementitious materials as num bridge design australiannew zealand standards asnzs num structural steel welding welding of steel structures asnzs num structural steel hotrolled plates floorplates and slabs asnzs num welding consumables covered electrodes for manual metal arc welding of nonalloy and fine grain steels classification specification num bored piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name asnzs iso num welding consumables tubular cored electrodes for gas shielded and nongas shielded metal arc welding of nonalloy and fine grain steels classification asnzs iso num welding consumables tubular cored electrodes for gas shielded metal arc welding of creepresisting steels classification asnzs iso num welding consumables tubular cored electrodes for gas shielded and nongas shielded metal arc welding of highstrength steels classification main roads specifications specification num excavation and backfill for structures specification num concrete for structures specification num steel reinforcement other references astm dnum standard test method for sand content by volume of bentonitic slurries astm dnum standard test method for fluid loss of clay component of geosynthetic clay liners astm dnum standard test method for marsh funnel viscosity of clay construction slurries num competency of piling contractor num .
prior to award of piling contract the piling contractor shall submit to the principal or delegated authority evidence of past projects in the construction of bored piles .
reference to successful completion of projects with similar pile sizes in similar soil conditions using the proposed equipment and procedures should be included .
past projects num .
the piling contractor shall provide evidence that all piling operators on the project have adequate training in producing good quality bored piles in similar ground conditions to those anticipated at the site .
operator competency num .
the piling contractor shall provide for the duration of the piling operations a fulltime supervisor with a minimum of numyear experience in the construction of bored piles .
supervision num pile installation plan num .
at least num weeks prior to commencing installation of piles the piling contractor must supply to the principal or delegated authority full details of the proposed installation plan together with a certification by an experienced engineer for approval to commence .
hold point specification num bored piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the installation plan shall include as a minimum but not limited to the following items a .
methodology of drilling controlling and testing .
b .
material including bore holes support and mix design for concrete .
c. mix designs for concrete to be used on the project including aggregate grading curve slump loss vs. time curves and strength development vs. time curves for mixes .
d. methodology of concrete placement and process in place to avoid concrete contamination during its placement .
e. the frequency of testing and the method and procedure of sampling of drilling fluid .
f. a plan of sequence of pile installation so as to ensure adequate concrete strength is obtained before commencing drilling for adjacent piles .
g. proposed recording forms to be used during construction and testing .
h. contingency plans for equipment failures during drilling reinforcement installation or concrete operations or the interrupted construction process .
i .
methodology to ensure pile and pile reinforcement location and battering tolerance are met .
j .
details of the proposed integrity test and load test methods including a method statement of how the test will be carried out and details of the record sheets proposed for monitoring results .
k. contingency plans for remediation and for piles deeper than design drawings .
num not used materials num general num .
materials used in the construction of bored piles dimensions and details of the piles must be in accordance with the requirements shown on the drawings .
num concrete concrete num .
except as modified below concrete used for piling shall be selfcompacting in accordance with specification num concrete for structures which specifies minimum strength and other requirements for the concrete classes as nominated in the drawings to achieve the required durability .
for bored piles the provisions of this clause override any conflicting requirements of specification num .
specification num bored piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the piling contractor shall ensure that the proposed concrete mix design suits the proposed method of construction .
num .
mix design shall be submitted to the principal or delegated authority in accordance with clause num.c for approval .
num .
the piling contractor shall arrange to have a trial mix in the presence of the principal or delegated authority prior to the commencement of fieldwork .
the trial mix shall be carried out in accordance to the design mix submitted to the principal or delegated authority .
num .
concrete samples must be obtained from every other pile or every num mnum of concrete whichever comes first at the time of discharging into the pile shaft or the pump hopper and must be tested for consistency and temperature in accordance with as num .
additional samples may be required at the discretion of the principal or delegated authority at times corresponding to reinforcement cage installation .
num .
the slump flow for selfcompacting concrete shall be in accordance with specification num concrete for structures .
num .
concrete samples for strength testing must be taken from the discharge into the pile shaft or concrete pump hopper and tested in accordance with asnum .
num .
if the concrete samples as tested fail to satisfy the criteria as prescribed in the specifications or standards the piles shall be rejected and the piling contractor shall undertake all necessary remedy to the approval of the principal or delegated authority at no cost to the principal .
num reinforcement reinforcement num .
reinforcement must be in accordance with specification num steel reinforcement .
num steel pile casings steel pile casings num .
where a temporary steel casing is required it shall be designed supplied and fabricated by the piling contractor .
num .
the internal diameter of the casing shall be not less than the specified pile diameter and the straightness tolerance of any portion and of the completed length shall be num of the length .
num .
the dimensions and quality of the casing shall be adequate to withstand all possible stresses which it will subject to during handling and construction including preventing concrete within the pile shaft from squeezing out or soil squeezing in and displacing each other .
num .
the casings shall be fabricated in lengths that allow the casings to be extended should ground conditions dictate .
num .
the casings shall be of uniform cross section throughout and free from internal projection and encrusted concrete which might prevent the proper formation of piles .
the joints of casings shall be reasonably watertight .
specification num bored piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
if the temporary casing is damaged during the construction and as a result the proper formation of the pile is prevented such a casing shall be withdrawn before concrete is placed and necessary remedy works shall be carried out to the approval of the principal or delegated authority to continue the construction .
num drilling fluid drilling fluid num .
the proposed drilling fluid mix must be included in the pile installation plan and submitted to the principal or delegated authority as required by clause num .
num .
unless specified otherwise by the manufacturer bentonite slurry properties shall comply with follows a .
the density measured using a mud balance shall be about num gml .
b .
the marsh viscosity numml tested in accordance with astm dnum shall be num seconds .
c. ph value measured using a ph meter shall be between num to num inclusive .
d. the sand content tested in accordance with astm dnum shall be less than num. e. fluid loss tested in accordance with astm dnum shall be less than num mlnum mins .
num .
properties of drilling fluid other than bentonite shall be submitted to the principal or delegated authority for approval .
num .
the frequency of testing and the method and procedure of sampling shall be proposed by the piling contractor and submitted to the principal or delegated authority together with the pile installation plan for approval as required by clause num .
as a minimum the drilling fluid shall be tested for a .
fresh drilling fluid b .
drilling fluid taken from the bottom of bore hole before concreting c. circulated drilling fluid after desanding and d. drilling fluid left in the bore holes for more than num hours .
num .
the circulated drilling fluid may be re used given that the tested properties fall within the range as specified above .
num num not used operations specification num bored piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num general num .
an adequate site surface must be provided as a safe working platform for piling equipment .
num .
piles must be constructed in accordance with the installation procedure for nondisplacement piles in as num .
installation num .
piles shall be installed using appropriate boring and installation equipment capable of producing the required outcome .
all necessary installation equipment shall be available on site prior to commencement of piling .
num .
the contractors attention is drawn to the varied nature of the foundation material as indicated by the borehole log drawings and the potential to intersect ground water during the installation of the piles .
num .
ensure that installation of piles is timed so that other construction activities will not occur within vicinity that could dislodge or damage the concrete of the piles prior to the pile concrete strength reaching nummpa .
num transportation handling and storage of steel casings transport handling and storage num .
the methods of transport handling and storage shall be such as to prevent any damage to the steel pile casings such as the result of impact deflection or the application of load .
num .
any steel casings damaged or distorted in excess of the specified tolerances prior to or during pile installation shall be replaced at no cost to the principal .
num set out set out num .
all piles need to be set out in accordance with design requirements and appropriate procedures shall be taken to protect adjacent services structures and piles .
num .
check the horizontal position and verticalitybatter angle of the piling drilling rig prior to the construction of each pile .
num .
the piling contractor shall sequence the works in such a way as to provide sufficient distance between piles to ensure that adjacent piles are not damaged during drilling and construction of subsequent piles .
num .
locate construction equipment at sufficient distance from the pile being drilled and from recently constructed piles to avoid any displacement of the concrete column caused by the load of the equipment .
num .
confirm set out of all piles before commencing installation .
hold point num boring and excavation num .
the piling rig must be capable of installing piles to the depth as shown on the approved drawings with provision for contingencies .
num .
boring and excavation shall be such as to keep overbreak to a minimum .
specification num bored piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the side of all boreholes shall be kept intact and no loose material shall be permitted to fall into the bottom of the boreholes .
num .
the borehole shall be filled with drilling fluid to a level to sufficiently stabilise the borehole .
if drilling fluid alone is not sufficient to prevent the ground water from intrusion or the borehole side walls from collapse a steel casing of appropriate size and length shall be used in conjunction with the drilling fluid to support the side of the borehole .
num .
if a temporary casing is required to stabilise the borehole it shall be extended beyond the unstable strata for one meter or more to prevent the inflow of soil and the formation of cavities in the surrounding ground .
num .
if a temporary casing is damaged during installation in a manner which prevents the proper formation of the pile such a casing shall be withdrawn from the borehole and repaired if necessary or other measure to be taken to the approval of the principal or the delegated authority to continue the construction of the pile .
num .
the pile toe shall be founded at the levels shown on the drawings .
num .
during the installation process if any of the following scenarios occur the principal or the delegated authority shall determine the need for further deepening of the pile shaft a .
the pile excavation refuses at a level above the specified toe level b .
where the distance between the bottom of the steel casing which is going to be left in place and the toe level is less than the minimum socked length shown on the drawings c. the ground condition varies from that assumed at design stage or as shown in borehole logs completed during geotechnical investigation .
num .
if additional excavation is ordered to continue the principal or the delegated authority shall decide when the founding level is satisfactory and the pile shaft can be prepared for concreting .
hold point num cleaning and inspection of borehole num .
upon completion of boring the pile holes shall be cleaned of all loose disturbed soil and sediment soil to expose a firm base of undisturbed material using a suitable and effective method to be approved by the principal or the delegated authority .
num .
where practicable all boreholes shall be inspected for their full length prior to concreting to ensure the cleaning has been properly carried out the sides are able to remain stable during subsequent installation of reinforcement cage and concreting operations and the verticality and position of the boreholes meet the specified tolerances .
hold point num .
the piling contractor shall provide all necessary apparatus for the inspection to be carried out safely .
specification num bored piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num placement of reinforcement num .
the reinforcement cage shall be free from oil rust or debris and straight .
it shall not be placed until inspected and accepted by the principal or delegated authority .
hold point num .
reinforcement must be carefully aligned as shown on the drawings to allow the satisfactory construction of the pile caps .
num .
spacer skids with contact width of not less than nummm must be used for the installation of reinforcement to ensure maintenance of cover requirements as specified on the drawings .
not less than num spacer skids shall be provided evenly around the perimeter of the pile at a vertical spacing of not less than num meters .
num .
reinforcement cages and spacers shall be sufficiently robust to withstand the forces during lifting placing of the concrete and extraction of temporary casings .
num .
the cage shall be kept vertical or at the required batter angle if applicable during installation .
num .
in addition to any weld details shown in the approved drawings welding of reinforcement is required to form a robust cage .
each ligature must be connected to at least on main bar and each main bar to at least one ligature to form electrical connectivity to allow for future cathodic protection .
num .
if the reinforcement cage can not be placed to the specified depth the cage must be removed and the pile redrilled .
num concreting concreting num .
immediately after the completion of boring approval to commence concreting shall be sought and when this has been obtained concreting shall start forthwith .
num .
placing and compaction of concrete shall be in accordance with specification num concrete for structures .
num .
concreting must be continuous to achieve monolith from the top to the base of the pile without segregation and free of entrapped debris .
num .
concreting shall be continued to num mm above the designed pile cut off level to ensure any contaminated concrete is removed .
a temporary casing may be required to achieve the concreting level .
num .
any ground water must be displaced during concreting operations .
num .
the volume of concrete used in the pile shall be determined to an accuracy of num and recorded .
the measured volume of concrete placed in any pile shall be not less than num of the nominal volume of the pile .
specification num bored piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
if the recorded volume of the concrete placed in the borehole indicates a possible necking the piling contractor shall propose and carry out appropriate tests and measures to demonstrate the adequacy of the pile or appropriate remedy work to the approval of the principal or delegated authority .
num casing extraction num .
withdraw of any temporary casing shall be carried out whilst the concrete still fluid and has a slump close to that while concreting so that no concrete is lifted .
num .
when casings are withdrawn as concreting proceeds a sufficient head of concrete shall be maintained to prevent the entry of ground water .
concrete shall be placed continuously as the casing is extracted until the desire head of concrete is obtained .
num .
temporary casings may be left in place provided that the designed geotechnical capacity i.e .
provided by bond between rock and concrete is not compromised in any way by the steel casings left in place and the minimum cover to reinforcement specified on the drawings is satisfied .
num .
if a temporary casing is left in place any lifting lugs or other attachments shall be removed and any gaps between the casing and the sides of excavations shall be filled with sand which shall be compacted by flooding .
num pile cutoff num .
the piling contractor shall trim the tops of pile to elevations indicated on the design drawings prior to construction of the pile caps .
all contaminated and weak concrete or laitance must be removed to expose sound concrete over the full cross sectional area of the pile during trimming .
num .
piles must not be trimmed earlier than num hours after casting the concrete .
num pile installation records num .
the piling contractor must maintain accurate records for each pile constructed .
these records must include data shown at annexure numa .
annexure numa num .
the records for each pile must be provided to the principal or delegated authority within num hours of the completion of the pile .
num tolerances on piles tolerances num .
piles shall comply with the following tolerances a .
variation from specified position in plan unless otherwise specified nummm b. deviation of pier piles from pier centreline nummm c. variation from verticaldesign batter in a num m template unless otherwise specified nummm specification num bored piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name d. variation from vertical in a num m template from plane of pier centreline nummm e. variation in specified cutoff level nummm f. variation in pile diameter see below num .
the pile diameter shall not be less than shown on the drawings .
the pile diameter may generally be larger than shown on the drawings providing that the minimum distance from the outside of any pile to the edge of a concrete pile cappierabutment as shown on the drawings is satisfied after taking into account construction tolerances .
pile testing num general num .
prior to commence of pile cap construction the piling contractor shall submit satisfactory written pile test results to the principal or delegated authority for acceptance .
hold point num integrity testing num .
the piling contractor shall carry out integrity testing using the method approved by the designer and the principal or delegated authority on the test pile and the samples of production piles as nominated on the drawings or by the principal or delegated authority on site .
integrity testing num .
the designer shall determine the percentage of the pile shafts to be tested for integrity in accordance with as num but not less than num when design load is governed by pile geotechnical capacity or num when design load is governed by pile structural capacity .
num .
integrity testing and reporting shall be carried out in accordance with as num including appendix d integrity testing .
num .
integrity testing equipment and technique must be capable of checking crosssection irregularities in piles and identifying the location and characteristics of any significant anomalies such as voids or contaminants .
num .
piles giving anomalous results must be subject to alternative testing by the contractor and may be rejected if they do not comply with specifications or the standards .
alternative testing is at the discretion of the principal or delegated authority but may include static load testing in accordance with as num to ensure the pile serviceability and ultimate strength .
all alternative testing is at no cost to the principal .
num .
additional integrity tests on all piles at a particular pier or abutment may be required if any of the tested piles give anomalous results and all additional tests are at no cost to the principal .
specification num bored piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num pile dynamic load testing num .
the piling contractor must carry out pile dynamic load testing and analysis on all piles nominated on the drawings or by the principal or delegated authority on site .
pile dynamic load testing will be carried out on a minimum of num of all bored piles but not less than num per bridge .
pda testing num .
additional dynamic load testing must also be carried out on piles in the event that pile toe levels vary by more than num metres from the test pile .
num .
pile dynamic testing and reporting shall be carried out in accordance with as num including appendix b high strain dynamic pile testing num .
the piling contractor shall design and construct pile head extension required to prevent damage to the pile .
pile dynamic testing shall be carried out after the pile concrete has gained sufficient strength to prevent damage under the required hammer impact and not less than num mpa unless otherwise specified on the drawings .
num .
the piling contractor shall provide all the appropriate pile driving equipment including hammer crane and pile driving rig and all instrumentation hardware and software to carry out the dynamic testing .
num .
the piling contractor shall be responsible for the testing date analysis and calibration with static load tests if applicable and demonstrate the maximum mobilised shaft and end bearing resistance .
num .
the piling contractor shall include details of all the equipment and instruments applied for the test including hammer mass and rated energy in his method statement as required by clause num j .
num static load testing num .
static load testing and reporting shall be carried out on the piles as nominated on the drawings or by the principal or delegated authority on site .
static load testing num .
static load testing and reporting shall be carried out in accordance with as num including appendix a static load test unless otherwise specified .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num bored piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa pile installation record structure date position in structure contract no pile no contractor ground r l equipment used excavation log depth m material description depth m material description depth m material description num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num specification num bored piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num casing detail top r l volume of used concrete bottom r l pile toe r l details for payment length of casing .length between toe and existing ground level signed by contractor main roads western australia signed by main roads file no drawing number specification num bored piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
none at this time specification num bored piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num bored piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title bored piles revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num cased piles copyright main roads western australia specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date num redundant asnzs num and asnzs num removed sdse num num selfcompacting concrete added num annexures num c and d changed to b and c respectively num num changed to num annexure numb changed to a num annexure numb changed to a num redundant sentence deleted whole document reformatting sco num clause num as num superseded by asnzs iso num asnzs iso num asnzs iso num asdse num clause num as num superseded by asnzs num asdse num whole document new specification first issue mcp num specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num steel pile casings num num corrosion protection num num concrete num num reinforcement num num num not used num operations num num transportation handling and storage num num welded splices num num methods of installation of pile casings num num pile casings driven from the top num num pile casings driven from the bottom num num pile casings installed by oscillation num num pile driving equipment num num pitching and driving num num installation requirements num num tolerances on pile casings num num acceptance of piles num num integrity testing num num pile load testing num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num pile driving design assumptions num annexure numb num pile casing driving test sample num specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numc num acceptance of driven piles casing num annexure numd num pile driving data num annexure nume num pile installation record num specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num cased piles general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and installation of steel pile casings and construction of a reinforced concrete pile within the casing .
the steel casing may be fully filled with concrete or partly filled at the top as shown on the drawings .
the scope also includes forming concrete rock sockets below the toe of the casing by constructing down the casing as shown on the drawings .
num .
a summary of the scope is as follows summary a .
design and supply of sacrificialnon sacrificial steel pile casing b .
installation of steel pile casing including excavation during installation as required c. construction of reinforced concrete infill for pile and rock socket d. excavation cleaning and creating a seal at the rock interface e. drilling for rock sockets into fresh bedrock .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num arcwelded steel pipes and fittings for water and wastewater as num piling design and installation as num nondestructive testing radiography of welded butt joints in metal as num non destructive testing ultrasonic testing of fusion welded joints in carbon and low alloy steel as num bridge design australiannew zealand standards asnzs num structural steel welding welding of steel structures specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name asnzs num structural steel hotrolled plates floor plates and slabs asnzs num hotdip galvanised zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles asnzs num welding consumables covered electrodes manual metal arc welding of nonalloy and fine grain steels classification asnzs iso num welding consumables tubular cored electrodes for gas shielded and nongas shielded metal arc welding nonalloy and fine grain steels classification iso num mod asnzs iso num welding consumables tubular cored electrodes for gas shielded metal arc welding of creepresisting steels classification iso num mod asnzs iso num welding consumables tubular cored electrodes for gas shielded and nongas shielded metal arc welding of highstrength steels classification iso num mod main roads specifications specification num environment specification num excavation and backfill for structures specification num concrete for structures specification num formwork specification num steel reinforcement specification num structural steelwork specification num protective treatment of steelwork num num not used products and materials num steel pile casings num .
steel pile casings shall be designed supplied and fabricated by the contractor .
the design shall include for any edge stiffening required to suit the method of installation of the pile casings .
num .
the pile casing thickness shall be determined by the contractor based on the proposed installation method but in no circumstances shall it be less than nummm .
pile casings driven from the top shall have a minimum casing thickness as designed by the contractor but not less than nummm .
minimum casing thickness specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
all pile casings shall be fabricated in accordance with as num from grade num steel conforming to asnzs num .
the diameter of the casing shall be as specified on the drawings and fabricated to tolerances so as to result in the finished concrete work complying with the requirements of the tolerances for concrete construction clause of specification num formwork .
tolerances num .
pile casings fabricated from steel plate shall have all longitudinal and transverse joints welded with full penetration butt welds tested by radiographic andor ultrasonic examination carried out in accordance with as num andor as num .
all longitudinal joints between segments shall be staggered by not less than num degrees .
num .
spiral welded pile casings shall be welded by the submerged arc process from both sides of the plate .
num .
the pile casings shall be fabricated in lengths that allow them to be extended should ground conditions dictate .
num corrosion protection num .
where specified on the drawings steel pile casings shall be corrosion protected using a galvanised coating .
num .
galvanised coatings shall be carried out in accordance with asnzs num subject to the adoption of surface preparation or other procedures where necessary to avoid a. brittle uneven andor loosely adhering coatings on flame cut edges b. pinholes in galvanised coatings along welds and c. white rust ferrous rust and other surface contamination or stains which the superintendent deems diminish the appearance or function of the galvanised coating .
num .
at least num days prior to the application of the galvanised coating the contractor shall submit details of procedures which eliminate the above coating deficiencies to the superintendent for approval .
hold point num .
all hotdip galvanising shall conform to the requirements of asnzs num and shall be clean and smooth and continuous and free from acid spots and cracks and laminations and runs and drips .
the coating shall have a minimum thickness of num microns .
num concrete num .
concrete for cased piles shall be selfcompacting concrete in accordance with specification num concrete for structures and the class as nominated on the drawings .
concrete num reinforcement num .
reinforcement for cased piles shall be in accordance with specification num steel reinforcement .
reinforcement specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used operations num transportation handling and storage num .
the methods of transport handling and storage shall be such as to prevent damage to the steel casings .
num .
any steel casings damaged or distorted in excess of the specified tolerances prior to or during pile driving shall be replaced at no cost to the principal .
num welded splices num .
end preparation for welded butt pile splices in the steel casings shall be in accordance with the details shown on the drawings .
the contractor shall cut off the top nummm of the casing already driven to facilitate welding of the new length .
num .
welding of splices shall comply with specification num structural steelwork .
num .
when welding steel casings the longitudinal seams in adjoining sections shall be offset a minimum of num degrees .
num .
welded casing splices shall be tested by radiographic andor ultrasonic examination carried out in accordance with as num andor as num .
num .
all welds shall be examined by radiography except that if it can be shown to the satisfaction of the superintendent that ultrasonic testing is satisfactory then num of welds shall be examined by both test methods and the remainder by ultrasonic testing only .
the selection for the different tests shall be made by the superintendent .
num .
the contractor shall allow for any preparatory work including cleaning the casings by wire brushing for nummm above and below each splice to remove all mill scale and for all delays resulting from examination and approval by the superintendent of the welds .
num .
all weld testing shall be carried out by a nata registered company .
num .
all damage to protective coatings where used caused by site welding shall be repaired by the contractor in accordance with the requirements of specification num protective treatment of steelwork at no cost to the principal .
damage to protective coatings specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num methods of installation of pile casings num .
at least num weeks prior to commencing installation of pile casings the contractor shall supply to the superintendent full details of the proposed installation methodology and equipment including num copies of all drawings specifications and procedures and certification that the proposal has been independently checked by an engineer experienced in this form of construction confirming that the pile casings will meet their intended purpose and comply with this specification .
hold point num .
the contractors attention is drawn to the bore logs and the depth to which the soffits of pile caps may be below ground level and where piers and abutments foundations may be below the water level .
pile casings must remain extended above the ground level until excavation in accordance with specification num excavation and backfill for structures and dewatering in accordance with specification num environment for the pile caps are completed .
num .
piling operations that may cause dynamic vibrations within a pier or abutment foundation shall not be permitted within num days of concrete being placed in adjacent pile casings .
num .
rock sockets where specified on the drawings shall be formed using down the hole percussion drilling techniques to achieve required production rates in rock .
use of conventional rotary drilling to form the rock socket alone shall not be accepted .
rock sockets num .
pile casings not water tight after installation shall be sealed with a concrete or grout plug before construction of the rock sockets .
concrete or grout plug num pile casings driven from the top num .
pile casings may be driven from the top using an impact pile driving hammer .
the hammer shall be capable of achieving penetration of the pile casings to the toe levels detailed on the drawings or such level as approved by the superintendent without damaging the pile casings .
pile driving equipment shall comply with clause num and annexure numa of this specification .
num .
the pile casing wall thickness and edge stiffening shall be designed to accommodate the driving energy required to achieve the specified toe levels but shall not be less than nummm .
minimum top driven casing thickness num .
pitching and driving shall comply with clause num and annexures numa numb and numc of this specification .
num .
the contractor shall take temporary compressions on a minimum of num piles at each pile cap during pile driving .
temporary compressions will normally be taken when the pile is close to final set .
the contractor shall allow for any delays incurred in taking temporary compressions .
alternatively the contractor may use other means of testing approved by the superintendent in lieu of temporary compressions .
temporary compressions specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
minimum toe rls for the piles are shown on the drawings .
the actual driven length may vary based on the driving performance of the piles in each particular foundation .
the main criteria in the acceptance of the piles are that the minimum penetration pile toe rl and the minimum set as shown in annexure numc shall both be attained .
acceptance criteria for driving num .
as an audit the superintendent will select piles as described in annexure numb for dynamic pile testing when the piles are close to the minimum specified set .
the contractor shall cease driving when directed by the superintendent and provide all necessary assistance for attaching the dynamic test recording equipment to the pile .
the pile shall then be re driven .
dynamic testing a .
the contractor shall allow in the rates for pile installation all necessary assistance required to carry out the dynamic pile tests and for a delay of up to five days for the tests to be carried out and the results analysed before further piles are driven .
b .
all dynamic testing shall be undertaken by the superintendent and all costs met by the principal .
c. the contractor shall give the superintendent num weeks notice of when driving the pile casing test sample as described in annexure numb is scheduled to commence .
hold point num pile casings driven from the bottom num .
pile casings shall be installed by means of down the hole hammer percussion drilling techniques using an under reaming drill bit with a driving collar .
the bottom of each pile casing shall be fitted with a casing shoe incorporating a driving shoulder to match the collar on the under reaming drill bit being used such that it will permit the drilling of a rock socket to the required dimensions where shown on the drawings .
pile casing and rock socket num .
pile casings shall be held in fixed leads mounted on a crane base of adequate capacity to support the drill rotator .
num .
when the pile casings have been under reamed and driven to the required toe levels the under reaming drill bit shall be withdrawn and the pile casing redriven from the top to seat the pile casing in the short advanced under reamed section ahead of the pile casing .
the pile casing shall be fitted with a suitable helmet and packer before being redriven from the top with the down the hole hammer .
num pile casings installed by oscillation num .
pile casings may be installed within temporary liners driven using appropriate oscillation equipment where the piles are end bearing only as shown on the drawings .
the diameter of the temporary liners used shall be such that the annulus between the permanent pile casings and the temporary liners is kept to a minimum .
num .
the oscillating equipment shall be capable of simultaneously oscillating the temporary liners in a horizontal plane and applying vertical loads to drive the temporary liners down through the overburden material and into the underlying bedrock to form a seal .
specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the temporary liners shall be taken down to the same toe levels as specified for the pile casings .
num .
the base of the temporary liners shall be kept far enough ahead of the excavation to prevent foundation materials from entering the temporary liners .
num .
the temporary liner may be withdrawn before the formation of a rock socket where specified on the drawings but only after the permanent pile casing has been embedded in a concrete plug .
forming a rock socket num pile driving equipment num .
piles shall be held in fixed leads such that the hammer and a braced follower follow the pile and provide support throughout the entire driving period .
the use of swinging leads shall not be permitted .
equipment num .
in general the choice of the hammer shall be in accordance with the recommendations of clause num of as num and shall develop a rated energy of not less than that specified in annexure numa .
num .
a helmet and packing to suit the approved hammer and pile shall be used at all times during driving .
the specification for the driving dolly and packing is given in clause num .
num .
at least num days prior to driving of piles the contractor shall submit details of the proposed hammer to be used including hold point a .
energy rating of hammer b .
details of helmet and dolly c. mass of ram and total mass of hammer d. method of determining the efficiency of the hammer during pile installation .
num pitching and driving num .
piles shall be pitched accurately in position prior to the commencement of driving .
num .
prior to driving any piles the contractor shall supply to the superintendent certification that the piles comply in all respects with the requirements of the specification .
hold point num .
prior to driving any piles the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that the plan position and batter of the piles comply with the requirements of the specification and the drawings .
hold point num .
prior to driving any spliced piles the contractor shall supply to the superintendent certification that the splice complies with the requirements of the specification .
hold point specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the driving has been designed assuming the details shown in annexure numa .
the contractor should note that the packing requirement is for a minimum thickness at the conclusion of driving .
to ensure compliance excess will need to be inserted at the commencement of driving and it may be necessary to replenish the packing during driving .
in any event the packing shall be replaced after driving each pile or more frequently if necessary .
num .
to avoid the possibility of premature settingup pile driving shall be continuous in the latter stages without deliberate stops except as directed by the superintendent .
delays of as little as num minutes may lead to significant setup in piles .
where premature setup has occurred the contractor shall be required to overcome this by continued driving where resistance to penetration may be significantly greater than normal .
num .
the superintendent may direct that certain selected piles be subject to a setup test .
these piles shall be driven as specified and subsequently re driven num hours after completion of initial driving .
a provisional sum is allowed for this operation .
num .
the contractor shall record the number of blows for each nummm of pile penetration .
details of each pile driven shall be kept on pile driving record forms as shown in annexure nume .
num installation requirements num .
the level of the natural surface at each pile location shall be determined prior to the contractor commencing works necessary for the installation of each pile casing .
num .
the contractors attention is drawn to the requirements for installing the pile casings in particular the nature of the material as shown on the bore logs and the potential to intersect ground water during the installation procedure .
depending on the installation method used it may be that there will be a need to excavate within and ahead of the casing during driving to breakout and remove difficult material in order to attain the pile casing toe level specified on the drawings or such level as approved by the superintendent .
num .
where pile casings are driven to rock the pile casing is required to be driven into the underlying bedrock to create a seal .
rock sockets where shown on the drawings shall be constructed in the dry .
casings to rock num .
where rock sockets are shown the contractor is required to drill into the bedrock to construct the rock socket as detailed on the drawings .
rock sockets num .
prior to driving or placing any pile casing the contractor shall supply to the superintendent certification that the plan position and alignment of the casings comply with the requirements of the specification .
hold point specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
where rock sockets are required the indicative toe level of the rock sockets shall be shown on the drawings .
the superintendent shall specify the final level to which the rock socket is to be drilled .
this level shall be a minimum distance into solid bedrock and a minimum distance below the bottom of the pile casing whichever is the deeper as detailed on the drawings .
the superintendent will take into consideration any irregularities andor inclination of the surface of the bedrock when determining the final level .
num .
the contractor shall ensure that the drill head remains on line when it commences to construct the rock socket in the underlying bedrock .
the pile shaft shall be cleaned of all loose material and pumped free of water in readiness for inspection and construction of the piles .
num .
when the toe level of the rock socket has been reached the pile shaft shall be inspected by the superintendent in the dry for acceptance before preparation for construction .
num .
all piles shall be constructed in the dry .
concrete for piles constructed in the dry shall be compacted using immersion vibrators in accordance with the compaction clause of specification num concrete for structures .
num .
in the event that a pile casing or pile casing including rock socket takes in water after being installeddrilled then the concrete shall be placed by use of a tremie or other under water concrete placement techniques approved by the superintendent .
num .
the tremie or other superintendent approved means of discharge shall be operated in a manner to ensure a continuous and uniform discharge flow of concrete below the surface of the fresh concrete for the whole of the pour in each pile casing .
the concrete level shall be taken to nummm above the finished level of concrete in each pile to displace the top section of concrete that is likely to be contaminated .
num .
no agitation or vibration of the underwater concrete during placement shall be permitted .
num .
the top section of concrete and pile casing above the level of the soffit of the pile cap shall be cut back to the levels shown on the drawings .
all contaminated concrete shall be removed in the preparation of the pile head construction joint .
num .
flame cutting of the pile casings to final level shall not be permitted .
num .
the reinforced concrete piles shall be constructed in accordance with specification num concrete for structures and specification num steel reinforcement .
num .
the contractor shall prepare pile heads for bonding into the structure in accordance with the construction joints clause of specification num concrete for structures .
num .
the contractor shall complete a pile installation record for each pile in accordance with annexure numd or nume .
specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num tolerances on pile casings num .
the installed pile casings shall comply with the following tolerances tolerances a .
variation from specified position in plan nummm b .
variation from vertical in a numm template nummm c. variation from specified batter other than vertical in a numm template nummm d. variation in specified cutoff level nummm num acceptance of piles num .
minimum toe rls for piles shall be shown on the drawings .
for driven steel casings the actual driven length may vary based on the driving performance of the steel casings in each particular foundation .
the main criteria in the acceptance of driven casings are that the minimum penetration pile casing toe rl and the minimum set as shown in annexure numc shall both be attained .
for pile casings installed by oscillation acceptance shall be based on the minimum specified toe rls and the level of the refusal layer .
num .
prior to the completion of the installation of each pile the superintendent shall determine the acceptance of the toe level of each pile .
num integrity testing num .
the contractor shall carry out integrity testing on num of all piles and at least one pile at each support pier and abutment in accordance with as num .
piles giving anomalous results shall be subject to superintendent approved alternative testing by the contractor and may be rejected by the superintendent if they do not comply with the standard .
integrity testing num .
alternative testing is at the discretion of the superintendent but shall include static load testing in accordance with as num to ensure the pile serviceability and ultimate geotechnical strength .
all alternative testing shall be at no cost to the principal .
num .
prior to substructure works commencing the contractor shall submit satisfactory written pile test results to the superintendent for acceptance .
hold point num pile load testing num .
the contractor shall carry out pile load testing on two cased concrete filled piles per bridge selected by the superintendent in accordance with as num .
load testing num num not used as built and handover requirements specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa pile driving design assumptions driving has been designed assuming the following hammer rated energy insert value kj per blow final set insert value blows per nummm driving dolly insert value mm micarta packing insert value mm pine plywood minimum specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numb pile casing driving test sample the contractor shall make provision for the superintendent to carry out dynamic testing on the following piles in accordance with clause num pier no insert value number of piles insert value specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numc acceptance of driven piles casing main criteria for bridge no .
insert number over insert rivercreek abutment no .
insert value over insert value penetration minimum penetration rl insert value minimum set insert value blows per nummm of pile penetration .
pier no .
insert value penetration underside of steel section shall be at a minimum of rl insert value minimum set insert value blows per nummm of pile penetration .
the final sets given above are based on continuous driving using a hammer of rated energy of insert value kilojoules per blow operating at num efficiency with other data as given in annexure numa .
the assumed temporary compression was insert value mm .
specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name sheet num of num annexure numd pile driving data structure date position in structure contract no pile no contractor ground r l cut off r l type and mass of hammer max kinetic energy per blow driving log depth m blowsnum mm penetration depth m blowsnum mm penetration depth m blowsnum mm penetration num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num final set mmblow toe r l details for payment length driven in ground length between toe and cut off number of butt weld splices signed by contractor main roads western australia signed by main roads file no drawing number specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name sheet num of num annexure numd pile driving data structure date position in structure contract no pile no contractor ground r l cut off r l type and mass of hammer max kinetic energy per blow driving log depth m blowsnum mm penetration depth m blowsnum mm penetration depth m blowsnum mm penetration num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num final set mmblow toe r l details for payment length driven in ground length between toe and cut off number of butt weld splices signed by contractor main roads western australia signed by main roads file no drawing number specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure nume pile installation record structure date position in structure contract no pile no contractor ground r l equipment used excavation log depth m material description depth m material description depth m material description num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num casing detail top r l bottom r l pile toe r l details for payment length of casing length between toe and existing ground level signed by contractor main roads western australia signed by superintendent file no drawing number specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the senior design engineer .
num .
scope clause num amend the scope to suit the project e.g .
delete reference to pile sockets if not used delete sacrificial or non sacrificial steel pile casing as appropriate .
num .
corrosion protection clause num as a general rule steel casings would not be specified with a protective coating .
the galvanised coating would only be specified for non sacrificial piles in aggressive environments .
amend the clause accordingly or for most instances delete the clause text and insert not used .
num .
dewatering clause num dewatering requirements are located in specification num environment under the specification guidance notes section ready for inclusion within that specification when required i.e .
they do not automatically appear in the standard text of specification num .
ensure that the dewatering clause within the specification guidance notes section of specification num is transferred to within the contract specific requirements section of that specification .
num .
pile casings driven from the bottom clause num delete reference to rock sockets where not applicable .
num .
pile casings installed by oscillation clause num delete reference to rock sockets where not applicable .
specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
pile driving equipment clause num pitching and driving clause num these two clauses are similar to clauses with the same title within specification num driven steel piles currently clause numbers num num and should be checked for currency against those clauses as any change to the clauses in specification num may affect the wording in the clauses in this specification too .
num .
installation requirements clause num delete all reference to rock and rock sockets where not applicable .
at paragraph num specify only the annexure reference applying to the method of installation of the casings and include only this annexure in the specification .
specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num cased piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title cased piles revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num continuous flight auger piles copyright main roads western australia specification num continuous flight auger piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date num each pile changed to every other pile or every num mnum of concrete whichever comes first sdse num num as num title updated as num and specification num added astm cnum removed sdse num num num years of experience changed to num years selfcompacting concrete added binder requirement removed slump flow requirements added concrete placing time requirement removed num num strength of concrete changed sequencing requirement added num reinforcement cage inspection and hold point added num num every truck changed to each pile astm cnum changed to as num testing requirement at num days removed concrete strength requirement for pda test changed whole document reformatted sco num num as num deleted as num as num as num and astm cnum added sdsea num num a section added for definition num a section added for competency of piling contract num percentage of admixtures and the allowable time from batching to placing are recommended num adjustment to tolerances on piles whole document significant editing whole document issue num sdsea num specification num continuous flight auger piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num competency of piling contractor num num pile installation plan num num not used num materials num num general num num concrete num num reinforcement num num num not used num operations num num general num num set out num num augering num num concreting and withdrawal of auger num num placement of reinforcement cage num num tolerances on piles num num pile installation records num num pile cutoff num testing num num general num num concrete sampling and testing num num preproduction testing num num integrity testing num num static load testing num num pile dynamic load testing num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num component of pile installation plan num specification num continuous flight auger piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numb num pile installation record num specification num continuous flight auger piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num continuous flight auger piles general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of piles constructed in the ground by excavation with a continuous hollow flight auger cfa which is subsequently and progressively withdrawn whilst replacing the excavated spoil below the auger tip with concrete injected under pressure .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num methods of testing concrete as num methods of testing concrete determination of properties related to the consistency of concrete slump flow tnum and jring test as num chemical admixtures for concrete .
mortar and grout as num piling design and installation as num supplementary cementitious materials as num general purpose and blended cements as num bridge design main roads specifications specification num excavation and backfill for structures specification num concrete for structures specification num steel reinforcement num definitions num .
piling contractor any party that has entered into a contract to undertake installation of cfa piles on a mrwa project .
num .
designer the qualified professional engineer who designs the cfa piles on a mrwa project .
specification num continuous flight auger piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num competency of piling contractor num .
prior to award of piling contract the piling contractor shall submit to the principal or delegated authority evidence of past projects in the construction of cfa piles andor secant pile wall construction if applicable .
reference to successful completion of projects with similar pile sizes in similar soil conditions using the proposed equipment and procedures should be included .
past projects num .
the piling contractor shall provide evidence that all cfa piling operators on the project have adequate training and experience in producing good quality cfa piles in similar ground conditions to those anticipated at the site .
operator competency num .
the piling contractor shall provide for the duration of the cfa piling operations a fulltime supervisor with a minimum of num years experience in the construction of cfa piles .
supervision num pile installation plan num .
at least num weeks prior to commencing installation of piles the piling contractor must supply to the principal or delegated authority full details of the pile installation plan including methodology material equipment testing methods and contingencies in accordance with annexure numa and competency as per num for approval to commence .
hold point num not used materials num general num .
materials used in the construction of cfa piles must be in accordance with the design requirements shown on the drawings .
num concrete num .
cfa piles shall only be used at sites where an uninterrupted supply of concrete can be ensured for each pile .
concrete num .
except as modified below concrete used for piling shall be selfcompacting in accordance with specification num concrete for structures which specifies minimum strength and other requirements for the concrete classes as nominated in the drawings to achieve the required durability .
for cfa piles the provisions of this clause override any conflicting requirements of specification num .
num .
the maximum aggregate size shall be num mm unless otherwise approved .
num .
the slump flow shall be in accordance with specification num concrete for structures .
num .
mix design shall conform to specification num and this specification .
any variation shall be reviewed and approved by the principal or delegated authority .
specification num continuous flight auger piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the piling contractor shall ensure that the proposed concrete mix design suits his proposed method of construction .
num .
mix design shall be submitted to the principal or delegated authority in accordance with annexure numa num for approval .
num reinforcement num .
reinforcement must be in accordance with specification num steel reinforcement .
reinforcement num num not used operations num general num .
piles must be constructed in accordance with the installation procedure for continuous flight auger piles in as num .
installation num .
cfa piles shall only be installed vertically .
num .
an adequate site surface must be provided as a safe working platform for piling equipment at a suitable level above pile cutoff levels .
num .
ensure that installation of piles is timed so that other construction activities will not occur within vicinity that could dislodge or damage the concrete of the cfa piles until the pile concrete strength reaching nummpa .
num set out num .
all piles shall be set out in accordance with design requirements and appropriate procedures taken to protect adjacent services structures and piles .
set out num .
check the horizontal position and verticality of the pilingdrilling rig prior to the construction of each pile .
num .
the piling contractor shall sequence the works in such a way as to provide sufficient distance between piles to ensure that adjacent piles are not damaged during drilling and construction of subsequent piles .
num .
locate construction equipment at sufficient distance from the pile being drilled and from recently constructed piles to avoid any displacement of the concrete column caused by the surcharge load of the equipment .
num .
confirm set out of all piles before commencing installation .
hold point num augering num .
the piling rig must have adequate power and torque capacity to install a pile to the depth of the piles shown on the approved drawings with provision for contingencies .
specification num continuous flight auger piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
suitable cutting heads and augers shall be used to auger to the design diameter and depth shown on the drawings .
the piling contractor shall regularly check that worn components are replaced .
num .
augering must be carried out at a rate that prevents drawing of the surrounding material laterally into the pile hole .
num .
automatic continuous measurements shall be made and recorded during the drilling operation including depth of the auger injection point speed of revolution penetration per revolution torque delivered to the auger and progressive total number of auger revolutions .
all measurements must be referenced to or plotted against the depth of auger injection point .
num .
if the measurements or records indicate that lateral subsidence of the ground inside the hole has occurred the piling contractor shall immediately stop augering fill the hole with concrete and then redrill the pile shaft after the concrete has had its initial set .
num .
if during the installation process the pile auger refuses at a level above the specified toe level rotation of the auger must be stopped and the piling contractor must determine the need for remedial works in consultation with the principal or delegated authority .
num concreting and withdrawal of auger num .
the concreting must commence immediately upon reaching the agreed pile toe elevation .
the auger shall be precharged with concrete under suitable preagreed pressure prior to lifting .
num .
the piling contractor shall use construction techniques which minimise disturbance at the pile toe .
the auger stem shall be locked against rotation at the commencement of withdrawal .
if it is necessary to rotate the auger to ease extraction the auger must be rotated slowly forward never reversed .
num .
lifting of the auger prior to blowing the plug closing off the hollow auger shall be avoided .
if and in any case it shall not exceed num mm and prior to starting withdrawal the auger must be repenetrated to the original pile tip elevation while maintaining pressure on the concrete .
num .
extraction of the auger must be smooth without jerks whilst maintaining the required concrete pressure and oversupply at all times .
the concrete oversupply must not be less than num in accordance with as num .
num .
concreting must be continuous to achieve concrete that is monolithic from the top of the pile to the base of the design cross section without segregation and free of entrapped debris .
num .
any ground water must be displaced during concreting operations .
num .
during auger extraction if the concrete pressure or oversupply drops to zero or less note the depth at which this occurred stop the extraction re auger to num mm below that depth and then recommence the extraction .
specification num continuous flight auger piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
if auger extensions are used check the level of the concrete in the extensions which as a minimum must be able to balance the overburden pressure at the discharge point at the tip of the auger .
after removing an extension and after reconnecting the auger stem to the drive head pre charge the auger and reauger one metre down prior to continuing auger extraction .
num .
continue concrete pumping until the auger tip rises to the working platform level or num mm above the designed pile cut off level whichever is higher .
a form at the pile top extending above the working platform shall be applied where it is necessary to achieve the required concreting level .
num .
on completion of concrete placing and prior to reinforcement cage installation the top of the pile shall be cleared of debris and any contamination shall be removed .
num .
as a minimum continuous automatic measurements must be made and recorded during the withdrawal and concreting operation for extraction rate mminute volume and oversupply of concrete flow profile concrete pressure auger revolution if any but not preferred and depth of the injection point .
all measurements must be referenced to or plotted against the depth of auger injection point .
num .
the equipment and the concrete pump efficiency shall be calibrated in advance for each concrete mix to be used to ensure the accuracy of the reported concrete volumes to within num .
num placement of reinforcement cage num .
the reinforcement cage shall be free from oil rust or debris and straight .
it shall not be placed until inspected and accepted by the superintendent or delegated authority .
hold point num .
the reinforcement cage shall be ready to be inserted immediately after concreting .
num .
reinforcement must be carefully aligned as shown on the drawings to allow the satisfactory construction of the pile caps .
num .
minimum nominal cover to reinforcement shall be num mm but cover spacers provided on the bars shall be num mm less than the nominal cover to facilitate insertion of the cage .
num .
prior to placement check the reinforcement cage to ensure that it is clean and straight .
cages may be worked into the concrete by hand supplemented by the use of approved vibratory drive head where required .
driving or hammering using plant is not permitted .
keep cage vertical during installation .
num .
spacers and ties shall be sufficiently robust to withstand the forces and vibration needed to install the reinforcement cages .
num .
if the reinforcement cage can not be placed to the specified depth the cage must be removed and the pile reaugered and reconcreted .
reuse of the cage is permitted only if it is recovered to meet all requirements as per items num to num and clause num of this specification .
specification num continuous flight auger piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num tolerances on piles num .
piles must comply with the following tolerances tolerances a .
variation from specified position in plan unless otherwise specified num mm b. deviation of pier piles from pier centreline num mm c. variation in cc spacing of top of adjacent piles in secant pile wall construction if applicable num mm d. variation from vertical in a numm template unless otherwise specified num mm e. variation from vertical in a numm template from plan of pier centreline num mm f. variation from vertical in a numm template within plan of secant pile wall construction num mm g. variation in specified cutoff level num mm h. variation in pile diameter see below num .
the pile diameter shall not be less than shown on the drawings .
the pile diameter may generally be larger than shown on the drawings providing that the minimum distance from the outside of any pile to the edge of a concrete pile cappierabutment as shown on the drawings is satisfied after taking into account construction tolerances .
num pile installation records num .
the piling contractor must maintain accurate records for each pile constructed .
these records must include data shown at annexure numb .
annexure numb num .
the records for each pile including plots as specified in clause num and num must be provided to the principal or delegated authority within num hours of the completion of the pile .
num pile cutoff num .
the piling contractor must trim the tops of pile to elevations indicated on the design drawings prior to construction of the pile caps .
all contaminated and weak concrete or laitance must be removed to expose sound concrete over the full cross sectional area of the pile during trimming .
num .
piles must not be trimmed earlier than num hours after casting the concrete .
testing num general num .
prior to pile cap construction commencing the piling contractor must submit written pile test results to the principal or delegated authority for acceptance .
hold point specification num continuous flight auger piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num concrete sampling and testing num .
concrete samples must be obtained from every other pile or every num mnum of concrete whichever comes first and must be tested for consistency and temperature prior to discharging into the pump hopper .
consistency shall be measured by slump flow in accordance with as num .
additional samples may be required at the discretion of the principal or delegated authority at times corresponding to reinforcement cage installation .
num .
density measurement shall be undertaken on the samples prior to strength testing .
num preproduction testing num .
prior to commencement of production pilling a test pile shall be constructed and tested with integrity testing and static load or dynamic load testing at the discretion of the designer .
piling records for the preproduction pile installed must be made available to the principal or delegated authority for review prior to commencement of the installation of production piles .
hold point num .
the test pile shall be located and detailed as shown on the drawings and shall include all construction reinforcing concrete monitoring and inspection requirements of production piles .
num .
after installation and testing the soil adjacent to the test pile shall be excavated to a depth of not less than num meters for visual assessment of the concrete integrity and cover shall be verified by cover meter .
the designer or the principal or delegated authority may require the depth of excavation and cover checking to increase to num meters .
num .
installation plan and design correlations of the pile resistance with the site specific soil parameters shall be reviewed by the designer and the principal or delegated authority based on the preproduction installation and testing .
this may result in a change of design of piles .
num .
the piling contractor must comply with any additional requirements that result from this review .
num integrity testing num .
the piling contractor shall carry out integrity testing using the method approved by the designer and the principal or delegated authority on the test pile and the samples of production piles as nominated on the drawings or by the principal or delegated authority on site .
integrity testing num .
the designer shall determine the percentage of the pile shafts to be tested for integrity in accordance with as num but not less than num when design load is governed by pile geotechnical capacity or num when design load is governed by pile structural capacity .
num .
integrity testing and reporting shall be carried out in accordance with as num appendix d integrity testing .
specification num continuous flight auger piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
integrity testing equipment and technique must be capable of checking crosssection irregularities in piles and identifying the location and characteristics of any significant anomalies such as voids or contaminants .
num .
piles giving anomalous results must be subject to alternative testing by the piling contractor and may be rejected if the testing results indicate a lack of structural integrity disadvantageous change in physical dimensions or inconsistency in material .
alternative testing is at the discretion of the principal or delegated authority but may include static load testing in accordance with as num to ensure the pile serviceability and ultimate geotechnical strength .
all alternative testing is at no cost to the principal .
num .
additional integrity tests on all piles at a particular pier or abutment may be required by the principal or delegated authority if any of the tested piles give anomalous results and all additional tests are at no cost to the principal .
num static load testing num .
the option of static load testing and frequency of the testing shall be determined by the designer based on the nature of the project .
static load testing num .
if static load testing is specified as a result of num num or num testing and reporting shall be carried out in accordance with as num including appendix a static load test unless otherwise specified .
num pile dynamic load testing num .
the piling contractor must carry out pile dynamic load testing and analysis on the test pile and the samples of production piles as nominated on the drawings or by the principal or delegated authority on site .
pda testing num .
the designer shall determine the percentage of the production piles to be tested but it shall not be less than num of all production piles and not less than num per pier or abutment .
num .
additional dynamic load testing must also be carried out on piles in the event that pile toe levels vary by more than num metres from the test pile or designed toe level .
num .
pile dynamic testing and reporting shall be carried out in accordance with as num including appendix b high strain dynamic pile testing .
num .
the piling contractor shall design and construct pile head extension required to prevent damage to the pile .
pile dynamic testing shall be carried out after the pile concrete has gained sufficient strength to prevent damage under the required hammer impact and not less than num mpa and no less than one week after casting of the pile unless otherwise specified on the drawings .
num .
the piling contractor shall supply all the appropriate pile driving equipment including hammer crane and pile driving rig and all instrumentation hardware and software to carry out the dynamic testing .
num .
the piling contractor shall be responsible for the testing date analysis and calibration with static load tests if applicable and demonstrate the maximum mobilised shaft and end bearing resistance .
specification num continuous flight auger piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the piling contractor shall include details of all the equipment and instruments applied for the test including hammer mass and rated energy in his method statement as listed in annexure numa .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num continuous flight auger piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa component of pile installation plan the pile installation plan must include but not be limited to the following items num .
list and performance characteristics of proposed equipment including drilling rigs augers and other drilling tools pumps for concrete mixing equipment automated monitoring equipment including details of procedures for calibrating equipment as required num .
description of pile installation procedures num .
a plan of the sequence of pile installation so as to ensure adequate concrete strength is obtained before commencing drilling for adjacent piles num .
target drilling and concreting parameters for pile installation including auger rotation speed penetration rates torque and concrete volume factors num .
detail of methods of reinforcement placement including supporting for reinforcing cages at the top of the pile and methods for centering the cages within the concrete column ensuring the required minimum cover to reinforcement is met num .
mix designs for concrete to be used on the project including ratio of each component aggregate grading curves slump loss vs. time curves which shall indicate a slump flow not less than num mm at num hours after batching and strength development vs. time curves for mixes num .
equipment and procedures for monitoring and recording auger rotation speed drill resistances torque and auger depths during installation num .
equipment and procedures for monitoring and recording concrete pressures and volumes placed during installation num .
contingency plans for equipment failures during drilling concreting or reinforcement installation or the interrupted construction process num .
proposed recording forms to be used during construction and testing num .
methodology to ensure pile and pile reinforcement location and battering tolerance are met num .
details of the proposed integrity test and load test methods including a method statement of each test type the hammer size proposed the test criteria and details of the record sheets proposed for monitoring results and num .
contingency plans for remediation and for piles deeper than design drawings .
specification num continuous flight auger piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numb pile installation record the records required under clause num for each pile constructed must show num .
pile location num .
ground surface elevation reference grade for pile length num .
pile toe depth or elevation num .
elevation of pile head num .
pile length num .
auger diameter num .
details of the reinforcing steel number size and grade of longitudinal bars size and spacing of transverse steel outside diameter and length of cage num .
slump and volume of concrete placed num .
theoretical volume of drilled hole num .
depth to which reinforcing steel was placed num .
datetime of beginning of drilling num .
datetime of completion of drilling num .
datetime concrete was mixed num .
datetime concrete truck arrived at project site and copies of all concrete batch tickets used for the pile construction num .
datetime of beginning of concrete pumping num .
datetime of completion of concrete pumping num .
datetime of placement of steel num .
weather conditions including air temperature at time of concrete placement num .
identification of all concrete samples taken from the pile num .
all other pertinent data relative to the pile installation and num .
all readings made by the automated measuring and recording equipment as listed in num and num together with pump efficiency calibration .
specification num continuous flight auger piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
num preproduction testing num .
static testing shall be specified in situations where piles are used in a pier are fully utilised for capacity or the design factors of safety are minimal and there is no redundancy allowed in case of pile failure .
specification num continuous flight auger piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num continuous flight auger piles num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title continuous flight auger piles revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num falsework copyright main roads western australia specification num falsework num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatting sco num whole document complete review no change asdse num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num falsework num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num products and materials num num general num num proprietary falsework num num num not used num operations num num general num num safety num num design num num load testing num num removal num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num specification num falsework num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num falsework general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the design and erection of falsework required for the proper construction of the permanent works and after completion of these works the dismantling and removal of falsework .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below acts and regulations occupational safety and health act num occupational safety and health regulations num australian standards as num formwork for concrete as num bridge design num definitions num .
falsework comprises all temporary supports of any nature that are required for the construction of the permanent structure .
num num not used products and materials num general num .
footings shall comprise concrete bases or timber bed logs or other types of suitable materials and shall be of a size that will satisfactorily distribute the bearing pressures under each footing .
footings num .
all standards shall be securely fastened to sole plates and shall be adequately braced in every direction necessary to provide rigid and stable support to the permanent work .
where standards are used with extending ends the length of unbraced extensions shall be limited in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
bracing standards specification num falsework num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num proprietary falsework num .
all proprietary falsework shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations and shall comply in all respects with the occupational safety and health act num .
num num not used operations num general num .
falsework shall be designed and constructed so that on completion of the permanent works the concrete levels are as shown on the drawings .
to achieve this objective the levels of the falsework shall be set to allow for any settlement and deflection accompanying casting of the concrete .
settlement num .
in the event that falsework settles under load to such an extent that the allowable tolerances on the finished concrete work are exceeded then the concrete shall be removed and the falsework modified so that the finished work is in accordance with the drawings .
the cost of such remedial works shall be at no cost to the principal .
num safety num .
all falsework shall comply with the requirements of the occupational safety and health regulations num .
worksafe num design num .
the design of all falsework shall be in accordance with as num and shall be adequate in every way for the loads it is required to support and to meet the requirements specified in clause num .
design by contractor num .
falsework shall be designed to permit shrinkage of concrete and movements due to temperature and to allow for any special conditions likely to occur during construction including but not limited to the redistribution of load due to the effects of staged construction and prestress .
num .
falsework shall be designed and erected in such a manner that the loads are accepted in accordance with the loading assumptions made .
all permanent structures such as piers and abutments which are adjacent to or surrounded by falsework shall be adequately protected to ensure that they are not damaged during the contract .
num .
foundations for falsework shall be designed to prevent excessive settlement and rotation of supports .
foundation materials which are soft and compressible or which may be subject to erosion by water shall be removed and replaced with a suitable foundation .
falsework shall not be supported or braced from the permanent structure unless it can be shown that such temporary loading will not affect the integrity of the structure .
specification num falsework num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
at least two weeks prior to commencing falsework including sheet piling erection the contractor shall supply to the superintendent design details and drawings checked and certified by a qualified structural engineer in accordance with the specification .
hold point num .
at least two weeks prior to the installation of sheet piling the contractor shall supply to the superintendent the proposed process description for installation and removal .
hold point num load testing num general num .
when directed by the superintendent the contractor shall carry out load tests on representative areas of the completed soffit formwork .
testing when directed num .
costs for such testing will be met by the principal .
num .
the purpose of the tests will be to prove the structural adequacy of the falseworkformwork system under overload .
num load testing of falsework num .
the load shall be applied using kentledge .
the load shall be equivalent to num times the actual weight of the concrete plus a construction live load of numkn per square metre .
kentledge num test duration num .
the full test load shall be applied for at least twenty four hours during which time the contractor will determine the displacement of the falsework resulting from the application of the test load .
the acceptance of the system shall be subject to it sustaining no structural damage under the test load and it being adequate such that the profile of the soffit surface after pouring the concrete shall be in accordance with the drawings and the formwork tolerances .
tolerances num nonconformance num .
if any section of the falsework under the test load displaces such that the profile of the cast concrete soffit will not be within the tolerances specified or if the falsework under the test load shows signs of structural distress then the contractor shall make the necessary modifications to the falsework tested and to all other areas which would be similarly defective .
the contractor shall then carry out a further test load on an area of the modified falsework in accordance with this specification .
the costs of all modifications and retesting shall be at no cost to the principal .
retesting a non conformance num removal num .
after completion of the permanent works the contractor shall dismantle all falsework and remove it from the site .
num num not used as built and handover requirements specification num falsework num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num falsework num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa insert as required .
include tables diagrams etc .
as necessary .
delete annexure page if not required .
specification num falsework num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
num .
falsework in river beds clause num num insert clause num if applicable .
num .
supporting existing abutments clause num num insert clause num if applicable .
num .
supporting timber decks clause num num insert clause num if applicable .
num .
steel beam bridges clause num num insert clause num if applicable .
num .
precast beam bridges clause num num insert clause num if applicable .
note insert annexures as applicable to any of the above clauses if supporting information is available .
annexures are placed as part of contract specific requirements commencing with annexure numa .
specification num falsework num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num falsework in river beds num .
the contractor is advised that the river may flow during the contract period and shall make due allowance for this in falsework design .
when carrying out repair or replacement of half caps falsework for the deck may be supported off existing piles .
num supporting existing abutments num .
where the height of abutments under repair exceeds numm measured from the base of any excavation works the abutment shall be adequately propped to resist full active lateral soil pressure including any surcharge .
num supporting timber decks num .
when carrying out repair or replacement works to supporting half caps and piles all associated stringers or corbels shall be adequately supported .
props shall be designed and so positioned to resist the full dead load of the deck and any traffic permitted over the bridge during construction .
these loads shall be calculated in accordance with as num .
num steel beam bridges num .
steel beams shall be supported on the bearings before casting the deck diaphragms .
permanent deck formwork can be supported on the beams .
the bottom flanges of beams shall be set parallel to the top surface of the bearings .
num .
the contractor shall provide adequate temporary bracing for the beams to prevent rotation lateral and longitudinal movements due to superimposed loads and temperature during construction .
the attention of the contractor is specifically drawn to the possibility of temperature differentials across the beams causing lateral displacements .
num .
beams may require pulling into line to conform to the construction tolerances specified .
num .
the welding to or drilling of holes in the beam flanges for attaching temporary bracings or supports shall not be permitted .
num precast beam bridges num .
the bottom flanges of the beams shall be set parallel to the top surface of the bearings and be supported on softwood timber packers .
these timber packers shall be removed only after the deck diaphragm concrete has achieved the nominated compressive strength as given on the drawings .
num .
the contractor shall provide adequate temporary bracing for the beams to prevent rotation and lateral movement due to superimposed loads .
specification num falsework num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title falsework revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num concrete for structures copyright main roads western australia specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date num references added as num as num as num as num as num as num as num as num as num as num as num astm cnum and bs num num sdse num num petrographic requirements added num as num and as num added num proportion of amorphous silica updated aggregate compliance note moved to clause num maximum amount of manufactured sand updated num num durability requirement added general bridge elements removed num mm aggregate grading envelope graph updated binder replaced with cement in table num wc added in table num num slump flow removed from clause num selfcompacting concrete in accordance with as num added slump flow and passing ability requirements added snum changed to snum in table num vpv for test cores added to table num num clause heading changed num excessive bleeding added clause added for construction during rain num exposure classification cnum or above added clause num num num added for additional curing requirements num clause added for quality assurance during construction requirements num clause added for noncompliance requirements num maturity testing limited to precast elements with accelerated curing methodology validation added whole document deletion of reviewers comments sco num specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num products and materials num num general num num cement num num aggregate num num water num num admixtures num num action required for the control of alkali aggregate reactivity aar num num soluble salts num num limitations on shrinkage num num num not used num design of concrete mixes num num general num num durability num num class of concrete for mix design num num trial mixes num num volume of permeable voids vpv num supply and delivery of concrete num num concreting plant num num batching and mixing num num transport num num temperature at point of delivery num num mix consistency num num addition of water to the mix after mixing num num sampling of concrete for strength num num strength of concrete delivered num num curing and testing of specimens for determination of compressive strength num num num not used num operations num num general num num placing concrete num num construction joints num specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num compaction num num finishing of unformed surfaces num num curing of concrete num num protection of concrete surfaces num num quality assurance during construction num num noncompliances num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num class of concrete num num maturity testing num specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num concrete for structures general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the mix design the supply and delivery placing compaction finishing curing and protection of high performance concrete for the following structures a. bridgeworks b. pedestrian overpassesunderpasses c. manufacture of box culverts and d. other major structural works num .
concrete for general nonstructural works is covered in specification num concrete general works .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num methods of testing concrete as num methods of testing concrete sampling of concrete as num methods of testing concrete determination of properties related to the consistency of concrete slump test as num methods of testing concrete determination of properties related to the consistency of concrete slump flow tnum and jring test as num methods of testing concrete determination of the drying shrinkage of concrete for samples prepared in the field or in the laboratory as num methods of testing concrete determination of chloride and sulphate in hardened concrete and concrete aggregates as num methods for sampling and testing aggregates as num potential alkalisilica reactivity accelerated mortar bar method as num potential alkalisilica reactivity concrete prism method specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name as num methods for sampling and testing aggregates method num alkali aggregate reactivity qualitative petrological screening for potential alkalisilica reaction as num specification and supply of concrete as num chemical admixtures for concrete mortar and grout admixtures for concrete as num chemical admixtures for concrete mortar and grout methods of sampling and testing admixture for concrete mortar and grout as num aggregates and rock for engineering purposes concrete aggregates as num determination of solids gravimetric method as num supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement fly ash as num supplementary cementitious materials slag ground granulated blastfurnace as num supplementary cementitious materials amorphous silica as num liquid membraneforming curing compounds for concrete as num general purpose and blended cements as num bridge design australian new zealand standards asnzs num supplementary cementitious materials amorphous silica other standards cement concrete report no trnum alkali silica association of new zealand reaction australian technical specification spnum cementitious infrastructure committee materials for concrete atic astm cnum standard guide for petrographic examination of aggregates for concrete bs num testing concrete recommendations on the use of electromagnetic cover meters main roads specifications specification num quality systems specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num falsework specification num formwork specification num steel reinforcement specification num concrete general works num definitions num design num .
for the purpose of this specification the following definitions apply a .
concrete in general shall consist of a mixture of cement water and coarse and fine aggregate .
where specified on the drawings blended cement as defined in clause num paragraph num shall be used .
b. watercement ratio is the ratio by mass of the total water content of the mix available for hydration to the total cement in the mix .
c. aggregatecement ratio is the ratio by mass of the total aggregate in the mix measured in the saturated surface dry state to the total cement in the mix .
d. the compressive strength of concrete shall be defined as the average numday crushing strength of a minimum of three standard num mm diameter by num mm long cylinders taken from the same sample and made cured and tested in accordance with as num .
num special processes num .
the placing compacting finishing and curing of concrete are identified as special processes in accordance with specification num quality systems .
special processes num additional quality system requirements num .
the information to be submitted by the contractor as part of their quality plan shall include but not be limited to the following quality plan a .
details of the methods to be used in maintaining evidence generated during each special process .
the number of personnel required together with proof of any relevant training and experience shall be included .
b. verification of the compliance of any proposed heat accelerated curing method with the specification requirements such as steam curing .
num num not used products and materials specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num general num .
concrete required under this contract shall be supplied from either an ap proved offsite batching plant and delivered by truck agitator or an onsite batching plant .
num .
in its finished state concrete shall be sound and dense and durable and free from honeycombing and shall have the strength and other properties specified .
num .
concrete shall comply with as num except as varied by this specification .
num cement num .
unless specified otherwise all cement used in the works shall comply with the requirements of type gp cement blended cement type gb or type lh low heat as specified in as num and australian technical infrastructure committee atic specification spnum .
the contractor shall provide manufacturers test certificates showing all cement has been sampled tested and conforms in all respects with the as num and atic specification spnum .
testing num .
blended cement shall be a combination of type gp cement and ground granulated iron blastfurnace slag complying with as num and atic specification spnum .
the densified silica fume to be added to the blended cement shall be finely divided and comply with asnzs num and atic specification spnum .
blended cement num .
cement for manufacture of concrete shall comply with the requirements of atic specification spnum .
the cementitious material registration scheme cmrs shall be used to confirm that the cement complies with atic specification spnum .
certification num .
prior to manufacturing of concrete the contractor shall confirm that the cement complies with atic specification spnum and shall provide the cmrs registration number for the cement to the superintendent for approval of the cement .
hold point num .
the contractor shall use cement in approximately the chronological order in which it is delivered from the manufacturer .
transportation units and storage bins for bulk cement shall be weatherproof and shall be constructed so that there is no dead storage .
the contractor shall demonstrate that the storage bins for bulk cement do not have any dead storage .
if dead storage exists the bins shall be emptied completely at least once every three months .
cement delivered in bags shall be stored in weatherproof structures having floors raised above the ground .
cement that is more than three months old shall not be used .
num .
concrete manufactured from cement not conforming to this specification or from cement that has deteriorated and become unsuitable for use shall be rejected .
num .
only that brand of cement used in successful trial mixes will be used for the production of concrete unless otherwise approved by the superintendent or delegated authority .
specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num aggregate num .
fine aggregates for concrete shall be natural sand or a combination of natural and manufactured sand and shall comply with the requirements of as num .
the maximum amount of water absorption for natural fine aggregates and manufactured fine aggregates shall not exceed num and num percent respectively .
testing num .
the durability of fine aggregates shall be assessed according to test methods nominated in clause num of as num .
the acceptance criteria for these tests shall be that for a concrete exposure classification c unless otherwise specified .
num .
coarse aggregates for concrete shall be crushed igneous rock or screened river gravel conforming to the requirements of as num .
the maximum amount of water absorption for coarse aggregates shall not exceed num percent .
num .
the durability of coarse aggregates shall be assessed according to test methods of as num .
the acceptance criteria for these tests shall be that for a concrete exposure classification c unless otherwise specified .
num .
all aggregates proposed for use in the works shall comply with the requirements of the alkalireactive materials clause of as num .
num .
a petrographic report for all the aggregates proposed for use in works shall be provided in accordance with astm test method cnum and as num .
the petrographic report shall include thin section microscopic examination of the proposed aggregate giving its mineralogical composition .
it shall also include comments and interpretations related to alkali silica reactivity and suitability of aggregate for use in concrete .
num .
the contractor shall provide proper means of storing the aggregates .
each nominal size of coarse aggregate and fine aggregate shall be kept separated and suitable precautions shall be taken to prevent the aggregates from being contaminated by the ground or by windblown dust or other foreign matter .
num .
only that aggregate source used in the successful trial mixes will be used for the production of concrete unless otherwise approved by the superintendent or delegated authority .
num water num .
water used in concrete manufacture and curing shall comply with the requirements of clause num of as num .
the total alkali content of a representative sample of water being a mix of recycled and bore water shall be measured and the result obtained included in the calculation of total alkali content as required by clause num .
num .
water for concrete shall have a total dissolved solids content of not greater than num mgl when tested in accordance with as num .
the amount of chloride in the water shall not be greater than num mgl .
testing num .
the contractor shall arrange that a suitable supply of water is available at the batching plant .
contractor to supply specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num admixtures num .
admixtures may be used in concrete to modify workability but will not be permitted for the purpose of reducing cement content .
however the admixture shall have no harmful effect whatsoever upon the quality of the concrete or upon any reinforcement or prestressing system or other fixture embedded therein .
num .
any admixture when tested in accordance with as num shall comply with the requirements of and be used in accordance with as num .
num .
calcium chloride and other chloridebearing admixtures shall not be used in concrete containing any type of steelwork or steel reinforcement .
num .
where two or more admixtures are proposed for incorporation into a concrete mix their compatibility shall be certified by the manufacturers and the certificates shall be provided to the superintendent before use of the admixtures .
num action required for the control of alkali aggregate reactivity aar num .
the total mass of reactive alkali in the concrete including any admixtures shall not exceed num kgmnum .
the method of determining the alkali content shall be in accordance with appendix c of report num trnum by the cement concrete association of new zealand .
testing num .
all aggregates for use in concrete shall be tested for their susceptibility to aar in accordance with as num .
num .
where the aggregate source has previously been classed as acceptable in accordance with as num may be exempt from retesting at the discretion of the superintendent .
num .
aggregates and manufactured fine sand shall be classified in accordance with table num. a .
for aggregates classified as nonreactive by as num no action for control is required b .
for aggregates classified as slowly reactive by as num as shown in table num concrete mix shall either i. incorporate a proportion of fly ash that is num by mass of the total cementitious materials or ii .
be a blended cement num ground granulated iron blast furnace slag num type gp cement or iii .
incorporate a proportion of amorphous silica that is num to num by mass of the total cementitious material .
c. aggregates classified by as num or as num as reactive shall not be used .
specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
fly ash ground granulated iron blastfurnace slag and amorphous silica shall comply with the requirements of as num as num and as num respectively .
num .
the contractor may submit test results for concrete prism testing in accordance with as num as an alternative to testing described above provided test certificates are less than num months old and show the aggregate to be nonreactive .
num .
the manufacture of concrete shall not occur before the aggregate source to be used has met the test requirements with respect to aar and approved by the superintendent .
hold point num .
the contractor shall provide the superintendent with certified test results for both the coarse and fine aggregates for each aggregate source to be used for the manufacture of concrete .
the contractor shall not change the aggregate source without the approval of the superintendent .
num .
manufactured sand shall be permitted in the mix of up to a maximum num by weight of the total aggregates in the mix from a source approved by the superintendent .
note some glassy basalt aggregates are nonreactive in the coarse aggregate form but can become reactive in crushed fine aggregate form .
the incorporation of basalt dust may significantly increase the alkali content of the concrete and cause deleterious aar expansion in the presence of a reactive aggregate in an otherwise non expansive concrete .
table num aggregate reactivity classification mean mortar bar expansion e as num aggregate reactivity classification num days num days e num nonreactive e num num e num slowly reactive num e num e reactive the value for natural fine aggregates is num num soluble salts num .
sulphate and chloride ion contents shall be determined by testing of hardened concrete in accordance with as num .
num .
the sulphate content of concrete as placed expressed as the percentage by mass of acidsoluble sonum of cement shall not be greater than num .
num .
the mass of acidsoluble chloride ion per unit volume of concrete as placed shall not exceed num kgmnum .
specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num limitations on shrinkage num .
concrete specimens shall be prepared from the nominated mix in accordance with as num for the purpose of shrinkage testing .
the shrinkage of the specimens shall be measured in accordance with as num .
the shrinkage strain of the concrete specimens after num days of drying shall not exceed num x num .
the maximum shrinkage strain for selfcompacting concrete used in piling construction shall not exceed num x num .
num num not used design of concrete mixes num general num .
the contractor shall design a mix for each class of concrete specified and shown on the drawings .
the locations for these classes are summarised in annexure numa .
num .
the contractor shall not change the source andor the formulation of the binder and the mix proportions of the concrete unless they have been tested and approved by the superintendent .
num durability num .
the intent of this specification is to provide durable concrete in the permanent works .
num .
durability requirements shall comply with asnum unless noted otherwise in this specification .
num class of concrete for mix design num .
all concrete for the works shall be as specified in table num except that blinding concrete and makeup concrete shall be class nnum in accordance with as num .
num .
type gp or gb cement only shall be used in all classes of concrete except for class snumm .
type lh cement may be used for elements greater than num mm thick .
hold point num .
class snumm concrete shall use blended cement consisting of num type gp cement num ground granulated iron blastfurnace slag and num silica fume .
specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the combined grading shall be within the limits given in figures num num or num after making allowance for the permissible tolerances on individual aggregate grading specified in clause num .
num .
subject to the superintendents approval the contractor may submit a combined grading curve for mixes supplied in remote locations in lieu of the grading limits shown in figures num and num .
the percentage passing of num mm and num mm sieves shall not exceed num and num respectively .
the grading of material can vary from coarse to fine in a uniform and consistent manner .
concrete supply in remote locations figure num aggregate grading envelope nummm specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name figure num aggregate grading envelope nummm figure num aggregate grading envelope nummm specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num concrete class snum snum snum snum nominated strength mpa num num num num target strength mpa num num num num max aggregate size mm num num num num max watercement ratio wc num num num num min cementitious content kgmnum num num num num note concrete class snum is to be used in the manufacture of precast parapet panels only num trial mixes num .
the contractor shall prepare a trial mix for each class of concrete to be used in the works .
each mix shall use such aggregates that have been tested and approved by the superintendent .
the mixes shall be made using the plant and degree of quality control proposed for the works .
num .
where the concrete is supplied by an offsite batching plant the contractor shall arrange for the trial mix to be delivered to the site in a truck agitator or mixer truck of the type to be used for the supply of concrete to the works .
surplus trial mix concrete may be placed as blinding or makeup concrete .
num .
the contractor shall measure the slump of the trial mix in accordance with as num and the value of the slump shall be agreed by the superintendent .
num .
once a mix design for a specific class of concrete is adopted the slump of the trial mix shall be deemed to be the slump for that class of concrete and all concrete of this class supplied to the works shall have the same slump within a tolerance as detailed in as num .
num .
the maximum slump of any concrete mix shall be nummm unless a super plasticising admixture is used in which case nummm shall be the maximum slump before addition of the admixture .
for concrete containing high range water reducer hwr the initial slump prior to its addition shall not be less than num mm unless otherwise approved by the superintendent or delegated authority .
num .
selfcompacting concrete shall be tested in accordance with as num and have a slump flow value of not less than num num mm immediately after batching and a minimum of num mm num hours after batching .
the slump flow shall achieve a spread of num mm within num to num seconds i.e .
tnum time num to num seconds however the final spread shall not exceed num mm in diameter .
the passing ability shall measure num mm and be free of segregation .
specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
selfcompacting concrete shall be used for bored piles or tremie concrete works only .
num .
selfcompacting concrete shall not be used for teeroff beams and the concrete is required to be compacted by immersion vibrators or form vibrators to eliminate air voids .
num .
the contractor shall cast not less than num and not more than num compressive strength test specimens from the trial mix which shall be tested to determine that the strength requirements of this specification are met .
num .
the average num day compressive strength of all specimens made from a trial mix shall be not less than the target strength and num of all test results shall have compressive strengths within num mpa of the mean .
num .
subject to the superintendents approval concrete mixes with a proven history of compliance to the specification of no more than num months may be exempted from the trial mix requirements .
num volume of permeable voids vpv num .
the maximum vpv values as determined according to as num shall not exceed the values given in table num .
num .
unless otherwise specified test cylinders shall be cured in accordance with as num .
a minimum of num cylinders per sample per trial mix shall be taken .
each cylinder shall be tested for vpv at num days in accordance with test method as num .
the average value of the test cylinders shall not exceed the values given in table num .
num .
should the vpv value exceed as shown in table num the contractor shall take steps to modify the concrete mix design and retest to ensure that the maximum specified vpv value is not exceeded .
table num vpv limits for various concrete classes maximum vpv at num days test cores concrete class test cylinders compacted by vibration rodding snum num num num snum num num num snum snum num num num specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name supply and delivery of concrete num concreting plant num .
the batching plant shall be capable of producing the quantities of concrete at the rates necessary for the efficient and proper placement of concrete in the works .
num batching and mixing num .
the contractor shall provide and maintain and operate the batching equipment so as to accurately determine and control the amount of each separate ingredient entering the concrete to the tolerances specified in as num .
the amounts of cement and sand and each size of aggregate entering each batch of concrete shall be determined by weighing and the amount of water shall be determined by weighing or by volumetric measurement .
num .
mixing of concrete shall comply with the requirements of as num .
num transport num .
concrete shall be transported to the works in a manner preventing contamination segregation or loss of ingredients .
containers for transporting concrete shall be cleaned at the end of each days work and whenever concreting is interrupted for more than num minutes .
num .
in continuous pours the maximum time lag between truck loads on site shall not exceed num minutes .
num .
concrete shall be continuously agitated from the time of adding water to the mix until discharge is completed .
the use of nonagitating equipment to transport concrete will not be permitted .
num temperature at point of delivery num .
placement of concrete will only be permitted providing hot weather concreting a .
the concrete mix temperature during placement shall at no time exceed numc .
and either b .
the ambient shade temperature is less than numc and falling .
or c. the ambient shade temperature is less than numc and rising but placement can be completed before the ambient temperature exceeds numc .
num .
to keep the concrete maximum temperature below numc it may be necessary to shield andor wet the aggregate stockpiles chill the mixing water or schedule concrete placement at night .
specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
when the ambient shade temperature is greater than numc suitable means shall be provided by the contractor to avoid premature stiffening of concrete placed in contact with hot dry surfaces .
where necessary the surfaces against which concrete is to be placed including reinforcement and formwork shall be sprayed with water to prevent excessive absorption of water from the fresh concrete .
num mix consistency num .
the contractor shall check the consistency of all concrete by measurement of the slump in accordance with as num .
the contractor shall supply a minimum of one full set of slump testing equipment for this purpose for the period of the contract .
slump tests shall be carried out on site close to the concrete discharge point .
the tolerances for the specified slump shall be in accordance with as num .
slump test num addition of water to the mix after mixing num .
excessive overmixing shall not be permitted and any concrete which has been retained in the mixer so long that it requires additional water to permit satisfactory placing shall be rejected .
num .
notwithstanding any batching variations to the design mix water shall not be added to the concrete on site prior to discharge .
num sampling of concrete for strength num .
sampling procedures for concrete shall conform to as num and from each sample of concrete taken for the purpose of checking the num day compressive strength not less than num test specimens shall be cast .
num .
the contractor shall have available not less than num steel moulds for making concrete compression test specimens .
for the period of large concrete pours the contractor shall supply adequate extra moulds to meet the increased frequency of sampling required .
num .
where it is required to determine the compressive strength of concrete prior to num days e.g .
to determine stripping times for formwork or to assess when prestressing force may be applied the contractor shall cast additional test specimens and they shall be cured under similar conditions to the concrete they represent .
num strength of concrete delivered num .
concrete from any class shall be deemed to conform with the strength requirements of this specification if a .
every concrete sample has a num day compressive strength greater than num of the nominated strength and b .
the average num day compressive strength for any group of four consecutive samples is equal to or greater than the nominated strength .
specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
consecutive samples for the same class of concrete are not restricted to a single pour .
num .
for a group of samples failing to comply with subclause numb above that concrete represented by the lowest strength sample shall be liable to rejection .
num .
if at any time during the progress of the works any mix is found to be unsatisfactory or it becomes necessary to use materials differing from those originally approved then the contractor shall prepare revised mix designs and prepare trial mixes for testing in accordance with clause num prior to their use being approved .
otherwise for any particular class of concrete the contractor shall not vary the properties of the materials used or their relative proportions from those of the approved trial mix .
num curing and testing of specimens for determination of compressive strength num .
within num hours all test specimens taken for the purpose of checking compressive strength shall be placed under standard moistcuring conditions as defined in as num .
continuous standard moistcuring conditions shall be maintained on the test specimens until the required curing period has elapsed and the test specimens are removed for the purpose of compressive strength testing .
curing num .
if the requirements of subclause num above can not be satisfied through the utilisation of offsite testing facilities then the contractor shall be required to establish onsite curing and testing facilities .
onsite facilities num num not used operations num general num .
requirements for falsework shall be in accordance with specification num falsework .
falsework num .
requirements for formwork shall be in accordance with specification num formwork .
formwork num .
requirements for steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with specification num steel reinforcement .
reinforcement num placing concrete num .
concrete shall be deposited as near as possible in its final position and shall be placed in a manner which will prevent segregation and excessive bleeding .
it shall be spread in horizontal layers with the first layer not exceeding num mm in compacted thickness and the thickness of subsequent layers limited to num of the length of the immersion vibrators being used .
placing shall be continuous between specified or approved construction joints .
specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
where chutes are used to convey concrete their slopes shall be such as to avoid segregation .
concrete shall not be allowed to fall freely more than num m unless suitable chutes or baffles or other devices are provided to prevent segregation num .
screeding of the deck or top surface of the structure shall progress in a longitudinal direction with the screed boards operated at right angles to the centreline of the deck or top surface .
screed guides shall be accurately set and rigidly fixed in position .
guides shall be of robust construction and shall be capable of sustaining construction loadings without undue or permanent deflection .
num .
concrete shall not be placed in standing water .
num .
unless trial mixes show a longer open time all concrete in a batch shall be placed in its final position and compacted within num minutes of adding water to the mix .
trial mixes may be undertaken to demonstrate a longer open time for a particular mix .
open time shall be judged by keeping concrete in a truck and measuring the slump at num minute intervals .
retempering a batch of concrete using admixtures or water shall not be allowed under any circumstances .
concrete shall not be incorporated into the works if its consistency falls outside the range permitted by as num for the designated slump .
num .
prior to the placement of any concrete the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that all falsework formwork reinforcement and other embedded items levels placement procedures and curing procedures to be employed comply with the requirements of the specification .
hold point num .
concrete shall not be placed during rain unless approved by the superintendent and that sufficient protection against rain is provided num construction joints num .
the location of all construction joints shall be as indicated on the drawings .
construction joints shall be made on true vertical and horizontal planes or as otherwise shown on the drawings .
the surface of the hardened concrete shall be treated to remove all laitance and expose the aggregate so as to provide a thorough bond with concrete cast subsequently .
the roughened surface shall be thoroughly cleaned to remove loose chips and any foreign matter .
num .
immediately before fresh concrete is cast against the joint the hardened concrete surface shall be thoroughly wetted .
specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num compaction num minimum equipment num .
before commencement of each concrete pour sufficient vibrators and spares shall be available and tested .
the number of working vibrators required shall be not less than one for each num cubic metres of concrete placed per hour .
the number of standby vibrators shall be not less than num of the number of working vibrators with a minimum of num .
hold point num .
the required number of vibrators for a given rate of placing concrete shall be continuously used during the pour .
num .
immersion vibrators shall be of the rotary out of balance type with a frequency of not less than num hertz and where the specified concrete finish is class num or num shall be fitted with approved rubber caps .
the largest practical size of vibrator should be used .
num operation num .
the concrete shall be properly compacted throughout the full extent of each layer so as to produce a concrete that is uniformly plastic dense free of all entrapped air and the finished work shall be a dense and uniform mass free of voids segregation honeycombing and showing a uniform face as specified when the forms are removed .
layers of concrete shall not be placed until layers placed previously have been thoroughly compacted .
num .
compaction of concrete shall be carried out by approved powerdriven immersion vibrators applied in such a manner as will ensure the concrete is satisfactorily and uniformly compacted .
immersion vibrators shall penetrate the full depth of the layer and where the underlying layer is of fresh concrete shall penetrate that layer a minimum of nummm to ensure that successive layers are well knitted together .
immersion vibrators shall be withdrawn slowly to prevent the formation of voids .
vibrators shall not be used to work the concrete along the forms or in such a way as to damage formwork .
num additional requirements for bridge deck concrete num .
compaction of deck concrete shall be carried out using approved vibrating screeds in addition to immersion vibrators followed by screeding with a bull float and finishing with a mechanical trowelling machine .
num .
concrete at the top surface of bridge decks must be a roughtextured surface suitable for bituminous surfacing .
this surface can be produced with a rough mechanical trowelling or any method that is approved by the superintendent .
a smooth finish will not be permitted except at the locations to be covered with a preformed waterproof membrane .
num finishing of unformed surfaces num general num .
the type of finish and surface texture required in each part of the works shall be as shown on the drawings .
specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num unformed surface finishes for concrete designated finish type of concrete finish maximum allowable surface irregularities unum a wood floated finish to produce a uniform surface without surface pitting or cavities nummm abrupt or nummm in a numm template .
unum a high quality steel trowelled finish having a dense smooth impervious finish without surface pitting or cavities nil abrupt or nummm in a numm template .
unum a high quality mechanical steel trowelled finish having a dense impervious finish without surface pit ting or cavities nummm abrupt or nummm in a numm template .
unum a wood floated surface with a broomed finish nummm abrupt or nummm in a numm template .
num allowable tolerances num .
unformed concrete surface finishes shall be as designated on the drawings with reference to the classifications given in table num .
num broomed finish num .
broomed surfaces shall be obtained by finishing with a wood float followed by brooming transversely to the principal slope direction or perpendicular to the edges .
the broomed finish shall contain grooves between nummm and nummm deep spaced between nummm and nummm apart so as to provide a non slip surface .
num curing of concrete num .
freshly placed concrete shall be protected from the sun wind and rain and prevented from drying out too quickly .
num .
curing shall commence immediately after the completion of final finishing operations .
num .
the minimum curing period for structural concrete shall be num days .
the minimum curing period for concrete class snumm and any other concrete incorporating ground granulated blast furnace slag silica fume fly ash or used in exposure classification cnum and above shall be num days .
num .
all concrete surfaces shall be cured by one of the following methods a .
by covering with sand or hessian or foam which is kept permanently wet .
b .
by wrapping with polythene or similar film to provide an airtight cover .
specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name c. by maintaining the formwork in position for the required curing period .
d. by spraying with an approved curing compound complying with the requirements of as num .
such curing compound shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
num .
if the contractor proposes to use a sprayon curing membrane on the top surface of the bridge deck the contractor shall remove it by an approved means immediately before application of the surfacing .
num .
concrete deck slabs shall also be treated with an approved aliphatic alcohol based evaporation retardant coating applied according to the manufacturers published recommendations immediately after the surface has been initially screeded .
num .
the contractor shall ensure that the method of curing shall not result in any staining of exposed surfaces of concrete .
num .
the temperature of concrete elements shall not exceed numc during the curing period .
num .
at no point during the curing period shall the crosssection of large and restraint concrete members exceed a temperature differential of numc .
num .
curing compounds shall not be used on surfaces against which fresh concrete is require to bond .
num protection of concrete surfaces num .
the contractor shall protect all completed surfaces from damage and staining from any source including rain water and concrete spillage and grout spillage and contact with hardwoods and ferrous metals .
where a delay is likely prior to casting the next concrete pour such that reinforcement bars protruding from completed sections may cause staining to exposed parts of the finished works then the bars shall be suitably treated to prevent rusting .
num .
where any damage or staining has occurred to completed concrete surfaces the affected section shall be deemed to be nonconforming .
the method of repair or removal shall in no way harm or damage the adjacent section of the works .
num quality assurance during construction num .
early age thermal crack of large and restrained concrete members shall be controlled in accordance with asnum clause num .
num .
visual inspection for cracks of all concrete surfaces shall be carried out and any cracking found shall be recorded .
width and formation of cracks shall be recorded .
crack width gauges meters are sufficient to measure crack widths .
num .
crack widths greater than num mm shall immediately be reported to the superintendent which shall be subjected for approval of remedial works or replacement .
hold point specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
after completed construction of concrete works concrete cover measurements shall be taken on representative areas of each element as directed by the superintendent .
suitable electromagnetic covermeters shall be used in accordance with bs num .
num noncompliances num .
any noncompliances identified during the works shall be recorded and immediately reported to the superintendent .
the record shall indicate the noncompliance items cause and location .
the contractor shall carry out remedial works to rectify noncompliances as directed by the superintendent .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa class of concrete class of concrete works component snum precast parapet panels snum normal superstructures and substructures in nonmarine environments approach slabs end treatments and base slabs for major box culverts snum snum precast prestressed beams snumm reinforced concrete substructures in marine environments specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
num .
class of concrete num the description in annexure numa may need to be modified to clarify where each class of concrete applies .
class snumm concrete is a class that has been used for marine environments .
its performance is being monitored .
where this does not apply the words .
except for class snumm through to and including material with silica fume in clause num should be deleted .
num .
steam curing clause num num clause num steam curing refers to precasting operations and should be added if applicable .
num this clause may be useful when the steam curing of psc beams piles culverts or other concrete elements is required .
num .
traffic restrictions num if applicable restrictions to traffic to allow maturation of concrete may need to be included insert as clause num where applicable .
num .
limitations on maximum compressive strength num subject to investigation for special projects insert as clause num where applicable .
num .
limitations on shrinkage num limitations on shrinkage refer also clause num subject to investigation for special projects insert as clause num where applicable .
num delete clause num if the specific value of shrinkage has been nominated and used in the design as given on the drawings .
amend not used clause range accordingly .
specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
variation of nominated mixes num subject to investigation for special projects insert as clause num where applicable .
num .
clause num mix consistency num for rural contracts where mobile concrete batch plant facilities are used one num slump test must be carried out on each truck delivered to site .
num .
maturity testing clause num num clause num maturity testing refers to precasting operations and should be added if applicable specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num steam curing num general num .
this section of the specification covers the curing of precast concrete units in an atmosphere saturated with water vapour at a pressure not exceeding atmospheric pressure .
num .
the method of control and the proposed curing cycle to achieve the specified concrete compressive strength are the responsibility of the contractor but shall be in accordance with this specification .
num .
the contractor shall take measures to allow for the potential lower numday compressive strength obtained from test cylinders cured initially under insitu conditions as compared to those cured in accordance with the requirements of as num .
num steam covers num .
to prevent drying out steam covers shall be placed over the units immediately following the casting and screeding operations in such a manner as to ensure free circulation of the steam around the concrete mass .
num curing cycle num .
after an initial maturity of numc hours but not less than num hours after batching the last batch of concrete for the units steam shall be admitted to the steam covers at such a controlled rate that the maximum average temperature rise shall not exceed numc per hour and the temperature rise in any one num minute period shall not exceed numc .
note the initial maturity period is calculated by dividing numc hours by the concrete temperature of the last batch of concrete placed in the unit .
the concrete temperature is as measured on an indicating thermometer .
num .
if the admission of steam to the steam covers is delayed by more than the initial specified maturity of numc hours after the completion of placing of concrete water curing shall be applied until steaming commences .
num .
steaming shall continue at a rate such that the temperature rise shall not exceed numc per hour until a temperature under the steam covers of not greater than numc has been reached .
the steam supply shall then be reduced to maintain the temperature at num numc .
specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
after the elapse of sufficient time at the maximum temperature for the required concrete properties to have been reached steam shall be completely shut down .
steam covers shall not be removed nor any part of the concrete units and test cylinders disturbed in any way until the temperature under the steam covers has fallen to within numc of the ambient temperature .
the rate of loss of temperature under the steam covers after shutting off steam shall not exceed numc per hour .
num temperature controls num .
temperature shall be recorded by means of recording thermometers .
the temperature sensitive parts of the thermometers shall be so positioned under the steam covers as to record the minimum temperature under the covers .
one recording thermometer shall be used for each unit or group of units in line up to a total length of numm .
for greater lengths additional recording thermometers shall be used and the distance between the temperature sensitive parts of the thermometers shall not exceed numm .
num .
the recording thermometers shall be set in operation immediately upon completion of casting and screeding .
num .
charts shall not be removed from any recording thermometers nor the recording thermometers disturbed or moved in any way until after the removal of the steam covers .
num .
charts from temperature recording thermometers shall be retained .
num .
the following information shall be recorded on the chart a. date on which steaming commenced b. unique identification and description of concrete unit c. temperature correction if any d. time correction if any e. batching of concrete f. temperature of concrete when placed g. ambient temperature at time of removal of steam covers and h. name of contractor and manufacturer .
num steam delivery num .
under no circumstances shall steam jets be allowed to impinge upon any part of the concrete units or of a test specimen or of their formwork or moulds .
neither shall any steam delivery pipe be attached directly to any formwork nor moulds in such a manner as may cause localised overheating of the concrete .
specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
sufficient steam jets or steam entry points shall be provided to ensure that a substantially uniform temperature is maintained under the steam covers such that the difference in temperature between any two points adjacent to the concrete units is not more than numc .
num extent of steam curing num .
unless otherwise specified steam curing shall be continuously applied until at least the num day compressive strength for the specified concrete grade is obtained .
num partial steam curing num .
where steam curing is used only to obtain sufficient compressive strength for removal of forms or for lifting curing shall be continued by one or a combination of the methods specified in clause num for a minimum period of num days .
num curing of test cylinders num .
concrete compression test cylinders shall be placed near the concrete units and shall be so positioned under the steam covers as to be midway between num adjacent points of steam entry subject always to their being no closer to any points of steam entry than half the width of the concrete units .
test cylinders shall be positioned in a group at the lower face of the concrete unit and shall in no case be placed on top of the concrete unit or its formwork .
num .
test cylinders shall remain in position under the steam covers until the steam curing cycle is complete .
test cylinders shall be suitably covered in such a way as to minimise moisture and temperature losses between the time of removal from the steam covers and the time of forwarding to an accredited laboratory for testing .
cylinders shall be transported in moisture proof containers .
specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num maturity testing num general num .
subject to the superintendents approval the contractor may be permitted to undertake maturity testing to determine the strength development of the concrete subjected to accelerated curing for the purpose of facilitating early lifting of precast units or early application of loading .
num .
the contractor shall submit the following for review to the superintendent at least num working days prior to concreting a .
purpose for test and strengths required for the application .
b .
the proposed procedure to develop the strengthmaturity relationship curve with the corresponding strength required .
c. the methodology of maturity testing and documenting procedures .
d. the proposed temperature recording device to be used to monitor the concrete temperature and the locations where the sensors a minimum of two sensors will be placed .
e. the proposed equipment and controls used for maturity testing of specimens to develop the relationship .
f. the period of testing .
g. the methodology for validation testing .
h. any documented evidence of previous performance of tested samples including accuracy and deviations .
num .
the constituents of the concrete test samples shall be the same used in construction this includes the mix proportions preparation and production of the concrete .
any deviations in manufacturing the concrete may reduce the accuracy of the strengthmaturity curve .
num .
strengthmaturity relationship curves shall be created for each project specific application and mix designs .
num developing the strengthmaturity function num .
a minimum of num specimens for either cylindrical or flexural beam test specimens shall be cast from the same concrete mixture used for construction .
num .
thermocouples or any approved maturity recording device shall be embedded within num mm centrally of at least two specimens .
num .
compressive strength testing shall be taken at maturity ages of num num num and num days .
specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
unless otherwise determined from laboratory testing the datum temperature to may be taken as numc .
num .
if results of one specimen has a difference of num or greater the specimen shall be discarded and the average of the two other specimens shall be used .
however a new strengthmaturity relationship shall be created if the difference of two or more specimens varies by more than num .
num .
once the strengthmaturity relationship has been determined it shall be reduced by num .
num estimating the inplace strength num .
the contractor shall nominate a suitable inspector with experience in maturity testing who shall be present at the concrete batch plant to monitor the batching process .
num .
a minimum of two temperature sensors per element shall be installed at the locations approved by the superintendent .
it is recommended that one temperature sensor be located centrally of the concrete member and the other within the concrete cover .
installation of additional sensors at alternative locations may be required to increase the accuracy of strength estimation .
num .
temperature sensors shall not be in direct contact with any steel that may affect the temperature recorded by the sensor .
num .
the maturity recording device shall immediately start recording after the concrete placement .
temperatures shall be recorded every num hours for the first num hours and every hour thereafter up until the strength required has been achieved .
num .
the concrete shall have reached its required design strength once results indicate the strength is equal to or greater than the strengthmaturity relationship at the same maturity index .
num verification of the strengthmaturity relationship num .
strength verification testing shall be required for the determination of the maturity index of the specified application .
a minimum of three specimens shall be cast from the concrete that is used in the structure and shall be cured in the same conditions .
num .
if the percent error of the measured verification strength is equal to or less than num of the estimated strength then the strengthmaturity relationship shall be considered valid .
similarly the strengthmaturity relationship shall be considered invalid if the percent error is greater than num .
a new strengthmaturity relationship shall then be created .
until a new relationship has been developed standard compressive strength testing shall be required for determining early age concrete strength required .
specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
if the volume of concrete exceeds nummnum for the specified application the strengthmaturity relationship curve shall be monitored periodically for the duration of the project by means of taking compressive test specimens during construction .
a minimum of num test specimens for every num mnum shall be cast for the purpose of embedding sensors and testing at num num and num hours and num num and num days .
specification num concrete for structures num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title concrete for structures revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager contracts .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num formwork copyright main roads western australia specification num formwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num clause num redundant as num removed asdse num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num formwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num general num num offform concrete finishes num num timber formwork num num other temporary formwork num num permanent deck soffit formwork num num void formers num num num not used num operations num num formwork design num num formwork construction num num removal of formwork num num tolerances for concrete construction num num provision for thermal movement num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num specification num formwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num formwork general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the design and construction of formwork required for the proper construction of concrete for structures in the permanent works to the tolerances specified herein .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num helical lockseam corrugated steel pipes as num formwork for concrete australiannew zealand standards asnzs num plywood and blockboard for exterior use main roads specifications specification num concrete for structures num num not used products and materials num general num .
formed concrete surfaces shall comply with the requirements of section num of as num .
num offform concrete finishes num .
surface finishes shall meet the requirements of as num to the classes designated on the drawings .
num .
particular importance is attached to the achievement of good offtheform concrete finishes throughout the works .
formwork shall be designed and fabricated and erected and dismantled so that all formed concrete surfaces achieve the specified uniform surface finish and texture without patching or plastering or cement washing or any treatment after removal of the formwork .
surface finish specification num formwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
all formwork made up from separate panels shall be so designed that the pattern of exposed panel joints complements the overall geometry of the structure and does not detract from the final appearance of the structure .
the contractor shall detail proposed soffit and side formwork panel arrangements on the formwork drawings .
panel arrangement num .
in order to minimise the number of joints formwork panels shall be supplied in the maximum practicable width and length .
plywood when used shall be placed with the grain of the outer plys in the direction of the span .
plywood panels num timber formwork num .
timber for formwork shall be well seasoned and free from loose knots and other defects .
timber which has become warped or unsuitable for use shall be replaced at no cost to the principal .
timber num .
plywood used in formwork lining shall comply with the relevant provisions of asnzs num .
plywood num other temporary formwork num .
forms made from materials other than plywood will be permitted provided that the requirements for strength and rigidity and tightness are met and that all bolts and rivet heads are countersunk and the finished concrete appearance is not inferior to that obtained with good quality plywood .
steel forms shall be suitably treated to prevent rusting of the face to be in contact with the concrete .
the minimum thickness required for steel formwork is nummm .
steel forms num .
polystyrene used as formwork shall be lined with a nummm thickness of plywood on the face that is to be in contact with the concrete to be poured and such facing shall be glued with a suitable adhesive to the polystyrene .
polystyrene num permanent deck soffit formwork num .
where indicated on the drawings permanent deck soffit formwork shall be used between the beams .
such permanent formwork shall be bondek with thickness as detailed on the drawings or an equivalent material approved by the superintendent .
bondek or similar approved num .
due care shall be exercised in achieving an effective seal at the seating joint between the bondek and the beams .
the minimum width of the seating on the beams shall no be less than that detailed on the drawings .
seating of bondek num .
the contractors attention is drawn to the tendency of the bondek formwork to walk off the beam seating .
the contractor shall ensure it is installed so that it can not move during any stage of construction .
the joining ribs shall be securely fastened together with self tapping screws or equivalent method approved by the superintendent .
the bondek profiled ends shall be sealed in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
securing and sealing bondek num .
the fixing of bondek formwork to the steel beams where used shall be by tack or puddle welding .
the fixing of bondek formwork to timber stringers shall be by spiking .
fixing of bondek specification num formwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
care shall be taken to align the bondek ribs across the bridge section prior to fixing deck reinforcement .
alignment num void formers num .
nonrecoverable void formwork as shown on the drawings shall be helical lock seam corrugated galvanised steel pipe of nummm minimum sheet thickness .
the void former and material shall be in accordance with the relevant sections of as num .
the contractor shall ensure that the void former is held rigidly in position until the surrounding concrete has set .
corrugated steel pipe void formers num num not used operations num formwork design num .
the design of all formwork shall be in accordance with as num .
num .
formwork shall be so designed and constructed that it can be removed without damage to the concrete .
in the case of prestressed concrete the design of the formwork shall permit movement of the members to occur during prestressing without damage to the permanent works .
formwork shall be set to the profiles and precambers shown on the drawings and due allowance shall be made in setting the levels of the formwork to compensate for any deflection or deformation due to the weight of the concrete .
formwork shall be designed and constructed to withstand the vibration required during placing of the concrete as specified in specification num concrete for structures .
num .
where concrete is poured in more than one operation the contractor shall take all necessary precautions to hold the formwork tight against the previous pour to avoid any discontinuities in the finished offform surface .
construction joints num .
at least two weeks prior to commencing formwork construction the contractor shall supply to the superintendent design details and drawings checked and certified by a qualified structural engineer that the formwork complies with the specification .
hold point num formwork construction num .
forms shall be built true to line and level and braced in a substantial and unyielding manner to maintain correct position and shape .
num .
on all exposed concrete surfaces the joints and splices in formwork panels shall be arranged in a manner suitable to the shape and area being formed .
wherever possible joints in adjoining panels shall be positioned to be either staggered by half panel lengths or placed in line .
joints num .
forms shall be mortar tight and the edges of all joints shall be sealed with a suitable type of sealant .
forms subject to external water pressure shall be watertight .
sealing specification num formwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
forms shall be held in correct alignment and spacing by bolt and rod assemblies designed so that when the forms are removed no metal shall be closer to the surface of the concrete than the minimum cover specified on the drawings .
the rods shall be held in place by devices capable of developing the strength of the rod attached to the walings .
bolt and rod assemblies shall be arranged so that cavities caused by their removal shall form a regular pattern appropriate to the area being formed .
all such cavities shall be wetted and carefully packed with colour matched mortars and brought to an even surface .
bolt and rod assemblies num .
the use of wires andor bolts extending to the surface of the concrete shall not be permitted except where shown on the drawings .
wires or bolts or fastenings for forms or fixing reinforcement shall have the same concrete cover as specified for reinforcement .
cover num .
all balustrade and traffic barrier sockets and hole formers and all other fittings shall be accurately located .
bolts pipes and bars used to form holes in the structure shall be well greased and arranged so that they may be removed from the concrete without excessive jarring or hammering before removal of forms .
fittings num .
form lubricants shall be of the nonstaining type which do not adversely affect the surface of the concrete .
lubricants shall be used after the fabrication of forms and prior to the placing of any reinforcing steel or other embedded item .
the lubricant shall be uniformly applied in a thin film and any surplus shall be removed prior to placing concrete .
care shall be taken that such coatings do not soil the surface of reinforcement .
lubricant num .
where the bottom of a panel is inaccessible from within then access panels shall be provided to permit thorough removal of rubbish before placing concrete .
access panels num .
prior to concreting all forms shall be clean and free from sand and shavings and tie wire ends and other debris .
surplus water shall be drained and any temporary openings closed in a proper manner .
cleaning num .
forms for reentrant angles shall be chamfered and forms for corners shall be filleted .
the bevel in each case shall have a width of nummm on each side unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
chamfers fillets num removal of formwork num .
formwork shall be removed in such a manner to ensure that no damage to the concrete occurs .
removal num .
based on average conditions in accordance with as num formwork support and formwork to reinforced concrete deck soffits and pier cap beams shall not be removed until a minimum of num days has elapsed and the concrete has achieved a cylinder strength of nummpa .
for other environmental conditions as num table num shall be used to determine minimum formwork stripping times .
timing specification num formwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
formwork support and formwork to prestressed concrete deck soffits and pier cap beams shall not be removed until the concrete has achieved the transfer strength specified on the drawings and the concrete has been prestressed .
in addition the minimum formwork stripping times given in as num table num shall be met .
timing num .
based on average conditions in accordance with as num for other parts of the structure other than the deck formwork shall not be removed until a minimum of num hours has elapsed and the concrete has attained a cylinder strength of num mpa .
for other environmental conditions as num table num shall be used to determine minimum formwork stripping times .
timing num tolerances for concrete construction num .
the materials for forms and form arrangements shall be such as to result in finished concrete work complying with the tolerances shown in table num table num tolerances for concrete construction footings to piers and abutments a .
variation of dimensions in plan and elevation nummm nummm b. misplacement or eccentricity of centreline nummm c. variation in specified level nummm abutment walls columns and column cap beams a .
variation from vertical or specified batter .
the lesser of num or nummm in full height b .
variation in cross sectional dimensions nummm nummm c. misplacement or eccentricity of centreline nummm d. variations from specified level of surfaces other than bearing surfaces nummm e. variation from specified level of all bearing surfaces nummm bridge superstructures a .
departure from specified alignment of centreline and edges nummm b .
departure from specified profile nummm c. variation in crosssectional dimensions nummm nummm d. variation from specified level of all bearing surfaces nummm specification num formwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num provision for thermal movement num .
the contractors attention is drawn to the need for the formwork for all deck diaphragms other than the fixed piers to be supported off the steel beams in a manner that will permit temperature movement of the deck diaphragms relative to the cap beams during construction .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num formwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa insert as required .
include tables diagrams etc as necessary .
delete annexure page if not required .
specification num formwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
num .
permanent deck soffit formwork clause num if the design and drawings nominate the use of transfloor permanent concrete deck soffit formwork then contract specific requirement clause num should be included and clause num deleted and replaced with not used .
specification num formwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num permanent deck soffit formwork num .
as indicated on the drawings the design has assumed the use of transfloor precast concrete permanent formwork for the in situ concrete deck slab .
num .
the contactor shall be responsible for designing the transfloor formwork in accordance with the details shown on the drawings .
num .
particular care shall be taken in detailing the location of reinforcement in the panels and the beam shear stud layout to avoid clashes .
num .
the contractor may propose alternative types of permanent formwork .
in this case the contractor shall provide details of any required modifications to the deck slab .
if steel permanent formwork is proposed it may only be used between the beams not for the cantilever or parapet .
num .
tenderers shall provide details of their proposed alternative deck formwork with their tender .
specification num formwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title formwork revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num steel reinforcement copyright main roads western australia specification num steel reinforcement num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date num table reference changed to num sco num whole document reformatted sco num whole document reformatted to corporate branding guidelines mps num num and num standard for bar chairs added sdse num num clause num changed and tables num and num deleted num previous section num is now section num .
previous table num renumbered table num .
num new section for bar chairs and spacers added num inclusion of acrs certification asdse num whole document complete review no change asdse num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num steel reinforcement num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num clear cover requirement num num num not used num products and materials num num standards num num bending and cutting num num storage num num cleaning num num mechanical splices num num num not used num operations num num fixing num num welding num num lap splices num num bar chairs and spacers num num tolerances for fixing num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num specification num steel reinforcement num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num steel reinforcement general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the scheduling supply delivery and fixing of steel reinforcement to be cast into concrete .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australiannew zealand standards asnzs num structural steel welding welding of reinforcing steel asnzs num steel reinforcing materials asnzs num bar chairs in reinforced concrete product requirements and test methods num clear cover requirement num .
the minimum cover measured from the surface of the concrete to the face of any reinforcing steel shall be as shown on the drawings .
num num not used products and materials num standards num .
reinforcement used in the works shall comply with the australian standards listed in table num .
table num reinforcement used in works reinforcement specification grade numn hot rolled deformed steel reinforcing bars for concrete asnzs num reinforcing wire asnzs num reinforcing fabricwelded mesh grade numl asnzs num specification num steel reinforcement num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
bar chairs and spacers used in the works shall comply with asnzs num .
num .
manufacturers and processors of steel reinforcing materials must hold a valid certificate of approval issued by the australian certification authority for reinforcing steels ltd acrs .
num bending and cutting num .
the contractor shall prepare reinforcement bending schedules from the drawings .
schedule num .
reinforcement shall be accurately cut and bent to the dimensions and shapes shown on the drawings .
all bars shall be bent in accordance with as num unless otherwise detailed on the drawings .
pin diameters for bends and hook and cog allowances shall be in accordance with as num .
num .
reinforcement partially embedded in concrete shall not be field bent unless it is allowed for on the drawings .
where field bending is required it shall be carried out by the application of a constant force using a pin diameter as specified in as num .
num .
heating of reinforcement shall not be permitted except where indicated on the drawings and shall then only be carried out in accordance with the following requirements a .
the steel shall be heated uniformly for at least num mm each side of the portion to be bent .
b .
for grade num steel the heating shall be controlled such that the temperature does not exceed numc and shall be measured with temperature indicating crayons .
steel heated beyond numc shall be rejected .
c. grade numn steel may be heated to a dull cherry red .
d. heated bars shall not be cooled rapidly by quenching or any other means .
e. all heating shall be carried out in the presence of the superintendent .
num .
prior to heating any reinforcement the contractor shall supply to the superintendent full details of the proposed heating procedure .
hold point num storage num .
reinforcing steel shall be stored above ground level and shall be protected from damage and deterioration .
num cleaning num .
reinforcement placed in the works shall be clean and free from all loose rust and millscale and all dirt and grease and all other foreign substances .
after being placed in position all reinforcement shall be maintained in a clean condition until it is embedded in the concrete .
specification num steel reinforcement num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num mechanical splices num .
mechanical splices shall be used only where shown on the drawings .
alternative mechanical splices to the ones shown on the drawings may be used provided that they are capable of developing at least num of the specified yield strength of the bar and meet the dimensional and clearance requirements shown on the drawings .
num num not used operations num fixing num .
reinforcing steel shall be accurately placed in the positions shown on the drawings in accordance with the tolerances given in table num .
num .
the reinforcement shall be secured in position so that it shall not be displaced during the placement of concrete and the contractor shall ensure that there is no disturbance of the reinforcement in concrete that has already been placed .
num .
reinforcing bars intended to be in contact at points where they cross shall be bound together with nummm annealed soft iron tie wire .
stirrups shall be wired securely to the bars they are intended to restrain so as to form an effective reinforcement cage .
num .
all reinforcing steel supported off formwork where the resulting concrete surface will be exposed shall be supported on special purpose bar chairs or spacers as appropriate approved by the superintendent .
num .
reinforcement not supported off formwork or where the resulting concrete surface will be concealed may alternatively be supported on concrete blocks or plastic chairs approved by the superintendent .
num welding num .
welding or tack welding of reinforcement shall not be permitted except where indicated on the drawings and shall then comply with the following requirements a. welding shall be in accordance with asnzs num. b. welding of grade num steel will not be permitted within num mm of a bend .
c. welds shall not be broken out .
num .
prior to welding any reinforcement the contractor shall supply to the superintendent documentation showing that welders to be employed on the works are suitably qualified and that the qualification of welding procedures has been verified by testing in accordance with the requirements of asnzs num .
hold point specification num steel reinforcement num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num lap splices num .
reinforcement shall only be spliced at locations shown on the drawings .
num .
the minimum length of lap shall be as indicated on the drawings .
num .
welded steel wire fabric shall be lapped as detailed on the drawings and where not detailed shall overlap by at least one complete mesh on all sides such that the end cross wire of one sheet overlaps with the second end wire of the adjacent sheet .
loose bars shall not be used in conjunction with fabric reinforcement except where shown on the drawings .
loose small pieces of fabric shall only be used where they are essential for fitting into small confined parts of the works .
num bar chairs and spacers num .
steel reinforcement shall be secured in position by bar chairs and spacers manufactured under factorycontrolled conditions from extruded fibre concrete or conventional concrete .
fibres are to be synthetic and non metallic .
num .
bar chairs and spacers shall have durability and strength greater than those specified for the surrounding concrete .
concrete bar chair shall have a minimum concrete compression strength of num mpa and a rcpt rapid chloride penetration test value not exceeding num coulombs .
num .
bar chairs and spacers made from metal plasticcoated metal or sitecast concrete shall not be used .
num .
test requirements and sampling frequency for bar chairs shall be in accordance with asnzs num .
num .
the contractor shall submit for approval by the superintendent not less than num days prior to the proposed use of steel reinforcement supports and spacers a signed document including relevant tests reports demonstrating that the performance of the supports and spacers satisfied the requirements of asnzs num and this specification .
hold point num tolerances for fixing num .
the tolerances for fixing of reinforcement are given in table num .
specification num steel reinforcement num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num fabrication num num num num nominal length nominal size tolerance condition or dimension or diameter of mm l mm bar mm on each overall dimension or on the overall dimension of each straight portion or on that offset dimension controlled by concrete cover at both ends for bars other than fitments .
up to num up to num num num up to num over num num num over num up to num num num over num over num num num up to num up to num num num up to num over num num num over num up to num num num over num over num num num on that overall dimension controlled by cover at both ends for fitments ties stirrups helices hoops and the like only .
up to num up to num num num up to num num to num num num over num up to num num num any length over num num num up to num up to num num num up to num num to num num num over num up to num num num any length over num num num on the overall dimension or on the overall dimension of each straight portion or on that offset dimension controlled by concrete cover at one end only or at neither end .
any length any size num num including allowances for laps .
on the overall offset dimension of a cranked column bar any offset up to num num num on the deviation from square measured in relation to any bar num and over the end nummm of the sawn or machined end of a length .
a straight bar intended for use as an end bearing specification num steel reinforcement num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num tolerances on fixing reinforcement num num num case condition tolerancemm num where concrete cover to the numa .
at the end of reinforcement is the controlling reinforcement .
factor .
tolerances on dimensions c num num numb .
at the outside edge of tolerances on dimension t reinforcement or fitment .
num num when compression face num num when tension face tolerances on dimension b num num when tension face num num when compression face num where cover is not numa .
at the end of reinforcement .
tolerance on dimension l. controlling .
num see case num numb .
at the outside edge of tolerances on dimension e reinforcement including num fitments .
num lateral spacing of numa .
beam or column type member .
reinforcement .
tolerance on dimension s nums or nummm whichever is greater .
numb .
slab or wall type member .
num bars in corners crossing bars bars to be placed in configuration starter bars etc .
shown on the drawings .
tolerances on location of an individual bar nummm unless otherwise limited by cover requirements of case num above .
the tolerances given above are the maximum permissable but it should be noted that in some circumstances where reinforcement is fabricated to maximum tolerance they may not be fully available .
note this table should be read in conjuction with table num specification num steel reinforcement num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num steel reinforcement num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
no guidance notes or contract specific requirements available at this time .
specification num steel reinforcement num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num steel reinforcement num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title steel reinforcement revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num prestressing of concrete copyright main roads western australia specification num prestressing of concrete num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date num num num references updated corrosivity category in accordance with as num flame cutting permitted .
sdse num whole document reformatting sco num num inclusion of acrs certification asdse num whole document complete review no change asdse num amendment made to a number of clauses added asnzs num to standards reference substituted for the following references as num num num sdse num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num prestressing of concrete num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num alternative systems num num tendons num num anchorages num num sheathing num num couplers num num swaging and buttonheading num num num not used num operations num num installation of tendons num num preparation for stressing num num stressing operations num num grouting num num protection of anchorages num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num specification num prestressing of concrete num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num prestressing of concrete general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply installation post tensioning and grouting of materials for the prestressing of concrete .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num methods of testing concrete as num bourdon tube pressure and vacuum gauges as num portland and blended cements as num atmospheric corrosivity zones in australia australiannew zealand standards asnzs num steel prestressing materials general requirements asnzs num steel prestressing materials testing requirements asnzs num prestressing anchorages astm international astm cnum standard test method for flow of grout for preplacedaggregate concrete flow cone method astm cnum standard test method for expansion and bleeding of freshly mixed grouts for preplaced aggregate concrete in the laboratory main roads specifications specification num concrete for structures specification num precast concrete members specification num prestressing of concrete num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used products and materials num alternative systems num .
alternative systems are acceptable if they comply with the requirements of this specification and the contractor supplies all details to accommodate the changes in design and documentation .
num tendons num general material requirements num .
wire or strand or bar which has been used previously shall not be used in the works .
tendons num .
all prestressing material installed in the works shall be clean and free from loose rust grease and mill scale at the time of fixing in position and subsequent concreting .
slight rusting of the steel is acceptable but the surface shall not be pitted .
num .
manufacturers and processors of prestressing steel must hold a valid certificate of approval issued by the australian certification authority for reinforcing steels ltd acrs .
num prestressing wire num .
prestressing wire shall conform to the requirements of asnzs num and shall be nummm nominal diameter low relaxation stress relieved round steel wire having a minimum tensile strength of num mpa .
num prestressing strand num .
prestressing strand shall conform to the requirements of asnzs num and shall be numwire low relaxation super grade steel strand having a minimum tensile strength of nummpa .
num prestressing bar num .
prestressing bar shall conform to the requirement of asnzs num and shall be super grade prestressing bar with a minimum tensile strength of nummpa .
num testing requirements num .
each delivery of materials shall be accompanied by documentation showing the lot numbers from which each coil or bar is taken together with a certificate from a laboratory with appropriate nata registration which indicates conformance with the relevant standard .
num .
in addition testing of wire strand and bar shall be carried out in accordance with the testing requirements of asnzs num .
the frequency of testing shall be at least three samples from each num tonne of material or part thereof .
testing samples shall be from the same source .
specification num prestressing of concrete num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num information to be supplied by the contractor num .
the following information shall be obtained during testing and submitted to the superintendent prior to use in the works along with certification to clause num a .
breaking force .
b .
yield strength and elongation .
c. loadstrain plot .
d. crosssectional area of strand wire or bar .
e. num hour relaxation loss at num and num of mbl .
f. sources of strand wire or bar .
num delivery and storage of tendons num .
hightensile steel wire and strand shall be supplied in coils conforming to the requirements of asnzs num .
prestressing steel and couplers shall be protected from damage and deterioration at all times .
tendons shall be stored off the ground in suitable weatherproof shelters and shall not be kinked or bent .
num anchorages num materials num .
anchorages shall comply with the requirements of asnzs num .
anchorages num .
no damaged anchorage devices shall be used .
all parts shall be protected from corrosion at all times .
all threaded parts shall be protected by greased wrappings and all tapped holes shall be protected by suitable plugs until used .
the anchorage components shall be kept free from mortar loose rust and any other deleterious coating .
num .
gripping efficiency of the combined anchorage shall be maintained by achieving the required manufacturing tolerances for each component as specified in the manufacturers requirements .
num placement num .
anchorages shall be positioned and maintained during concreting so that the centre line of the duct shall pass axially through the anchorage assembly and shall be normal to the bearing surfaces .
num .
all bearing surfaces of the anchorages shall be clean prior to concreting and tensioning .
specification num prestressing of concrete num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num sheathing num material num .
all sheathing used shall be of corrugated galvanised steel .
the design is based on a difference of nummm between internal and external diameters .
sheathing num placement num .
the contractor shall set the sheathing and anchorages to the line and profile shown on the drawings prior to concreting .
allowance has been made on the drawings for the eccentricity of the cables within the sheathing .
all sheaths shall be maintained in their correct positions during the placing of concrete by means of steel stirrups and bars .
the permissible tolerance on the vertical profile of the sheathing shall be nummm .
the permissible tolerance on horizontal alignment shall be nummm .
num .
the number of joints shall be kept to a minimum and each joint shall be adequately sealed .
num .
sheaths shall at all times be kept free of any matter detrimental to the bond between the sheath and the grout .
num grout vents and drains num .
grout vent tubes and corresponding holes in the cable sheath shall have a minimum internal diameter of nummm .
grout inlets and grout vents shall be of plastic or nonferrous materials and shall be provided at positions along all sheaths corresponding to the centre of each span and each high point in the cable profile and where otherwise indicated on the drawings .
grout vents shall be at least numm higher than the grout inlet to ensure effective head of grout .
num .
the contractor shall ensure that grout inlets and vents are firmly secured in position .
if any grout inlet or vent becomes blocked during concreting the contractor shall clear them and make good any damage so that they operate in a satisfactory manner at no cost to the principal .
num .
all grout inlets shall be fitted with a pressure gauge for measuring pressures independent of pressures observed at the grout pump or air compressor .
num .
all grout inlets outlets and vents shall be fitted with a metal valve which can be closed and opened several times or other approved method provided for maintaining pressure during air testing and for controlling the grout flow during grouting .
num .
the pressure rating for inlets outlets and vents shall not be less than nummpa .
num protection of cable sheath num .
the contractor shall take adequate precautions to ensure that cable sheaths are protected against mechanical damage and the ingress of dirt water grease and other contaminants at all times .
the contractor shall make good all damage before the cable sheaths are cast into the concrete at no cost to the principal .
specification num prestressing of concrete num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num couplers num .
tendons shall be joined only by couplers designed to develop at least num of the specified minimum breaking load of the tendon .
couplers shall only be used as shown on the drawings .
couplers num .
efficiency testing shall be carried out in accordance with asnzs num to prove the couplers develop greater than num of the specified minimum breaking load of the tendon for strand tendons and greater than num for bar tendons .
num swaging and buttonheading num .
swages and buttonheads shall develop not less than num of the specified minimum breaking load of the strand or wire .
swages and buttonheads num num not used operations num installation of tendons num general num .
wires or strands or bars shall not be welded within the length to be tensioned and shall only be cut by sawing or cropping .
restrictions to welding num .
for welding works adjacent to a tendon the contractor shall erect a shield to protect the tendon from damage .
it shall be ensured that no damage is caused to tendons either directly by heat or weld spatter or indirectly by stray electric currents .
num .
all wires or strands which are to be stressed at the same time shall wherever possible be taken from the same parcel .
num .
wires or strands or bars shall be built into the works in accordance with the drawings and finished cables shall not be kinked or twisted .
num assembly of tendons num .
the strand from the coil shall be paid out in such a way that any twisting force which the strand might acquire during the uncoiling will not loosen the lay of the strand .
num .
assembly of tendons shall not commence until full conformance records are available for all materials prepared for use .
the full conformance records shall be submitted to the superintendent for approval .
hold point num .
cutting of strand shall be carried out using high speed carborundum disc cutters .
the use of flame cutting shall not be permitted under any circumstances .
specification num prestressing of concrete num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
tendons shall be assembled using methods and equipment which ensure that individual wires or strands are not kinked and that they maintain approximately the same relative position to the other wires and strands in the tendon .
the wires and strands of the assembled tendon shall be bound at regular intervals in such a manner that twisting of the tendon is minimised and no damage will be done to the tendon when it is installed .
num .
for the button headed tendons composed of wires or strands the individual wires or strands in each tendon shall be so laid out that the uniformity of length can be inspected .
num minimum cover num .
unless otherwise specified on the drawings the concrete cover to any duct sheathing or former shall not be less than nummm .
num pulling of tendons and pushing of strands num .
the preassembled tendons shall be pulled through the ducts using a form of pulling sock or cable leader so that no damage is done to the sheathing .
num .
notwithstanding the above paragraph and if requested by the contractor consideration will be given to pushing the strands through the ducts individually provided the contractor can demonstrate conclusively to the satisfaction of the superintendent that this procedure will not be detrimental to the strength and safety of the tendon during and after stressing .
num .
the demonstration shall prove that under the proposed pushing procedure there will be no risk of sheathing being stripped and forming blockages in the duct or of the strands becoming interlocked and developing internal friction points which may cause differential overstress and even failure during stressing and particularly during the additional extensions associated with temporary destressing operations .
num precautions during and after concreting num .
during concreting the contractor shall ensure that all cable sheaths and associated anchorages and coupling devices and grout vents are maintained in position .
num .
where the contractor elects to have sheathing concreted in before the prestressing cables are installed black polythene tube liners shall be inserted into the complete length of the sheathing to provide adequate support and stiffness during the concreting operations .
num .
the contractor shall remove the polythene tube liners num hours after the concrete has attained its initial set .
num .
immediately after all the concrete has been placed in the element any installed tendons or continuous tubing shall be pulled back and forth about numm to ensure they are perfectly free inside the duct .
num special provision for high tensile bars num .
the exposed threads of all bars nuts and couplers shall be fully protected on site at all times until stressing is completed .
specification num prestressing of concrete num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
each set of bars nuts and couplers shall be trial assembled prior to installation .
the bars shall be suitably marked andor a suitable system of reference marks established in the adjacent concrete so that it can be confirmed by visual inspection that each end of each bar is fully engaged in its corresponding nut or coupler .
num .
the contractor shall submit details of the proposed procedures for ensuring that all bars are fully engaged during installation including the method of confirming this by inspection prior to stressing .
num .
the contractor shall submit these proposed procedures to the superintendent for approval at least num working days prior to the commencement date for installing bars .
no bars shall be installed until the superintendent has released this hold point .
hold point num preparation for stressing num stressing equipment num .
the prestressing equipment comprising pump jack and pressure gauges shall be calibrated every num months unless there is reason to doubt their accuracy in which case a recalibration shall be carried out .
num .
dual working gauges shall be used at all times as a safeguard against gauge failure .
num .
gauges and scales shall permit force and elongations respectively to be determined within an accuracy of num .
pressure gauges shall be concentric scale industrial gauges of nominal size above nummm complying with the requirements of as num .
num cleaning tendon ducts num .
tendon ducts and grout vents shall be cleaned out by blowing oilfree compressed air through them .
anchorages shall be thoroughly cleaned prior to commencement of tensioning .
the protruding ends of tendons shall be cleaned of any coating rust mortar oil or mud which may have accumulated since placing and which would lessen the grip of wedges or of anchorage devices .
num .
where the bearing plate has been previously cast in concrete any misalignment of the plate shall be compensated for prior to stressing .
num concrete strength testing num .
in addition to test cylinders submitted for acceptance testing the contractor shall take test cylinders as required below for determination of the concrete strength prior to prestressing .
num .
a pair of test cylinders shall be taken from each batch or load of concrete which is placed around or close to the anchorages .
also a pair of test cylinders shall be taken from every num cubic metres or part thereof of the remaining concrete in the member .
specification num prestressing of concrete num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the member shall not be prestressed until these cylinders representing all the concrete in the member attain the specified strength and unless otherwise shown on the drawings the concrete has reached the age of num days if moist cured or two days if steam cured and the concrete has cooled to ambient temperature .
hold point num .
if any cylinder moulded for the purpose of assessing the transfer strength for prestressing fails to reach the required value the member shall not be prestressed until the time at which the concrete represented by the cylinder is estimated to attain num of the required value .
num stressing calculations num .
stressing forms as described below shall be prepared and made available to the superintendent at least num working days before stressing of the relevant tendons is commenced .
num .
for each tendon a stressing form shall be prepared which shall include provision for recording at least the following information a. identification nos .
of coils b. applicable test identification no .
c. stressing length of tendon including jacking length d. frictionless extension of tendon at proposed jacking force e. calculated loss of extension due to friction and curvature of duct f. anticipated actual elongation at proposed jacking force num .
the anticipated elongation versus load during stressing shall be plotted in a form which can be used to compare actual elongations against the pre plotted anticipated values as the operation proceeds .
num stressing operations num safety precautions num .
care shall be taken during tensioning to ensure the safety of all personnel engaged on the work and of other persons in the vicinity .
jacks shall be secured in such a manner that they will be restrained if a tendon failure occurs .
no person shall be allowed to stand behind the jacks while tensioning is in progress .
the operation of the jacks the measurement of the elongation and associated operations shall be carried out in such a manner and from such positions that the safety of all concerned is ensured .
num .
the contractors proposed safety precautions shall be included in the detailed procedures .
num conformance records num .
the following data where applicable shall be recorded a .
identification number of gauges and pumps and jacks .
specification num prestressing of concrete num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name b .
identification particulars of cables .
c. initial force or pressure at which cables are marked for measurement of elongation .
d. final force or pressure and elongations obtained on completion of tensioning including where specified any overload force and elongation of short duration .
e. elongations remaining after release of jacks .
f. ramming pressures .
g. not less than six readings of elongations obtained at suitable intervals during tensioning together with corresponding force .
num .
no tendons shall be cut off or grouted until the stressing conformance records for the relevant tendons have been made available to the superintendent .
hold point num personnel num .
tensioning operations shall be performed only by personnel trained for and experienced in this type of work .
num tensioning num .
the cables shall be stressed at a gradual and steady rate in the order indicated on the drawings until they attain the forces specified .
num .
the initial force applied to take up the slack must seat the jack firmly but must not exceed num of the minimum breaking load of the tendon .
num .
the extension and force in each cable shall be measured in every case .
the extensions calculated from the force in the cable after allowing for the effect of sheath friction shall agree with the measured extension within plus or minus num otherwise the cable may be required to be released from the jacks and restressed .
num .
under no circumstances shall the maximum jacking force exceed num of the specified minimum ultimate strength of the cable .
num .
cables shall be anchored off when the force detailed on the drawings has been reached .
the jack pressure shall then be released gradually in such a way as to avoid shock to the anchorage or cables .
specification num prestressing of concrete num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num grouting num general num .
all cable sheaths containing stressed cables are to be grouted unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
grouting shall be carried out as soon as practical after stressing and in any case no later than a. one week under a corrosivity category cnum or higher b. two weeks under a corrosivity category cnum c. three weeks under a corrosivity category cnum or lower as defined in as num .
num .
the grouting shall be carried out in such a manner that the cable sheaths are completely filled with a dense and uniform grout .
num .
grouting shall not be performed at temperatures greater than numoc when the shade temperature is rising nor numoc when the shade temperature is falling .
num .
grouting shall not be performed when the temperature of the concrete is below numoc or above numoc .
num properties of grout num .
the grout shall be a mixture of type gp portland cement to as num and water having a watercement ratio of not more than num by mass .
cement and water shall conform with the requirements for these materials given in specification num concrete for structures except the water shall not contain more than num milligrams per litre of chloride ions and cement shall be less than num days old .
no additives will be permitted in the grout mixture unless the contractor can show that they have no harmful effect whatsoever on the prestressing steel do not contain iron or aluminium powder and do not generate gases from chemical reaction between grout mix constituents or other materials in contact with the grout .
num .
grout shall have high bleed resistance low shrinkage and high fluidity .
grouts shall comply with the performance requirements of table num when tested as specified .
specification num prestressing of concrete num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num performance requirements for grout property test method criteria comments bleeding astm cnum final bleeding num measured when two successive readings show no further expansion or bleeding early expansion astm cnum num at num hours temperature tolerances are num oc num oc fluidity astm cnum immediately after mixing efflux time num s num minutes after mixing change in efflux time num s contactors target efflux time for the site conditions shall not vary from nominated value by more than num s minimum compressive strength as num nummpa at num days i .
modify the test method to simulate wicking of strands as follows cut a nummm long piece of nummm numwire prestressing strand wrap strand at cuts with suitable tape to prevent splaying the wires when it is cut .
degrease and clean the cut strand .
insert the piece of strand vertically and centrally into the grout cylinder using a centraliser and secure in position .
introduce the grout into the graduated cylinder as per the test method .
take readings as per the test method .
ii .
a modification may be introduced to the test method as follows fill the flow cone to the top instead of to the standard level .
measure the efflux time as the time measured to fill the one litre container placed directly under the flow cone .
num .
suitability tests are required for all grouts unless previously approved for use by main roads wa .
trial mix tests shall be undertaken for all tests given in table num and proof of conformance submitted to the superintendent for approval at least num weeks prior to intended use .
hold point num .
once approval has been granted frequency of acceptance testing for use in the works shall be in accordance with table num .
table num frequency of acceptance tests for grout test sample bleeding test one test per day fluidity one test per day compressive strength test three cubes per day or lot whichever is larger additional cubes may be taken if testing is required at other than seven days .
specification num prestressing of concrete num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num air testing of ducts before grouting num .
air testing of ducts before grouting shall be carried out under the supervision of the specialist stressing personnel .
num .
any water in the duct shall first be blown out with oilfree air .
num .
after sealing the anchorage ends each duct shall be tested as follows i .
with all valves closed pressurise the duct at the inlet with oilfree air to numkpa to confirm the installed system has sufficient integrity for grouting .
ii .
hold the pressure at numkpa for num seconds .
a sudden drop in pressure of more than numkpa or a need to continuously inject compressed air to maintain pressure indicates that the system is not sufficiently sealed for grouting .
all leaks shall be located and repaired and the test repeated .
iii .
reduce the pressure to numkpa .
iv .
lock off the air source .
v. record the air pressure loss over time .
a pressure loss greater than num shall not be permitted within a duration of d numv num where d duration in minutes and v volume of the duct minus the strand volume in litres .
num .
if the pressure loss over time is greater than num a thorough inspection and repairs shall be undertaken prior to retest .
num .
where air testing detects leakage between two adjacent ducts that can not be practically rectified both shall be air tested together as a single system and then shall be grouted simultaneously with two lines controlled by individual lock off valves .
num .
if the air loss criterion can not be achieved after rectifying all detected leakages assessment shall be undertaken by the specialist stressing personnel to determine whether grouting can proceed and approval shall be sought from the superintendent before proceeding .
hold point num grouting equipment num .
the mixing equipment shall be of a type capable of producing a uniform suspension of cement in water .
num .
the injection shall be capable of continuous operation with minimum variation of pressure and shall include a system for recirculating the grout whilst grouting is not in progress .
num .
the grout pump shall be capable of delivering grout at a rate of num litres per hour at pressures up to nummpa .
all piping to the grout pump shall have a minimum of bends and valves and changes in diameter .
all baffles to the pump shall be fitted with nummm sieve strainers .
specification num prestressing of concrete num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
a standby grout pump shall be made available on site for use at all times during grouting operations .
num .
all equipment shall be thoroughly washed through with clean water after every series of operations and more frequently if necessary .
the intervals between washings shall not exceed three hours .
num mixing of grout num .
water shall be added to the mixer first then portland cement .
mixing shall continue for at least two but not more than four minutes until a uniform consistency is obtained .
only as much grout as may be used in one hour shall be mixed in any batch .
the contractor shall ensure that each batch of grout is mixed to the same consistency .
num grouting procedure num .
before grouting the volume of grout required for each duct shall be determined for use as a basis for control of volumes and rates of grout injection .
num .
grout shall be injected into the sheath from the lowest anchorage in an even continuous flow so that it moves along the sheath at a rate of between num metres per minute .
filling rates for vertical ducts shall not exceed num metres per minute .
num .
when the grout reaches the first grout vent it shall be allowed to flow out until all excess water and air has been expelled from the first portion of the sheath and it is of the same consistency as the injected grout .
this grout vent shall then be sealed off and the procedure repeated at the remaining vents until the sheath is completely filled .
in cases where the sheaths are longer than num metres an alternative grouting procedure may be required .
num .
the contractor shall supply attachments suitable for injecting grout at the anchorages and all intermediate grout outlets for use as required if a blockage occurs during grouting .
num .
after a period of not less than two days the plugs at grout outlets shall be removed and any necessary topping up carried out .
num .
all grout outlet pipes shall be cut off or drilled out as necessary to maintain the specified cover to any metal surfaces .
the recess so formed shall be made good with mortar to give a smooth surface flush with the concrete .
num protection of anchorages num .
the ends of the tendons shall be cut off with high speed abrasive disc or wheel so as to give when the recesses are concreted a minimum of nummm cover over the tendon stubs .
flame cutting within nummm of a concrete surface will not be allowed .
num .
where the ends of the tendons are not to be covered with concrete a protective coating of epoxy shall be applied in an approved manner to the exposed parts of the anchorage .
specification num prestressing of concrete num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
where the drawings show that the anchorage recess is to be concreted the concrete shall be of the same mix as in the member .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num prestressing of concrete num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
specification num prestressing of concrete num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num prestressing of concrete num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title prestressing of concrete revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num sandblasted concrete finish copyright main roads western australia specification num sandblasted concrete finish num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num whole document complete review no change asdse num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num sandblasted concrete finish num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num products and materials num num abrasive cleaning agent num num water num num num not used num operations num num personnel num num precautions num num texture depth num num cleanup num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num specification num sandblasted concrete finish num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num sandblasted concrete finish general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the sandblasting of concrete surfaces .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards epa environmental code of practice abrasive blasting works main roads specifications specification num quality systems specification num environment num definitions num .
extent of sandblasting the extent of sandblasting shall be as shown on the drawings .
the suffix x following the surface finish class number signifies a sandblasted finish .
num .
abrasion blast cleaning is identified as a special process in accordance with specification num quality systems .
special process num num not used products and materials num abrasive cleaning agent num .
sand or grit for abrasive blast cleaning shall preferably be nonsiliceous such as garnet but if a siliceous sand is used it shall have a silica content of less than num .
silica content num water num .
the contractor shall arrange that a suitable supply of clean water is available at the works site .
specification num sandblasted concrete finish num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used operations num personnel num .
the work shall be carried out by skilled operators having experience in this type of work .
num precautions num .
sandblasting shall not commence until num days after the concrete has been placed .
num .
when carrying out any sandblasting operation the contractor shall take suitable protective measures to ensure that no damage occurs to any other surface .
num .
all blast cleaning work shall be undertaken in accordance with specification num environment and the relevant requirements of the epa environmental code of practice for abrasive blast cleaning .
the contractor shall comply with the requirements for open blasting concerning epa code of practice a .
use of water to reduce or eliminate dust particularly in urban areas where dry blasting is inappropriate b .
control of waste water noise attenuation in urban areas c. compliance with ohs requirements for respiratory protective devices and clothing .
num texture depth num .
the texture of the sandblasted finish shall be determined from trial sandblasting of areas of the work .
as a general guide sandblasting shall be such as to expose the coarse aggregate with a texture depth of no more than nummm .
trial area num cleanup num .
upon completion of the sandblasting of a section the blasted surface and adjacent areas shall be washed down with a high pressure water jet to remove loose sand and blasting debris .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num sandblasted concrete finish num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
no guidance notes at this time specification num sandblasted concrete finish num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num sandblasted concrete finish num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title sandblasted concrete finish revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num precast concrete members copyright main roads western australia specification num precast concrete members num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num clause num redundant as num removed asdse num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num precast concrete members num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num manufacture num num general num num formwork num num reinforcement num num prestress num num concrete num num transfer of prestress num num records num num member tolerances num num marking of members num num num not used num transport handling and storage num num general num num lifting num num transport num num stacking num num num not used num installation num num general num num welding of positive moment connection reinforcement at beam ends num num plank joints num num deck concrete overlay num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num supply of precast members by principal num specification num precast concrete members num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num precast concrete members general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and installation of precast concrete members beams and planks .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num bourdon tube pressure and vacuum gauges as num bridge design australiannew zealand standards asnzs num structural steel welding welding of reinforcing steel asnzs num hotdip galvanised zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles other standards concrete institute of australia precast concrete handbook num main roads specifications specification num concrete for structures specification num formwork specification num steel reinforcement specification num prestressing of concrete num num not used manufacture num general num .
manufacture and acceptance shall be in accordance with this specification and details shown on the drawings and the concrete institute of australia publication precast concrete handbook num .
specification num precast concrete members num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
casting methods shall be designed to ensure that no damage occurs to the units .
the ends of all units shall be free from any grout loss or honeycombing or cracking or spalling .
units with defects of this nature shall be rejected .
num .
some beams are required to have holes located in the webs for subsequent attachment of formwork during bridge construction .
the location and size of these holes and the number of beams requiring these holes are detailed on the drawings .
num formwork num .
the provisions of specification num formwork shall apply and in addition a. formwork shall be fabricated from steel with a minimum thickness of nummm .
b. unformed surfaces shall be roughened and shall be free from laitance and loose material which may be deleterious to the bond with the in situ deck concrete .
this shall be achieved after curing by scabbling or any other suitable method .
num reinforcement num .
the provisions of specification num steel reinforcement shall apply except that the tolerance on the minimum clear cover specified shall be nummm nummm in all cases .
any lengths of reinforcement which are left exposed after manufacture shall be coated with cement grout to prevent rusting .
num prestress num .
the provisions of specification num prestressing of concrete shall apply with additional provisions as specified below num .
the stressing bed shall have the capacity to safely accommodate the forces involved for the pretensioned member being manufactured .
num .
the structural adequacy of a temporary stressing bed shall be certified by an engineer eligible for corporate membership of the institution of engineers australia .
such certification shall be made available to the superintendent prior to the commencement of any stressing .
num .
pressure gauges shall comply with the requirements of as num .
the diameter of the gauge shall not be less than nummm or shall be of such a type which will allow visual reading to the nearest nummpa .
the maximum jacking force shall correspond to a gauge pressure between num and num percent of the gauge capacity .
a device shall be fitted to the gauge to protect it against a sudden loss of pressure .
provision shall be made for the attachment of a second gauge .
num .
calculations to determine the nominated jacking force nominated elongations and corresponding gauge pressure shall be carried out for the coils in each lot using the representative test certificates .
specification num precast concrete members num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
all calculations shall be certified by an engineer who is eligible for corporate membership of the institution of engineers australia .
num .
where prestressing strand is to be deflected at tie down points as shown on the drawings then the steelwork which is cast into the beam to hold the deflected strand shall be hot dipped galvanised in accordance with asnzs num and shall be rebated nummm from the surface of the concrete .
the void so formed shall be filled with a compatible colour matching epoxy mortar and brought to a smooth even finish .
num .
at least one working day prior to the proposed pretensioning of each member or line of members the contractor shall submit to the superintendent stressing calculations engineers certification and the representative test certificates for each member .
hold point num .
the superintendent will consider the submitted documents for compliance with the specification prior to authorising the release of the hold point for each member or line of members .
num .
strands at the ends of units shall be cut off flush or left protruding as detailed on the drawings .
strands cut off flush shall be coated with epoxy resin to prevent rusting .
strands left protruding shall be coated with cement grout .
num concrete num .
the provisions of specification num concrete for structures shall apply .
in addition a .
if the contractor proposes to use external type vibrators for concrete compaction then evidence shall be provided to show that the same level of compaction can be achieved .
compaction b .
where steam curing is proposed to be used then it shall be low pressure wet steaming and in accordance with specification num concrete for structures .
any other form of accelerated curing will not be permitted .
steaming shall not commence until at least two hours after the last batch of concrete has been placed .
subsequent curing shall be in accordance with specification num .
curing num transfer of prestress num .
the contractor shall use methods that result in a relatively shock free transfer of stress during the release of tendons .
examples of noncomplying methods include cutting through with a disk grinder and severing the tendons directly and quickly with a naked flame .
num .
the transfer of the prestressing force from the stressing bed to the member shall not occur until the concrete has reached the minimum transfer strength specified in the drawings .
num .
prior to transfer all tendons shall be checked .
all tendons shall be tight .
num .
the slippage of each tendon into the concrete at transfer shall be visually inspected .
localised spalling around fully bonded strands at transfer as a result of excessive slippage shall be identified as a nonconformance .
specification num precast concrete members num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num records num .
the contractor shall enter all transfer information on a record sheet .
information shall include but not be limited to concrete compressive strength verification of the transfer method and order of release of tendons and any defects in the member .
num member tolerances a .
the precast pretensioned concrete i beams shall conform to the dimensions and details given on the drawings .
beams b .
the precast pretensioned concrete planks shall conform to the dimensions and details given on the drawings .
the overall depth of the plank shall be nummm nummm .
planks num marking of members num .
each member shall be clearly marked using distinguishing numbers or letters consistent with those shown on the drawings .
identification num num not used transport handling and storage num general num .
temporary storage areas shall be carefully cleared and levelled .
the beams and planks shall be supported over their full width at the lifting points only .
temporary supports shall be of timber of a minimum size nummm wide nummm thick and numm long .
the supports shall be on firm foundations and every precaution taken to prevent subsidence from occurring and to prevent the units bearing other than at the specified support positions .
num .
any units damaged or distorted in excess of the specified tolerances prior to or during installation shall be replaced at no expense to the principal .
num lifting num .
units shall be kept in the upright position at all times and shall only be lifted from the specified lifting points .
units shall be lifted using either a full length steel lifting beam or two cranes to ensure the force at the lifting points is in accordance with the drawings .
num transport num .
the beams shall be transported to the site in a manner which does not damage the beams .
beams shall not be transported until they are at least num days old and the concrete shall have reached its num day nominated strength .
specification num precast concrete members num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num stacking num .
precast concrete members may be stacked on top of each other .
each layer shall be separated from the next layer by at least nummm by temporary supports placed in line vertically at the support points .
no superimposed loads shall be placed on the units .
num .
where stacking of girders is required by the contractor the design of the stacking arrangement shall be carried out by an engineer eligible for corporate membership of the institution of engineers australia .
a certificate from the engineer shall be provided to the superintendent prior to stacking the girders stating that the proposed stacking arrangement will not overstress or damage any girder so stacked .
consideration shall be given to the relief of temperature shrinkage creep and any other effects on the stacking arrangements .
num num not used installation num general num .
no beam or plank shall be positioned in the works until the supporting substructure has gained num of its design strength .
beams and planks shall be positioned to a tolerance of nummm .
num welding of positive moment connection reinforcement at beam ends num .
the contractor shall observe the rules and procedures of welding laid down in asnzs num .
num plank joints num .
the plank locating dowels shall be fully installed and grouted before placing any shear key concrete .
num .
the shear keys between planks shall be adequately sealed at their lower section as detailed on the drawings before placing the shear key concrete .
num .
the shear key concrete shall be placed in a continuous operation for each shear key for each plank length .
concrete shall be compacted using a nummm maximum diameter pencil vibrator in accordance with specification num concrete for structures .
num .
joints between plank ends over the piers shall be filled with a cement mortar with a watercement ratio by mass not exceeding num and a sandcement ratio by mass of num .
the mortar shall be rodded into the joint to achieve maximum compaction .
num deck concrete overlay num .
the deck concrete overlay shall not be placed earlier than num days after the completion of all plank shear key joints .
specification num precast concrete members num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
before the deck concrete overlay is placed the top surface of the precast units shall be thoroughly cleaned with a water jet to remove dust and chips and any other foreign matter .
num .
immediately prior to commencing of concreting the top surface of the precast units shall be thoroughly wetted .
num .
all other works for the deck concrete overlay shall be in accordance with specification num concrete for structures .. num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num precast concrete members num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
num .
supply by principal clause num num if the principal will presupply precast concrete members include clause num in the contract specific requirements section complete and incorporate annexure numa into the specification document .
num annexure numa is provided for listing principal supplied items such as precast concrete beams and planks in which case any clauses relating to manufacture should be deleted and marked as not used .
the description to be entered in annexure numa should include identification with items shown on the drawings and the location for pickup of precast members .
specification num precast concrete members num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num precast members supplied by the principal num general num .
the number and type of pretensioned prestressed concrete beams and planks which will be supplied by the principal free of charge to the contractor is given in annexure numa .
these will conform to the dimensions specified on the drawings within the tolerances specified in the concrete institute of australia publication precast concrete handbook num .
all units have been precast under factory conditions .
num .
holes are provided on the beam webs for the attachment of falsework .
the drilling of other holes in the beam will not be permitted .
num supply num .
the beams and planks will be stored in the perth metropolitan area and will be available to the contractor at the times and locations shown in annexure numa .
the contractor shall provide all equipment plant and labour necessary for the transportation of the beams and planks to the works .
specification num precast concrete members num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa supply of precast members by principal type number location time of availability weeks after commencement of contract beam type a beam type b plank type a plank type b note this annexure is used in conjunction with clause num and should be varied as required to suit .
specification num precast concrete members num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title precast concrete members revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num precast concrete parapet panels copyright main roads western australia specification num precast concrete parapet panels num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num references reference to australian standard as num deleted sdse num whole document complete review no change asdse num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num precast concrete parapet panels num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num manufacture num num materials num num tolerances num num test panel num num handling and stacking num num acceptance num num num not used num installation num num installation of parapet panels num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num specification num precast concrete parapet panels num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num precast concrete parapet panels general num scope num .
the work under this specification is the manufacture supply and fixing of precast concrete panels .
the various types of panel which are required for the works are shown on the drawings .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below main roads specifications specification num concrete for structures specification num formwork specification num steel reinforcement specification num prestressing of concrete num num not used manufacture num materials num .
concrete shall comply with the requirements of specification num concrete for structures .
it is important that the concrete mix developed shall consistently produce a high quality finish and be of a uniform colour .
num .
where steam curing is proposed it shall be low pressure wet steaming .
any other form of accelerated curing shall not be permitted .
num .
reinforcement and formwork shall comply with relevant clauses of specifications num steel reinforcement and num formwork respectively .
num tolerances num .
the precast panels shall be manufactured to the dimensions shown on the drawings within the following tolerances a .
overall dimensions of length and width and height nummm .
specification num precast concrete parapet panels num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name b. crosssectional dimensions nummm .
c. deviations from a straight line shall be no more than nummm on a numm template .
num test panel num .
the contractor shall produce a test panel to the dimensions and finish of any one of the panels shown on the drawings .
num .
the test panel shall be kept in a convenient location at the casting yard .
num .
prior to the commencement of production of panels for incorporation in the works the contractor shall present the test panel for the superintendents inspection .
hold point num handling and stacking num .
the contractor shall be responsible for all handling and stacking of the precast panels and shall ensure that no panel is removed from a mould until the concrete has gained sufficient strength to safely withstand handling stresses .
num .
during handling and stacking operations the panels shall be supported only at the points detailed on the drawings and the contractor shall take due care to protect the surface of the panels from deterioration .
num .
any units damaged or distorted in excess of the specified tolerances prior to or during installation shall be replaced at no cost to the principal .
num acceptance num .
panels shall be rejected if they exhibit spalling or cracking including hairline cracks or staining or any substantial variation from the texture and colour of the test panel .
num num not used installation num installation of parapet panels num .
panels shall be fixed to the line and levels as indicated on the drawings with the following tolerances .
a .
change of alignment nummmnumm max b .
overall out of alignment nummm max c. out of alignment on adjacent panels nummm max num .
the finished line of the panels shall present a smooth and regular appearance .
num .
all lifting recesses in the panels shall be filled with grey pvc plugs .
specification num precast concrete parapet panels num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num precast concrete parapet panels num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
no guidance notes at this time specification num precast concrete parapet panels num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num precast concrete parapet panels num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title precast concrete parapet panels revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num structural steelwork copyright main roads western australia specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document formatting issues corrected sco num num hold point and internet link to certified companies added sdsea num num added information regarding scope of this document num added references asnzs num asnzs num asnzs num asnzs iso num asnzs iso num removed references asnzs num asnzs iso num num definitions added ndt rwc num subclauses added to include the construction category treatment grades prequalification of fabricators geometrical tolerances and purchasing steel .
clause regarding quality assurance and audit inspection combined and information added num information added to clause num and num .
num information on traceability added to clause num asnum added to clause num new clause added to cover supply of welding consumables num change in standard referenced num information added to clause num additional restrictions placed on temperature allowed num information added to clause num information added to clause num subclause added to cover welding plan welding supervisor num minor amendments relating to standards referenced num information added to clause num minor amendments relating to standards referenced num minor amendments relating to standards referenced specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num minor amendments relating to standards referenced information added to clause whole document reformatted sco num whole document reformatted to corporate branding guidelines mps num specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num quality control and workmanship num products and materials num num storage and handling num num traceability num num steel in plates sections and bars num num acceptance of steelsiin plates sections and bars num num testing of steel plates greater than num mm num num bolts nuts and washers num num acceptance of bolts nuts and washers num num supply of welding consumables num num num not used num fabrication num num general num num shop drawings num num precamber and distortions num num straightening and correction of distortions num num cutting and edge treatment num num splices num num holes for bolting num num welding num num stud shear connectors num num bolting num num holding down bolts num num certification of fabrication num num num not used num erection num num general num num bolted joints num num construction tolerances num num calibration and validation num num quality records num num num not used num specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num steel items supplied by principal num specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num structural steelwork general num scope num .
this specification covers the supply fabrication handling and erection of structural steelwork for bridges and gantries .
num .
this specification covers the use of structural steelwork with a specified minimum yield strength up to nummpa which has been designed to as num or as num .
num .
minor steel items balustrades and traffic barrier requirements are covered in specifications num num and num respectively .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num technical drawing series as num graphical symbols for general engineering welding and nondestructive examination as num iso metric hexagon bolts and screws product grade c bolts as num iso metric hexagon nuts product grade c as num hotdip galvanized coatings on threaded fasteners iso metric coarse thread series as num plane washers for metric bolts screws and nuts for general purposes as num metric screw threads for fasteners as num nondestructive testing ultrasonic testing of carbon and low alloy steel plate and universal sections test methods and quality classification as num certification of welders and welding supervisors as num certification of welding supervisors structural steel welding as num welding brazing and cutting of metals glossary of terms specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name as num guidelines for the erection of building steelwork as num steel structures as num bridge design series as num arc welding equipment welding power sources iec num mod australiannew zealand standards asnzs num coldformed structural steel hollow sections asnzs num highstrength steel fastener assemblies for structural engineering bolts nuts and washers part num technical requirements asnzs num highstrength steel fastener assemblies for structural engineering bolts nuts and washers part num verification testing for bolt assemblies asnzs num structural steel welding welding of steel structures asnzs num structural steel welding stud welding steel studs to steel asnzs num welding cables asnzs num structural steel hotrolled plates floorplates and slabs asnzs num structural steel hot rolled bars and sections asnzs num structural steel welded i sections asnzs iso num quality requirements for fusion welding of metallic materials part num comprehensive quality requirements asnzs num hotdip galvanized zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles asnzs num welding consumables covered electrodes for manual metal arc welding of nonalloy and fine grain steels classification asnzs num structural steelwork fabrication and erection asnzs iso num quality requirements for fusion welding of metallic materials comprehensive quality requirements asnzs iso num quality management systems requirements asnzs iso num qualification testing of welders fusion welding specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name asnzs iso num welding consumables solid wire electrodes tubular cored electrodes and electrodeflux combinations for submerged arc welding of nonalloy and fine grain steels classification asnzs iso num welding consumables fluxes for submerged arc welding and electroslag welding classification asnzs iso num welding consumables wire electrodes and weld deposits for gas shielded metal arc welding of non alloy and fine grain steels classification asnzs iso num welding consumables tubular cored electrodes for gas shielded metal arc welding of nonalloy and fine grain steel classification other standards wtia tnnum welding technology institute of australia technical note num care and conditioning of arc welding consumables iso num welding coordination tasks and responsibilities iso num welding calibration verification and validation of equipment used for welding including ancillary activities main roads specifications specification num safety traffic barrier systems specification num minor steel items specification num bridge balustrades specification num protective treatment of steelwork num definitions num .
the following particular definitions will apply num .
acrs is the australasian certification authority for reinforcing and structural steels .
acrs num .
aplac mra is the asia pacific laboratory accreditation cooperation mutual recognition arrangement .
aplac mra num .
ilac mra is the international laboratory accreditation cooperation mutual recognition arrangement .
ilac mra num .
itp is the detailed inspection and test plans for the works .
itp specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
mdr is the manufacturers data report .
mdr num .
nata is the national association of testing authorities australia .
nata num .
wsp is the welding service provider .
wsp num .
ndt is nondestructive testing .
ndt num .
rwc is the responsible welding coordinator rwc num quality control and workmanship num prequalification of fabricators num .
the fabricator must be third party certified under a recognised scheme to the level construction category num in accordance with asnzs num .
num construction category num .
unless otherwise noted on the design drawing construction category ccnum applies to all major steel structures and components supplied fabricated and erected in conformity to this specification .
for a listing of current certified companies refer httpwww.scacompliance.com.aucertifiedcompanies hold point num treatment grades num .
unless required otherwise treatment grade pnum applies to structures and components fabricated in accordance to this specification .
details of treatment grade pnum are to be found in asnzs num clause num num geometrical tolerances num .
unless required otherwise essential tolerances shall be class num in conformity with asnzs num appendix f for all structural steel structures and structural members .
num .
unless required otherwise functional tolerances shall be class num in conformity with asnzs num appendix f for all structures and structural members .
num .
where the designer allocates an essential andor functional tolerance class other than class num to a fabricated component or structural element this will be noted on the design drawing .
num quality assurance num .
the contractor is responsible for the development maintenance and implementation of all quality documentation to comply with asnzs num clause num .
num .
the contractor shall lay out and arrange the individual members or units to be inspected so that identification marks on each may be readily distinguished and so that each member or unit is accessible for audit inspection by the superintendent .
specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall assist the superintendent by turning the members or parts to permit examination of all sides .
the contractor shall supply all labour plant tools and scaffolding required to facilitate full inspection .
num .
the wsp shall a .
establish and maintain a certified quality management system to asnzs iso num asnzs num and asnzs iso num and to ensure that any subcontractors comply with this requirement .
b .
be responsible for all quality control and assurance activities necessary to ensure that the completed works comply with the specified requirements .
c. provide prior information to the superintendent in respect of any proposed subcontract works to enable the superintendent to assess and approve their suitability for that work .
d. submit a quality plan to the superintendent detailing how the quality assurance requirements are to be applied to each element of the works in accordance with asnzs clause num. e. provide an inspection test plan to the superintendent detailing the inspection and testing of welds in accordance with asnzs num clause num .
num purchasing steel num .
the contractor shall maintain a documented purchasing procedure in accordance asnzs num clause num .
num .
the contractor shall ensure that all materials or parts conform with the tests required by the standards and to other tests specified in this specification .
num .
all parties to the steel procurement must provide a supplier declaration of conformity sdoc conforming to as isoiec num as specified in asnzs num clause num .
num identification marks mark number each item of structural steelwork shall have its own unique item mark number which shall be used on all related schedules and documents .
this mark shall be clearly indicated on all members by durable identification marks to enable accurate identification on site .
specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name products and materials num storage and handling num storage num .
all members components and fasteners shall be stored in accordance with the relevant manufacturers instructions in such a way that damage and permanent deformation is not caused to them during preparation fabrication and assembly .
num .
all steel whether fabricated or not shall be stored in such a manner that corrosion is minimised .
generally storage at least num mm above the ground on timber gluts under cover shall be satisfactory .
rusted or bent or damaged steel shall be rejected .
num handling and stacking num .
all structural steelwork shall be handled and stacked in such a way that it is not damaged or permanently deformed before and after fabrication and during transit and on the site num .
storage handling and stacking of painted steel members shall comply with asnzs num clause num .
storage handling and stacking of galvanised steel members shall comply with asnzs num clause num .
num .
all bolts and nuts and washers and plates under num mm maximum dimension and small articles generally shall be packed separately in watertight containers .
num .
identification marks as specified in clause num shall be stencilled on each package in a noticeable position .
num .
all materials or parts used in the works shall be traceable to the test certificates .
the contractor shall establish and maintain a comprehensive system of identification records .
copies of all these records shall be forwarded to the superintendent on request and shall form part of the mdr .
num traceability num .
unless otherwise noted full traceability in accordance with asnzs num clause num is required for all structures and components supplied fabricated and erected in conformity to this specification .
num .
test certificates showing the results of mechanical tests and chemical analysis where applicable of the material or parts used in the works shall be retained by the contractor and shall form part of the mdr .
num .
all materials or parts used in the works shall be traceable to the test certificates .
the contractor shall establish and maintain a comprehensive system of identification records .
copies of all these records shall be forwarded to the superintendent on request and shall form part of the mdr .
specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the steel in the fabricated components must be traceable to the mill certificate issued by the steel manufacturer in conformity to the relevant product standard at all stages from supply and manufacture to incorporation into the works .
num .
all welders must clearly identify their work either through the use of weld maps or by marking their identification symbol adjacent to the each weld .
chalk crayons or other marking substances that may interfere with the application adherence or final appearance of any protective coating must not be used .
num steel in plates sections and bars new steel standards num .
all materials of steel plates bars and sections supplied by the contractor shall be new and shall conform to the standards specified below unless as varied by this specification .
identification num .
steel shall be identified in accordance with clause num of asnzs num clause num of asnzs num clause num of asnzs num or clause num of asnzs num as appropriate .
this identification shall be maintained during all phases of fabrication .
num .
steel shall comply with the requirements of the following standards a. hotrolled steel bars and sections asnzs num b. hotrolled steel plates asnzs num c. hollow sections asnzs num grade lnum d. welded isections asnzs num num .
structural steel hollow sections with silicon content greater than num shall not be used when steelwork is to be hot dip galvanised to asnzs num .
num acceptance of steels in plates sections and bars num .
acceptance of steels for the standards listed in clause num shall be through product certification by acrs .
num .
in the event of a dispute as to the compliance of the steel with any of the standards listed in clause num the reference testing shall be carried out by independent laboratories accredited by signatories to the ilac mra or the aplac mra .
the cost to carry out the independent testing and the cost for subsequent reporting shall be borne by the contractor .
hold point num .
the fabrication of steel shall not commence until the superintendent has reviewed and approved the acceptance of steels in plates sections and bars by the method in clause num .
specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num testing of steel plates greater than num mm num .
prior to fabrication the contractor shall test all plates of thickness in excess of num mm using continuous ultrasonic testing along all lines where welding shall be carried out and to establish that the plates are free from laminations and defects .
the method of testing shall be in accordance with as num .
num .
a written report on each line tested shall be forwarded direct from the nata registered testing laboratory to the superintendent within num hours of completion of the test .
the location and extent of inclusions andor laminations shall be detailed and sketched in the report .
num .
the welding of plates with thickness in excess of num mm shall not commence until the superintendent has reviewed and approved the acceptance of report described in clause num .
hold point num bolts nuts and washers new fasteners standards num .
all bolts nuts and washers supplied by the contractor shall be new and shall conform to the relevant australian standards unless as varied by this specification .
num .
the hardness of hotdip galvanised washers for use with high strength bolts shall have a hardness of num hrc .
num .
high strength bolts with associated nuts and washers shall comply with as num .
the length of the bolt shall be as shown on the drawings or if no length is shown shall be in accordance with the requirements of as num .
num .
all screw threads shall conform to the iso coarse pitch series thread in accordance with as num .
identification num .
all high strength bolts nuts and washers shall have the identification marks as detailed in clause num of as num .
num .
before the application of corrosion protection tolerance of screw threads for a. bolts conforming to asnzs num shall be class numg and b. bolts conforming to as num shall be class numg .
num .
before the application of corrosion protection tolerances of nut threads for a. nuts conforming to asnzs num shall be class numh and b. nuts conforming to as num shall be class numh .
num .
the galvanising of fasteners is to be in accordance with as num .
after galvanising the galvanised nuts shall be tapped oversize in accordance with as num .
num .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings nuts other than those for high strength bolts shall be normal size .
the strength grade of normal nuts to be associated with each strength grade of the bolt ubolt or other threaded component shall be as follows specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num associated strengths of normal grade nuts grade of bolt ubolt etc strength grade of nut num num num num num num num .
unless shown otherwise on the drawings the following types of washers shall be used a. with precision bolts bright metal washers normal series and b. with commercial bolts black metal washers normal series .
num .
unless shown otherwise on the drawings washers are generally not required under socket head cap screws .
num acceptance of bolts nuts and washers num .
acceptance of bolts nuts and washers for the standards listed in clause num shall be through test certificates that state that the bolts nuts and washers comply with all the provisions of asnzs num .
these test certificates shall be provided by the manufacturer or bolt importer and these certificates shall be supported by test reports from an independent laboratory accredited by signatories to the ilac mra or the aplac mra .
alternatively the test certificates with supporting test reports can be provided by the testing laboratory on behalf of the manufacturer importer or customer .
num .
the installation of bolts nuts and washers shall not commence until the superintendent has reviewed and approved the acceptance of bolts nuts and washers by the method in clause num .
hold point num supply of welding consumables num .
all welding consumables shall conform to the requirements of the relevant standard as listed in the relevant part of asnzs num and asnzs num .
num num not used specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name fabrication num general num .
all structural steelwork shall be fabricated as shown on the drawings and in accordance with the requirements of asnzs num and asnzs num sp quality except as varied by this specification .
num .
the steelwork shall be fabricated where applicable with all necessary temporary brackets straps gussets cleats fixings lifting eyes and the like necessary for erection and assembly .
num shop drawings num .
the contractor shall prepare shop drawings for the fabrication of all members to conform to asnzs num clause num .
num .
shop drawings shall show details of fabrication which are not explicit in the drawings .
details required include dimensions angles and weld preparation details and any contract specific requirements specified in clauses num to num .
num .
the details shown on the shop drawings shall be consistent with the drawings and shall comply with the following a. complete information regarding the member conforming to asnzs num clause num b. the marking plan shall show the location of each part in the structure c. shop drawings shall conform to the as num series d. welding and cutting definitions shall conform to as num e. welding symbols shall conform to as num f. complete information regarding the location type size and extent of all welds shall be clearly shown on the shop drawings .
these shop drawings shall clearly distinguish between shop and field welds g. joints or groups of joints in which it is especially important that the welding sequence and technique of welding be carefully controlled to minimise shrinkage stresses and distortion shall be noted on the shop drawings .
joints where no welding is permitted shall also be clearly indicated .
weld lengths specified on the drawings shall be the required effective lengths h. each member shall be clearly identified with the identification marks shown on the drawings .
each type of component shall be further identified to readily distinguish it from all other types and i. for assemblies all associated bolting accessories andor joining details shall be shown on the shop drawings .
specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
four copies of the shop drawings certified by the contractor as complying with the above requirements shall be submitted to the superintendent num working days before fabrication commences .
num .
variations of details shown on the shop drawings shall not be made without resubmission of appropriately amended shop drawings at least num working days before fabrication of any affected component of the works .
num .
the contractor shall be responsible for the correctness of the shop drawings .
acceptance of the shop drawings by the superintendent shall not relieve the contractor of any responsibility .
num precamber and distortions num .
the contractor shall be aware that the specified construction tolerances require making due allowance for precamber and distortions due to fabrication and erection processes and for careful matching of angles and dimensions at field joints .
num .
the drawings show precamber allowance for dead load .
the contractor shall allow for all other aspects of the construction method affecting pre camber .
num straightening and correction of distortions num .
all plates shall be flattened and all sections shall be straightened and made free from twist before any work is done on them to ensure assembled surfaces are flat within specified tolerances and adjacent surfaces are in close contact throughout .
the methods adopted for such flattening and straightening shall be such as not to damage or mark the material .
heating of plates and all sections shall not be permitted unless written approval is obtained from the superintendent prior to any heat application and at no time is heating to exceed numc .
num cutting and edge treatment num .
steelwork shall be cut only by sawing thermal cutting machining abrasive water jet cutting or laser cutting .
after cutting cut edges shall be ground to remove burrs dross and slag and to clean up any roughness including gouge marks and unintentional bevel .
the maximum allowable surface roughness shall comply with aszns num table num .
num .
unless required otherwise for welding or where shown differently on the drawings any surfaces produced by cutting shall be finished square unless a bevelled edge is called for and smooth and true to the required dimensions .
num .
ends of web stiffener plates shall be cut and finished to fit snugly and uniformly to girder flanges unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
num .
cut edges shall be finished as specified in clause num of asnzs num .
guillotined plates shall be cut to an oversize sufficient for the correct dimensions to be achieved after edge finishing as per clause num .
where galvanising is specified the edge surface preparation shall conform to the requirements of this specification .
specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
unless shown otherwise on the drawings all corners on cut edges shall be rounded to a radius of approximately num mm except where such edges are subsequently to be welded .
rolled edges need not be rounded provided the corners have a similar radius .
num .
a reentrant corner shall be shaped notch free to a radius of at least nummm by drilling a hole at the corner and cutting to the hole unless stated otherwise in the contract specification .
a reentrant cut shall be free of overcut .
num splices num .
the location of any splices required in the flanges or webs of the box girder additional to those shown on the drawings shall be suitably staggered and away from zones of high stress typically not within num m of beam bolted splice connection points and located near the contraflexure points away from pier centrelines as approved by the superintendent .
num holes for bolting num .
all bolt holes shall be drilled to a diameter num mm larger than the diameter of the bolt for bolts not exceeding nummm and nummm larger than the diameter of bolt for bolts exceeding nummm diameter unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
num .
drilled holes shall be cylindrical and perpendicular to the face of the member .
drilling shall be done by mechanical means .
num .
punching of holes shall be restricted to sub punching nummm undersize followed by reaming .
num welding num general num .
all welding shall comply with clause num of asnzs num .
all welding shall be category sp structural purpose in accordance with asnzs num .
num .
unless otherwise stated all welding shall comply with the requirements set out in asnzs num table num for construction category num .
welding works shall be carried out and managed under a quality management system qms in accordance with asnzs iso num .
num welding plan num .
a welding plan shall be provided as part of the planning process .
the welding plan must comply with the requirements in asnzs num clause num .
num qualifications of welding personnel num welder num .
welding shall only be carried out by welders meeting the requirements of asnzs num and iso num .
specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
not less than num working days prior to planned commencement of welding the following information on each welder shall be provided to the superintendent a. documentary evidence of the qualificationcertification currently held b. trade training background c. duration of employment with current employer d. nature of current employment duties and e. documentary evidence confirming each welder is qualified for each welding procedure that they shall apply to the works .
num .
the wsp shall a. maintain records clearly identifying the welders to each completed weld weld repair andor fabricated assemblyunit .
all records shall be available to the superintendent and b. on completion of the welding work a weld map showing the welds completed by each welder shall be part of the mdr .
num responsible welding coordinator num .
all welding shall be carried out under the supervision of the contractors responsible welding coordinator who shall meet the requirements of clause num of asnzs num and clauses num num and num of iso num .
num .
not less than num working days prior to commencement of welding the wsp shall identify the responsible welding coordinator who shall be responsible for the coordination of all operations in respect of the welding work .
the wsp shall provide to the superintendent details of the responsible welding coordinators qualifications certification and experience .
the responsible welding coordinator shall have delegated authority to deal directly with the superintendent on all issues relating to the welding work including a. welding procedure management b. welding quality management c. inspection and testing activities and d. signoff of completed work .
num welding supervisor num .
all welding shall be carried out under the supervision of the contractors responsible welding supervisor who shall meet the requirements of clause num of asnzs num .
specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
not less than num working days prior to commencement of welding the wsp shall identify the responsible welding supervisor who shall be responsible for ensuring that all welding is carried out in accordance with drawings plans welding procedures and other documentation .
the wsp shall provide to the superintendent details of the responsible welding supervisors qualifications certification and experience .
the responsible welding supervisor shall have delegated authority to deal directly with the superintendent on all issues relating to the welding work including a. welding procedure management b. welding quality management c. inspection and testing activities and d. signoff of completed work .
num welding inspector num .
all welding work shall be inspected by a suitably qualified welding inspector in accordance with clause num of asnzs num .
num .
not less than num working days prior to commencement of welding the wsp shall identify the welding inspector who shall be responsible for the inspection of the welding work .
the wsp shall provide to the superintendent details of the welding inspectors qualifications certification and experience .
num equipment num .
welding equipment and plant shall conform to as num and asnzs num and shall be maintained at all times in good condition .
it shall be of an appropriate type for the intended purpose and shall only be used in the circumstances and in the manner recommended by the manufacturer for size of electrodes currents voltages speeds of travel position of welding and fixtures and jigs shall be as laid down for the particular class of work .
num .
the type of machine and method used shall be written on the welding procedure qualification and welding plan .
num .
where welding is required to be done in conditions of a high risk of electric shock the welding equipment shall be fitted with a voltage reduction device vrd .
num .
the wsp is required to maintain a list of essential equipment and their capacities in accordance with clause num of asnzs iso num .
specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num welding consumables num .
all welding consumables to be used in welding procedures and for the works shall comply with the relevant standards .
electrodes used for manual welding shall conform to asnzs num .
tubular cored electrodes used for gas shielded and nogas shielded metal arc welding of nonalloy and fine grain steels shall conform to asnzs iso num .
solid wire electrodes tubular cored electrodes and electrodeflux combinations for submerged arc welding of nonalloy and fine grain steels shall conform to isnzs iso num .
fluxes for submerged arc welding shall conform to asnzs iso num .
wire electrodes for gas shielded metal arc welding of nonalloy and fine grain steels shall conform to asnzs iso num .
num .
the wsp shall produce and implement procedures for storing handling identification and the use of welding consumables in particular hydrogen controlled electrodes in accordance with manufactures specifications .
if no manufacturers specifications are available then the recommendations in wtia tnnum shall be adopted .
num welding procedures num .
welding procedures for all fillet and butt welds or any combination of either shall be complied as per asnzs num section num by the wsp who shall submit to the superintendent all welding procedure specifications wps and procedure qualification records pqr not less than num working days prior to the planned commencement of welding work to which the procedures shall apply .
num .
prior to the commencement of any welding procedure where the essential variables vary outside the limits specified in table numa of asnzs num the contractor shall submit to the superintendent a copy of the new procedures proven qualified by the wsp .
hold point num .
suitable runon and runoff tabs shall be used for all butt welds .
the tabs shall have the same thickness and preparation as the parts to be joined .
each weld pass shall terminate at least num mm beyond the edges of the parts to be joined .
welds shall be continuous for the full length .
num .
all welding for the work shall be shown in a detailed welding procedure specification in accordance with asnzs num .
each welding procedure shall be qualified by way of test pieces andor assemblies in accordance with asnzs num sp or as specific joint geometries not met by the standard .
num .
test pieces andor assemblies shall represent the actual conditions in the work in regard to location weather environment geometric arrangement plate thickness joint preparation and equipment and be of a minimum size recommended by asnzs num but of adequate size to carry out all testing .
num .
the superintendent shall be given at least num working days notification of the time and place where the welding and testing of all test pieces andor assemblies shall be carried out .
specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the wsp shall obtain any test andor inspection certificates from a laboratory with appropriate nata registration with all relevant results shown and a statement that the results comply with asnzs num .
num .
the wsp shall develop and maintain a document control procedure for all welding documentation including welding procedure specifications procedure qualification records welder qualifications and supporting documentation .
num cleaning of finished welds num .
all runon and runoff tabs shall be removed after the joint has cooled and the ends of the welds shall be finished smooth and flush with the faces of the abutting parts .
num .
slag shall be removed from completed welds .
the weld and adjacent base material shall be cleaned by brushing or other suitable means to remove spatter and foreign material .
welded joints shall not be painted until after the welds have been inspected and tested in accordance with clause num .
num .
where butt welds form part of a faying or contact surface the surfaces of the butt welds shall be dressed in accordance with clause num of asnzs num .
num inspection and testing of welds num .
inspection of welds shall be carried out in accordance with clause num of asnzs num clause num of as num and section bnum bnum and bnum of iso num .
the wsp shall produce an inspection and test plan itp for all welding work which shall contain the necessary elements and hold points to ensure the completed welding work complies with asnzs num and clause num of asnzs iso num requirements .
the wsp shall submit itps to the superintendent not less than num working days prior to commencement of the welding work .
num .
the wsp shall ensure that testing of all welds is carried out in accordance with clause num of asnzs num .
inspection is required before during and after welding .
visual scanning and visual inspection to be completed by a suitably qualified welding inspector as per asnzs num clause num .
test certificates issued by a nata registered laboratory for testing c to h shall be available to the superintendent and shall be part of the mdr .
the testing procedures to be used are a. visual scanning b. visual inspection c. radiographic testing d. ultrasonic testing e. magnetic particle inspection f. dye penetration testing specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name g. hardness testing and h. microstructure replica examination .
num .
the extent of testing and inspection of welds shall generally be in accordance with the recommendations in table b.numa of asnzs num but also as follows a. visual inspection of all weld preparations prior to welding b. inspection of all weld quality using testing procedures num.a and b c. testing of all full strength butt weld splices in tension and compression using testing procedure num.c d. for all other butt welds test num of the length of all welds longer than num m and one in twenty of all welds which are less than num m long using a combination of testing procedures num.c and d e. num of fillet welds tested using testing procedures num.e andor f and f. testing procedures num.g and h shall be used where directed by the superintendent .
num .
the contractor shall allow for all labour and plant required to lay out and arrange items for inspection and testing and carry out any necessary weld preparation including allowance for lost production time .
num .
should any welds not comply after testing they shall be repaired as per asnzs num clause num .
num .
all repaired welds shall be retested and for welds tested under clause num.d above retest three nonoverlapping samples each num of the length of all welds longer than num m and retest three in twenty of all welds which are less than num m long using a combination of testing procedures num.c and d. all repairing and retesting defective welds and additional testing shall be at no cost to the principal .
num .
the wsp shall only employ or contract australian institute for non destructive testing aindt certified ndt operators and qualified procedures .
num .
the wsp be responsible for the appropriate calibration or validation of measuring inspection and testing equipment used for assessing the quality of the construction .
iso num is to be used as the guideline document .
num nonconforming welds num .
any welds not meeting the requirements of this specification shall be rejected .
the wsp shall document all ncrs and shall submit proposals to the superintendent for correcting defective welds .
all corrective work shall be in accordance to asnzs num .
specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
repairing or correcting defective welds and any additional work or material required to repair defective welds shall be at no cost to the principal .
num stud shear connectors num general num .
stud shear connectors and stud welding shall comply with the requirements of asnzs num except as varied by this specification .
num responsible welding coordinator num .
all welding shall be carried out under the supervision of the contractors responsible welding coordinator who shall be qualified in accordance with clause num of asnzs num and meets the requirements of clauses num num and num of iso num .
num operator qualification num .
operators shall be qualified in accordance with section num of asnzs num .
num welding num .
after stud welding all beams shall comply with the tolerances given in clause num construction tolerances .
quality control for all stud welding shall be maintained in accordance with asnzs num .
distortion num testing num .
the testing of welded studs shall be in accordance with section num asnzs num .
in addition the superintendent shall select an additional five per cent of the remaining studs which shall also be tested .
all other studs shall be ring tested as per clause num asnsz num .
num inspection num .
inspection of welds shall be carried out in accordance with asnzs num .
the wsp shall produce an inspection and test plan itp for all welding work which shall contain the necessary elements and hold points to ensure the completed welding work complies with asnzs num and clause num of asnzs iso num requirements .
the wsp shall submit itps to the superintendent not less than num working days prior to commencement of the welding work .
num correction of defective stud welds num .
any stud welds not meeting the requirements of asnzs num shall be rejected .
repairs to defective welds except where allowed for in asnzs num shall not be allowed .
specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num bolting num .
all bolts nuts and washers are to be hotdip galvanised unless otherwise noted .
use one nut only to each bolt unless other noted on the design drawings .
project the threaded portion of the bolt a minimum of one thread and a maximum of five threads through the nut .
use washers tapered where necessary to give nuts and bolts satisfactory bearing .
all nuts and washers in each joint shall face in one direction and away from the general view .
general num .
the minimal nominal diameter of a bolt used for structural bolts shall be at least mnum .
the length of the bolt shall be such that at least one clear thread shows above the nut and at least one thread plus the thread run out is clear beneath the nut after snugtightening .
num .
the following types of bolts with their tightening procedures are designated on structural drawings when required nums nums numtf numtb numxtf and numxtb where num bolts are designated the washers and nuts shall also be hardened as for the bolt .
where numx bolts are designated the thread portion of the bolt shall be kept outside the shear plane of the parts being joined .
types of bolts num .
the tightening of bolts shall be carried out to the following procedures according to the grade of bolt bolt tightening a. bolting procedure nums refers to commercial bolts of strength grade num manufactured to as num tightened using a standard wrench to a snugtight condition .
all bolts shall be installed and tightened in accordance with procedures detailed in the drawings .
and b. bolting procedure nums refers to any bolt of strength grade num tightened using a standard wrench to a snugtight condition in the same way as for procedure nums .
the bolts used shall be high strength structural bolts of grade num manufactured to asnzs num. c. bolting procedure numtf and numtb refers to commercial bolts of strength grade num manufactured to asazs num fully tensioned with a calibrated torque wrench part turn tensioning or using load indicated washers in accordance with clause num of asnzs num .
all bolts shall be installed and tightened in accordance with procedures detailed in the drawings .
d. the torque wrench shall be calibrated to ensure that the appropriate bolt tension is achieved .
hold point num holding down bolts num .
all holding down bolts shall wherever applicable be welded into a cage to ensure accurate placement .
bolts nuts washers and cage assemblies shall be hotdip galvanised to give a coating of zinc of not less than num microns thick .
specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num certification of fabrication num .
prior to dispatch of work from the shop the contractor shall provide the superintendent with certification that each item fabricated conforms to the requirements of the drawings and the specification .
hold point num num not used erection num general num .
where applicable erection procedures shall comply with the requirements of clause num of asnzs num .
the erection sequence assumed in the design is shown on the drawings .
num .
upon completion of erection all temporary bracing shall be removed and holes plugged and steel made good in accordance with asnzs num clause num .
num .
during erection no steel shall be cut or heated or welded or drilled .
drifting may only be used for bringing parts into position and not to match unfair holes or enlarge holes or distort metal .
num .
permanent bolting of box girders shall not be carried out until the correct alignment and level has been obtained including any precamber allowance necessary .
num bolted joints num general num .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings all bolts and nuts for field joints shall be high strength friction grip bolts complying with asnzs num grade num .
num bolt installation and tightening num .
high strength bolts shall be installed and tightened in accordance with clause num of asnzs num and all bolts shall be installed and tightened in accordance with procedures detailed in the drawings .
num construction tolerances num .
measurements of length shall be checked with a standard steel measuring tape or band corrected to a standard temperature of numc .
num .
the contractor shall allow in the fabrication of the girders for all weld distortion so that on completion of erection the dimensions of the fabricated members shall be correct within the tolerances specified in accordance with appendix f of asnzs num and in addition shall not exceed the following a. deviation from flatness and straightness of all exposed plate surfaces and edges or from specified surface in the case of curved surfaces .
num mm in num m straight edge in any direction specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name b .
length of beam num mm c. deviation from specified alignment at points of support num mm d. deviation from specified alignment elsewhere num mm e. deviation from specified profile measured along edge of box girder num mm f. maximum permitted angular rotation of any crosssection relative to its specified location num degrees num calibration and validation num .
the contractor shall be responsible for the appropriate calibration or validation of measuring inspection and testing equipment used for assessing the quality of the construction .
e num quality records num .
all records specified as part of the mdr shall be retained by the wsp for a minimum period of num years .
num .
inspection of the erection shall comply with asnzs num clause num .
an inspection report is to be prepared including the details of the competent person the date of inspection identification of the item to be inspected and the results of the inspection .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa steel items supplied by principal description number location time of availability weeks after commencement of contract suppliers yard fabricators yard delete annexure if not applicable refer guidance notes specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
num .
principal supplied steel clause num num if there are to be principal supplied items insert clause num and complete annexure numa .
num if the principal is to presupply steel annexure numa is provided for listing principal supplied items such as presupplied rolled steel beams .
the description should include identification with items shown on the drawings as well as the length and weight and whether items are fabricated with shear studs bolt holes etc .
or unfabricated .
the location may need to be changed to suit arrangements made .
num note that the last column in annexure numa should be deleted if the paragraph on timing in clause num is included unaltered .
num clause num should generally be retained unless the contract is for erection only .
specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num supply of structural steel by the principal num .
the principal shall make available free of charge to the contractor structural steel as listed in annexure numa .
num .
the contractor shall provide for all cranage handling and loading and a means of transport for the structural steel .
handling num .
the structural steel will be available at the commencement of the contract .
timing num .
the contractor shall supply all other material in accordance with the specification necessary for fabricating connecting and supporting the structural steel .
associated materials specification num structural steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title structural steelwork revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager contracts num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num minor steel items copyright main roads western australia specification num minor steel items num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date num num num num scope amended for clarification information added to clause regarding traceability cutting methods added information added to comply with asnzs num sdse num num asnzs num asnzs num asnzs iso num iso num references added sdse num num as num changed to asnzs num num as num changed to clause num of asnzs num num asnzs num num changed to clause num of asnzs num num clause heading changed to compliance and traceability clause num and num added whole document reformatted sco num num num num references to standards minimum thickness of steel corrosion protection num num references amendments to standards title asnzs num sdse num num reference to sockets for balustrades and traffic barriers deleted sdse num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num minor steel items num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num quality control and workmanship num num num not used num products and materials num num structural steel for plates bars and sections num num bolts nuts screws and washers num num testing and identification of material num num damaged steel num num storage of materials num num assembly procedures num num acceptance of prototype components num num identification marks num num num not used num fabrication num num cutting and edge treatment num num splices num num holes for bolting num num welding num num stud shear connectors num num fabrication compliance and traceability num num protective treatment num num transport handling and storage num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num supply of minor steel items by the principal num specification num minor steel items num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num minor steel items general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply fabrication protective treatment and delivery of steel expansion joint protection angles roadside furniture signage and poles and associated steel items including dowels bolts nuts screws and washers .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num iso metric hexagon bolts and screws product grades a and b as num iso metric hexagon bolts and screws product grades c as num iso metric hexagon nuts including thin nuts slotted nuts and castle nuts as num hotdip galvanised coatings on threaded fasteners iso metric coarse thread series as num plain washers for metric bolts screws and nuts for general engineering purposes as num metric screw threads for fasteners as num iso metric hexagon socket head cap screws as num electroplated zinc electrogalvanised coatings on ferrous articles batch process as num fasteners electroplated coatings as num wrought alloy steels stainless steel bars and semi finished products as num steel structures australian new zealand standards asnzs num coldformed structural steel hollow sections specification num minor steel items num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name asnzs num highstrength steel fastener assemblies for structural engineering bolts nuts and washers part num technical requirements asnzs num highstrength steel fastener assemblies for structural engineering bolts nuts and washers part num verification testing for bolt assemblies asnzs num structural steel welding welding of steel structures asnzs num structural steel welding stud welding steel studs to steel asnzs num structural steel hot rolled plates floor plates and slabs asnzs num structural steel hot rolled bars and sections asnzs num structural steelwork fabrication and erection asnzs iso num quality management systems requirements iso standards iso num mechanical properties of corrosionresistant stainless steel fasteners iso num quality management systems main roads specifications specification num protective treatment of steel work num quality control and workmanship num construction category num .
unless otherwise noted construction category ccnum applies to all minor steel components supplied fabricated and erected in conformity to this specification .
num .
where the designer allocates a construction category other than ccnum to a fabricated component or structural element this will be noted on the design drawing .
num num not used products and materials num structural steel for plates bars and sections num .
structural steel for plates bars and sections shall conform to the requirements of asnzs num grade num and asnzs num grade num unless noted otherwise on the drawings or the specification .
specification num minor steel items num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
structural steel hollow sections shall conform to the requirements of asnzs num .
unless noted otherwise on the drawings sections with a nominal thickness less than nummm shall be grade num and sections with a nominal thickness equal to or greater than nummm shall be grade numlnum .
num bolts nuts screws and washers num .
all bolts nuts screws and washers shall conform with the relevant australian standards listed in clause num .
num .
high strength bolts with associated nuts and washers shall be manufactured in accordance with asnzs num and installed in accordance with asnzs num .
the length of the bolt shall be as shown on the drawings or if no length is shown shall be in accordance with asnzs num .
num .
all screw threads shall conform to the iso coarse pitch series thread in accordance with as num .
num .
before the application of corrosion protection tolerance of screw threads a. for bolts conforming to asnzs num shall be class numg and b. for bolts conforming to as num shall be class numg .
num .
before the application of corrosion protection tolerances of nut threads for a. nuts conforming to asnzs num shall be class numh and b. nuts conforming to as num shall be class numh num .
the galvanising of fasteners is to be in accordance with as num .
after galvanising the galvanised nuts shall be tapped oversize in accordance with as num .
num .
unless shown otherwise on the drawings nuts other than those for high strength bolts shall be normal size .
the strength grade of normal nuts to be associated with each strength grade of the bolt ubolt screw stud or other threaded component shall be as follows specification num minor steel items num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name grade of bolt ubolt etc .
strength grade of nut num num num num num num num .
the strength grade required for grades a and b precision bolts and screws shall be as shown on the drawings .
num .
unless shown otherwise on the drawings the stainless steel used in the manufacture of nonhigh strength bolts nuts and dowels shall conform to iso num grade numl for welded components or grade num for nonwelded components .
unless shown otherwise on the drawings the stainless steel used in the manufacture of high strength bolts and nuts shall conform to american iron and steel institute grade num mo and have a minimum ultimate tensile strength of nummpa .
num .
prevailing torque locknuts also known as selflocking nuts shall be the insert type having a nylon or similar plastic insert such as nyloc nuts or similar approved by the superintendent .
those used with commercial grade bolts or ubolts shall strength grade num or higher .
num .
unless shown otherwise on the drawings the following types of washers shall be used a .
with precision bolts bright metal washers normal series b .
with commercial bolts black metal washers normal series c. with stainless steel bolts stainless steel washers grade num normal series .
num .
washers are generally not required under socket head cap screws .
num .
acceptance of bolts nuts and washers shall be through test certificates that state that the bolts nuts and washers comply with all the provisions of asnzs num .
these test certificates shall be provided by the manufacturer or bolt importer and these certificates shall be supported by test reports from an independent laboratory accredited by signatories to the ilac mra or the aplac mra .
alternatively the test certificates with supporting test reports can be provided by the testing laboratory on behalf of the manufacturer importer or customer .. num testing and identification of material num .
the contractor shall ensure that all materials or parts conform with the tests required by the standards and with other tests specified in this part of the specification .
num .
test certificates showing the results of mechanical tests and chemical analysis where applicable of the material or parts used in the works shall be retained by the contractor .
specification num minor steel items num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
all materials or parts used in the works shall be identified with the tests .
the contractor shall establish and maintain a comprehensive system of identification records .
copies of all these records shall be forwarded to the superintendent on request .
num damaged steel num .
steel which is bent except as required for fabrication damaged or excessively rusted shall not be used in the works .
num storage of materials num .
all steel whether fabricated or not shall be stored in such a manner that corrosion is minimised .
generally storage at least nummm above the ground on platforms slabs or other supports under cover will be satisfactory .
num .
bolts nuts screws and washers not promptly incorporated in the work shall be stored in a waterproof shelter clear of the ground and protected from damage .
num assembly procedures num .
details of the procedures for assembly and fabrication shall be submitted with the contractors quality plan .
these procedures shall be comprehensive and shall cover all aspects of the work .
the procedures shall include but not be limited to quality plan a .
assembly procedures including dimensional control and details of manufacturing jigs b. welding procedures c. qualification of welds including stud welding d. qualification and identification of welders e. qualification of welding supervisors f. system of identification of welders with work g. quality control measures h. quality control check lists and forms i .
system for identification of components j .
procedures for trial assembly k. procedures for repair of nonconforming materials components and assemblies l. procedures for transport handling and storage including measures to prevent distortion and damage to the steelwork and its protective coating specification num minor steel items num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name m. procedure for curving num .
at least one week prior to commencing fabrication the contractor shall submit a programme to the superintendent showing the proposed sequence of operations .
hold point num acceptance of prototype components num .
the contractor shall give num working days notice in writing before commencing work and this shall be allowed for in the programme .
for the first item of any component fabricated the contractor shall make a thorough dimensional check .
the contractor shall submit to the superintendent details of this dimensional check and certification that the dimensions are in conformity with the requirement of the drawings and the specification .
no further fabrication work on similar items shall be carried out until submission of this certification .
hold point num identification marks num .
each component shall be metal stamped with an identification mark which remains recognisable after protective treatment but which is located in a hidden or inconspicuous position after erection .
each type of component shall be designated with a mark which is readily distinguishable from the marks for all other types .
identification num num not used fabrication num cutting and edge treatment num .
steelwork may be cut by flame cutting sawing machining or guillotining unless specified otherwise .
surfaces produced by such cutting shall be finished square unless a bevelled edge is called for and true to the required dimensions .
shearing by nibbling action shall not be permitted .
num .
cut edges shall be finished as specified in clause num of asnzs num .
guillotined plates shall be cut to an oversize sufficient for the correct dimensions to be achieved after edge finishing .
where galvanising is specified the edge surface preparation shall conform to the requirements specified in clause num of the specification .
num .
unless shown otherwise on the drawings all corners on cut edges shall be rounded to a radius of approximately nummm except where such edges are subsequently to be welded .
rolled edges need not be rounded provided the corners have a similar radius .
num splices num .
except where shown on the drawing splices shall not be permitted .
num holes for bolting num .
the diameters of the bolt holes shall be nummm greater than the diameters of the bolts shown on the drawings unless otherwise specified .
specification num minor steel items num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
holes may be either drilled fullsize or reamed to fullsize after subdrilling or subpunching .
in all cases subdrilling may be substituted for sub punching and holes may be drilled from the solid metal instead of being subpunched or subdrilled and reamed provided such drilling is done with the material assembled in the same manner as is required for reamed work .
num .
subpunched and subdrilled holes shall be smaller in diameter than the nominal diameter of bolts by nummm .
num .
for subpunched holes the diameter of the die shall not exceed the diameter of the punch by more than nummm .
holes shall be clean cut without torn or ragged edges .
reamed or drilled holes shall be cylindrical and perpendicular to the face of the member .
reaming and drilling shall be done by mechanical means .
num .
connecting parts shall be assembled and held securely while being reamed or drilled and shall be matchmarked before separating the parts .
burrs on the outside surfaces shall be removed .
num .
holes for field connections may be subpunched or subdrilled and reamed or drilled from the solid to a hardened steel template not less than nummm thick and all corresponding holes in the members to which they connect shall be reamed or drilled to the same template .
alternatively these connections may be reamed or drilled with the members assembled .
num welding num .
all welding shall conform to clause num of asnzs num for construction category num unless otherwise specified .
num .
weld quality shall be as nominated on the drawings .
all weld spatter shall be removed before protective treatment is applied .
num stud shear connectors num .
stud shear connectors and stud welding shall comply with the requirements of asnzs num except as varied by this specification .
num .
operators shall be qualified in accordance with section num of asnzs num .
operator qualifications num .
any stud welds not meeting the requirements of asnzs num shall be rejected .
repairs to defective welds except where allowed for in asnzs num shall not be allowed .
num fabrication compliance and traceability num .
prior to dispatch of work from the fabrication shop the contractor shall provide the superintendent with certification that each item fabricated conforms to the requirements of the drawings and the specification .
hold point num .
all steel items shall be fabricated by steel manufactures that have certified quality systems to iso num or asnzs num .
specification num minor steel items num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
steel items shall be traced from the point of manufacture to its final location in accordance with asnzs num for construction category num .
num protective treatment num general num .
all minor items of steelwork shall be hot dip galvanised unless otherwise specified .
galvanise num .
all protective treatment including hot dip galvanising shall be in accordance with specification num protective treatment of steel work unless otherwise specified .
num protective treatment for bolts nuts etc .
num .
stainless steel items do not require protective treatment .
num .
unless shown otherwise on the drawings all other bolts ubolts screws nuts and washers shall be protected with the following protective treatment item to be protected protective treatment high strength bolts and associated nuts and washers and commercial bolts screws and ubolts and associated nuts and washers hotdip galvanised in accordance with as num precision bolts and screws and associated nuts and washers prevailing torque locknuts electroplated with zinc in conformity with the principles of as num or for sizes over mnum of as num classification fezn numc type c socket head cap screws blueblack or chemical black finish plus a residual coating of light oil .
prior to placing into position in the bridge socket head cap screws shall be degreased and coated with approved zinc rich epoxy based primer .
num transport handling and storage num .
the contractor shall ensure that loading transport unloading stacking and handling operations are carried out in such a way that the items are protected from distortion and that galvanised surfaces are protected from damage .
the contractor shall store components in such a manner that the freshly galvanised surfaces are protected from the attack of white rust .
num num not used specification num minor steel items num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num minor steel items num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa supply of minor steel items by the principal description number location time of availability weeks after commencement of contract specification num minor steel items num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
num .
supply by the principal clause num num if the principal will presupply steel include clause num and complete annexure numa .
num annexure numa is provided for listing principal supplied items .
the description should include identification with items shown on the drawings and the location for pickup of items .
num if not applicable delete annexure numa .
specification num minor steel items num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num supply of items by the principal num .
the principal will make available free of charge to the contractor steel items as listed in annexure numa .
num .
the contractor shall provide for all cranage for handling and loading and a means of transport for these items .
handling num .
the contractor shall supply all other material necessary for completing the works .
associated materials specification num minor steel items num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title minor steel items revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager contracts num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num bridge balustrades copyright main roads western australia specification num bridge balustrades num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num num deleted reference to as num and asnzs num inserted references to welding consumables standards asnzs iso num asnzs isonum asnzs iso num and asnzs num asdse num num references amendments to standards title asnzs num sdse num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num bridge balustrades num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num specifications for steel num num test certificates num num identification records num num identification marks num num storage num num num not used num fabrication num num general num num shop drawings num num verticality of posts and balusters num num curving of rails num num cutting and edge treatment num num splices num num bolting num num welding num num protective treatment num num transport handling and stacking num num num not used num erection num num general num num tolerances num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure xxxa hnum sp num heading hnum sp error bookmark not defined .
specification num bridge balustrades num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num bridge balustrade general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply fabrication protective treatment and erection of steel handrailing and balustrading .
num .
minor steel items are covered in specification num .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num technical drawings as num graphical symbols for general engineering welding and nondestructive examination as num iso metric hexagon bolts and screws product grade commercial as num iso metric hexagon nuts including thin nuts slotted nuts and castle nuts as num structural steel hollow sections as num plain washers for metric bolts screws and nuts for general purposes as num steel structures australiannew zealand standards asnzs num high strength bolts with associated nuts and washers for structural engineering asnzs num structural steel welding welding of steel structures asnzs num structural steel welding stud welding steel studs to steel asnzs num structural steel hot rolled plates floorplates and slabs asnzs num structural steel hot rolled bars and sections specification num bridge balustrades num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name asnzs num welding consumables covered electrodes for manual metal arc of nonalloy and fine grain steels classification asnzs iso num welding consumables tubular cored electrodes for gas shielded and ongas shielded metal arc welding of nonalloy and fine grain steels classification iso num mod asnzs iso num welding consumables tubular cored electrodes for gas shielded metal arc welding of creepresisting steels classification iso num mod asnzs iso num welding consumables tubular cored electrodes for gas shielded and nongas shielded metal arc welding of highstrength steel classification iso num mod main roads specifications specification num minor steel items specification num protective treatment of steel work num num not used products and materials num specifications for steel num general num .
all materials supplied by the contractor shall be new and shall conform to the standards specified below .
new steel num .
unless otherwise specified all structural steel sections shall be grade num in accordance with asnzs num .
standards num rhs rails and posts num .
structural steel hollow sections shall conform to the requirements of as num and shall be grade num unless noted otherwise on the drawings .
rhs num test certificates num .
the contractor shall ensure that all materials conform to the tests required by the standards .
certificates num .
test certificates showing the results of mechanical tests and chemical analysis where applicable of the material used in the works shall be retained by the contractor .
specification num bridge balustrades num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num identification records num .
all materials used in the works shall be identified with the test certificates .
the contractor shall establish and maintain a comprehensive system of identification records .
copies of all these records shall be forwarded to the superintendent on request .
id records num identification marks num .
each item of steelwork shall have its own item mark number which shall be used on all related schedules and documents .
this mark shall be clearly indicated and remain recognisable after protective treatment on all members by durable identification marks to enable accurate identification on site .
each type of component shall be designated with a mark which is readily distinguishable from the marks for all other types .
id marks num storage num .
all steel whether fabricated or not shall be stored in such a manner that corrosion is minimised .
generally storage at least nummm above the ground on platforms slabs or other supports and under cover will be satisfactory .
excessively rusted or bent or damaged steel shall be rejected by the superintendent .
num num not used fabrication num general num .
all steelwork shall be fabricated as shown on the drawings and in accordance with the requirements of as num except as varied by this specification .
num .
the contractor shall supply fabricate transport and erect all railing to the deck and approaches of the bridge as shown on the drawings .
the railing shall be fabricated from steel sections .
num shop drawings num .
the contractor shall prepare shop drawings to show details of fabrication which are not explicit on the drawings .
details required include dimensions angles cambering profiles splice locations weld preparation details and any contract specific requirements .
num .
four copies of the shop drawings certified by the contractor as complying with the above requirements shall be submitted to the superintendent num working days before fabrication commences .
hold point num .
the contractor shall be responsible for the correctness of the shop drawings .
acceptance of the shop drawings by the superintendent shall not relieve the contractor of any responsibility .
specification num bridge balustrades num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num verticality of posts and balusters num .
all balusters and posts shall be vertical as shown on the drawings .
the contractors attention is drawn to the need to detail individually angled brackets and joints to ensure that this requirement is met .
num curving of rails num .
where the rails are shown on the drawings to be curved they shall be curved to form that shape without excessive springing forces being applied to the posts .
the methods adopted for curving the rails shall be such as not to excessively distort the section or damage the material .
num cutting and edge treatment num .
steelwork may be cut by flame cutting sawing or guillotining unless specified otherwise .
surfaces produced by such cutting shall be finished square unless a bevelled edge is called for and true to the required dimensions .
shearing by nibbling action shall not be permitted .
num .
cut edges shall be finished as specified in as num .
the edge surface preparation shall conform to the requirements specified for galvanising .
num .
unless shown otherwise on the drawings all corners on cut edges shall be rounded to a radius of approximately nummm except where such edges are subsequently to be welded .
num splices num .
posts shall not contain splices .
num .
the location of any splices required in the rails additional to those shown on the drawings shall be subject to approval by the superintendent .
num bolting num holes for bolting num .
all bolt holes shall be drilled to a diameter nummm larger than the diameter of the bolt unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
num .
reamed or drilled holes shall be cylindrical and perpendicular to the face of the member .
reaming and drilling shall be done by mechanical means .
num bolt specification num .
manufacture grade num bolts shall comply with as num and nuts shall comply with as num .
plain washers shall comply with as num .
grade num bolts and associated nuts and washers shall comply with asnzs num .
num .
installation bolt installation shall be in accordance with as num .
num welding num .
all welding shall be in accordance with asnzs num .
all welds shall be category sp unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
specification num bridge balustrades num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
all electrodes used for manual welding shall conform to asnzs num .
flux cored electrodes used for semiautomatic welding shall conform to as num .
num .
all weld spatter shall be removed before protective treatment is applied .
num protective treatment num .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings all steel components covered by this specification shall be hotdip galvanised in accordance with specification num protective treatment of steelwork .
num transport handling and stacking num .
the contractor shall ensure that loading transport unloading stacking and handling operations are carried out in such a way that all steelwork shall be protected from distortion and that galvanised surfaces are protected from damage .
the contractor shall store components in such a manner that the freshly galvanised surfaces are protected from the attack of white rust .
num num not used erection num general num .
erection of steel railing shall comply with the requirements of as num .
num .
after fabrication all weld splatter and slag shall be removed by suitable mechanical means and all sharp edges and rough welds rounded off .
num tolerances num .
the finished railing shall be erected to the tolerances set out below a .
variation from true plan positions of posts nummm b .
variation of dimensions in elevation nummm c. variation of line of rails from specified vertical and horizontal profile nummm num .
the final appearance of the bridge will depend very much on the profile of the railings and therefore in addition to the above tolerances the contractor shall take every care to ensure that the railings are erected to smooth curves which reflect the design profiles of the bridge .
in particular the contractor shall ensure that a smooth profile is maintained in the top rail after all site connections have been completed .
num num not used as built and handover requirements specification num bridge balustrades num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num bridge balustrades num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa supply of balustrade items by the principal description number location time of availability weeks after commencement of contract note this annexure is used in conjunction with clause num and should be varied as required to suit .
delete this note and the annexure where not applicable specification num bridge balustrades num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
num .
supply by the principal clause num num if the principal will presupply balustrade items include clause num in the contract specific requirements and complete annexure numa .
num annexure numa is provided for listing principal supplied items .
the description should include identification with items shown on the drawings as well as the length and whether items are fabricated with bolt holes etc .
or unfabricated .
the location will need to be worded to suit arrangements made .
num if there are no principal supplied items delete annexure numa .
num clause num should generally be retained unless the contract is for erection only .
num .
removal of existing balustrade clause num num if the contract includes the removal of existing balustrade clause num should be included in the contract specific requirements .
num where necessary this clause can be edited to include the storage site for the removed balustrade if salvageable for reuse or disposed to an offsite tip .
num .
shop drawings num shop drawings provide an assurance that the requirement for vertical posts and balusters and smooth profiles of rails have been interpreted correctly and adequately detailed .
num this requirement is generally necessary in urban bridges but generally not necessary in straight rural bridges in which case clauses num to num may generally be deleted and references to australian standards no longer relevant should be deleted .
specification num bridge balustrades num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num supply of material by the principal num .
the principal will make available free of charge to the contractor steel items as listed in annexure numa .
num .
the contractor shall provide for all cranage for handling and loading and a means of transport for the items .
handling num .
the contractor shall supply all other material necessary for completing the works .
associated materials num removal of existing balustrade num .
the existing posts and balustrade shall be removed from the bridge one side at a time in conjunction with the replacement of the overlay in such a manner as to minimise damage and allow the reuse of the materials .
removal num .
the removed materials shall be transported to a storage yard of the principals nominated by the superintendent .
storage specification num bridge balustrades num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title bridge balustrades revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num protective treatment of steelwork copyright main roads western australia specification num protective treatment of steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date num num amended to specify design according to as num and surface preparation to asnzs num sdse num num num num num num num num num num annexure numa new clause added primer changed surface preparation for faying surfaces amended surface preparation requirements amended requirements for galvanising amended shop priming amended intermediate coating thickness changed finishing coat changed finish colour changed treatments num num amended sdse num whole document reformatted sco num num reference made to asnum sdse num num new clause added num para num amended num para num amended num numd amended numf added annexure numa treatments num amended num para num of clause num amended sdse num num references amendments to standards titles as num num num num asnzs num apas numf s sdse num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num protective treatment of steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num products and materials num num coating systems num num general requirements and information to be provided by contractor num num num not used num operations num num pre treatment num num surface preparation num num galvanising num num shop priming num num intermediate coating num num finishing coats num num finish colour num num application num num acceptance testing num num protection num num site repairs num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num schedule of surface treatments num specification num protective treatment of steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num protective treatment of steelwork general num scope the work under this specification consists of the surface preparation galvanising and application of coating systems for the protective treatment of steelwork .
annexure numa contains a list of approved surface treatments for use in the works .
approved treatments num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num hot dip galvanised coatings on threaded fasteners as num methods of test for paints and related materials as num metal finishing preparation and pretreatment of surfaces as num metal finishing preparation and pretreatment of surfaces removal of oil grease and related contamination .
as num metal finishing preparation and pretreatment of surfaces power tool cleaning as num metal finishing preparation and pretreatment of surfaces abrasive blast cleaning of steel .
as num metal finishing preparation and pretreatment of surfaces pickling .
as num metal finishing preparation and pretreatment of surfaces pictorial surface preparation standards for painting steel surfaces .
as num colour standards for general purposes as num organic zincrich primer as num inorganic zinc silicate paint as num steel structures specification num protective treatment of steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name australiannew zealand standards asnzs num glossary of paint and painting terms asnzs num guide to the protection of structural steel against exterior atmospheric corrosion by use of protective coatings part num paint coatings asnzs num guide to the protection of structural steel against exterior atmospheric corrosion by the use of protective coatings part num hot dip galvanizing asnzs num inorganic zinc silicate paint asnzs num site testing of protective coatings method num determination of surface profile asnzs num hotdip galvanised zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles australian paint approval scheme apas num latex coating for protection of steel apas num inorganic zinc coating for protection of steel apas num polyurethane coatings for the protection of steel apas num organic zinc rich coating for protection of steel apas num catalysed polyester and vinylester coating for protection of steel apas num catalysed acrylic coating for protection of steel apas num epoxy numpack durable primer for protection of steel in atmosphere apas num medium build numpack epoxy coating for the long term protection of steel other standards bs num british standard num methods of test for paints num definitions num .
definitions of painting terms contained in as num shall apply where used in the specification or when used in relation to the works .
terms unless otherwise specified all work required to achieve the specified protective treatment of steelwork in the completed structure shall be carried out in accordance with the recommended procedures and guidelines set out in asnzs num and asnzs num as appropriate .
procedures num paint supply num .
all steelwork to be used in the works shall be painted in australia using a paint system supplied from a company certified to asnzs iso num .
specification num protective treatment of steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
all paint products used in the works shall be approved by the australian paint approval scheme .
num not used products and materials num coating systems num galvanising num .
galvanised coatings shall be carried out in accordance with asnzs num subject to the adoption of surface preparation or other procedures where necessary to avoid a. brittle uneven andor loosely adhering coatings on flame cut edges b. pinholes in galvanised coatings along welds and c. white rust ferrous rust and other surface contamination or stains which diminish the appearance or function of the galvanised coating .
num .
at least num days prior to the application of the galvanised coating the contractor shall submit to the superintendent details of procedures which eliminate the above coating deficiencies .
hold point num paint coating systems for steel num .
after priming permanently exposed surfaces of ungalvanised steelwork shall be painted with an intermediate coat of paint followed by finishing coats paint complying with apas num .
num .
the contractor shall also carry out protective treatment on site using num pack zincrich epoxy primer conforming to as num for areas of steel members which have been site welded .
refer also clause num .
num .
each coating type shall be of a different colour or shade to ensure adequate coverage and ease of inspection .
num .
surface treatment shall be in accordance with the requirements of asnzs num and asnzs num except as varied by this specification .
num special areas num .
areas in contact with concrete areas of steelwork in contact with concrete in the completed structure shall receive the same surface preparation and shop applied coatings as that employed on adjacent exposed areas for a minimum distance of nummm from the exposed surface .
areas further than nummm from an exposed surface shall be left unpainted .
note inorganic zinc silicate is not recommended for casting in concrete .
specification num protective treatment of steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
frictiontype bolted joints the faying surfaces of frictiontype bolted connections designed to as num shall be prepared and tested in accordance with clause num asnzs num .
num .
hollow members the treatment of hollow members shall be as follows a. galvanised members internal surfaces of galvanised members shall be galvanised according to asnzs num. b .
painted members the inner surfaces of fully sealed hollow sections shall receive no protective treatment except that all surfaces shall be dry and free of all loose materials .
num .
site welded connections where surfaces are to be welded all surface protection shall be removed for a minimum distance of num mm from the edge to be welded in order to prevent harmful effects to welders or to the quality of welds .
reinstatement is in accordance with clause num .
num general requirements and information to be provided by contractor num shop and field treatment num .
shop treatment shall comprise the galvanising or the abrasive blast cleaning of all surfaces plus the application of all paint coatings specified except that a .
areas adjacent to field welds shall be masked to leave an uncoated margin of num mm for the first coat and an additional num mm margin for each subsequent coat .
b .
the final finishing coat of a multicoat system on exterior exposed surfaces may be applied on site following the completion of all construction activities that may cause damage to the coatings .
num .
field treatment shall comprise the application of remaining finishing coats and the repair of the protective treatment at all field weld areas and at areas damaged in the course of construction .
num .
prior to the application of any treatment the contractor shall submit to the superintendent the proposed details of work to be carried out by shop treatment and that to be carried out by field treatment .
hold point num .
the details shall include a program of the work covering the following specification num protective treatment of steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name a .
the proposed timing for carrying out repairs to the protective treatment at areas in contact with concrete .
b .
the proposed timing for carrying out protective treatment to the surfaces which are inaccessible in the completed structure and outside of field welds .
num paint num .
all paints shall be supplied by a single manufacturer .
paints shall be australian paint approval scheme apas approved products conforming to the nominated apas specifications and approved by the principal for the specified application .
num.at least fourteen days prior to commencing the protective treatment of steelwork the contractor shall submit the following details for the superintendents approval hold point a .
name of paint manufacturer .
b .
product names of paints .
c. technical data sheets and hazard information for all paints .
d. documentary evidence from the manufacturer certifying compliance of paints with relevant apas specifications .
num testing num .
testing of the paint to assess conformity to specifications shall be included in the contractors inspection and test plan .
inspection and test plan num records num .
the contractor shall record details of the paints used on the works .
the records shall include but not be limited to the following a .
paint manufacturers name .
b .
product names of all paints .
c. batch numbers of each product .
d. designation of each member or area where each batch of paint is used .
num num not used operations num pre treatment num .
oil grease wax dirt and other foreign matter shall be removed by cleaning and degreasing of metal surfaces in accordance with asnum or approved equivalent international standard .
specification num protective treatment of steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num surface preparation num .
the surface treatment for all steel surfaces except those shown on the drawings to be galvanised shall be abrasive blast cleaned followed by shop priming with inorganic zinc silicate paint .
surfaces which are to be left unpainted shall be masked off .
num .
ungalvanised steel surfaces which are to be painted shall be abrasive blast cleaned to as num class sa num immediately before application of the inorganic zinc silicate paint system .
the abrasive may be either metallic or nonmetallic but shall be of an approved type to produce a mean surface roughness in the range num to num microns with no individual reading exceeding num microns when measured with replica tape .
the use of coarse steel angular grit or copper slag or any other material which gives a high surface profile or could contaminate the surface is not permitted .
num .
the surface roughness shall be determined using a needle type depth micrometer in accordance to asnzs num method c or replica tape to as num method c. once a satisfactory pattern of performance has been established as verified by this method an optical comparator may be used to check surface profile in accordance to asnzs num method b .
num .
steel surfaces which are to be galvanised shall be cleaned and degreased followed by pickling in accordance with as num or abrasive blast cleaning to class num in accordance with as num immediately before galvanising .
num galvanising num .
all hot dip galvanising shall conform with the requirements of asnzs num and shall be clean and smooth and continuous and free from acid spots and cracks and laminations and runs and drips .
the coating shall have a minimum system designation of hdgnum in accordance to asnzs num for thickness of steel member num mm and greater .
the coating thickness shall be in accordance with asnzs num for all structural members less than num mm thick .
num .
galvanising of fasteners shall conform with the requirements of as num .
num .
galvanised steel surfaces to be top coated shall be prepared by sweep blast cleaning in accordance with asnzs num .
the contractor shall ensure that no more than num microns of zinc is removed and the galvanised coating is not severely damaged before the application of primer .
num .
the finishing coat to be applied over the primer shall be of that specified in clause num .
num .
paint coating systems shall be applied and cured in accordance with the manufacturers published specifications .
specification num protective treatment of steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num shop priming num nongalvanised steel surfaces num .
all external surfaces of ungalvanised steelwork which are to be painted shall be coated with an approved inorganic zinc silicate coat witn a minimum thickness of num microns for a single coat surface treatment .
num .
the primer shall be applied as soon as possible after blast cleaning before deterioration has taken place and in any case within four hours .
num .
any surface showing deterioration before being primed shall be re cleaned at the contractors expense .
num .
the primer shall be zincrich epoxy conforming to asnzs num type num and apas num and shall have a minimum dry film thickness of num microns for a three coat system .
num .
the specified dry film thickness of primer refers to the minimum thickness of primer measured above peaks determined in accordance with clause num .
the primer shall be applied and cured in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations before application of any subsequent treatment .
num .
the primer shall be applied so as to produce a smooth even coating and shall be double lap sprayed into all corners and crevices and on welds and seams .
num galvanised steel surfaces num .
the primer shall be a numpack highbuild epoxy conforming to as num and apas num .
the minimum dry film thickness shall be num microns .
num surface preparation before applying finishing coats num .
not more than eight num hours prior to application of a finishing coat the surface shall be washed with fresh clean water to remove any salt sand dust grit grease and cement or other contaminants and allowed to dry thoroughly .
if necessary suitable solvents shall be used to remove contaminants that are not water soluble and the areas concerned rewashed with water .
num intermediate coating num .
the intermediate coating to all exposed surfaces of steelwork shall be epoxy micaceous iron oxide paint emio conforming to asnzs num and apas num .
num .
the minimum dry film thickness of the intermediate coating shall be num microns .
num .
where the manufacturers recommended coating thickness for the paint is less than num microns the required thickness shall be built up by the application of additional coats .
specification num protective treatment of steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num finishing coats num .
the finishing coats to all exposed surfaces of steelwork shall be either a .
numpack polyurethane gloss conforming to asnzs num and apas num or b .
numpack acrylic gloss conforming to asnzs num and apas num .
num .
the minimum dry film thickness of the finishing coat shall be num microns .
num .
subjected to the anticipated construction sequence the finishing coat may be applied in shop or onsite but shall be after the erection of steelwork placing of concrete removal of falsework and any defective repairs have been completed .
num finish colour num .
the finish colour for exposed surfaces of steelwork shall be as shown on the drawings .
num .
all paint pigments shall be suitable for outdoor exposure .
num application num tie coats num .
when recommended by the manufacturer tie andor mist coats shall be used to ensure compatibility of coatings .
num weather conditions num .
painting shall not be carried out under the following climatic conditions a .
when the ambient temperature is below numoc .
b .
when the metal surface temperature is above numoc .
c. when the relative humidity is above num. d. when the steel temperature is less than numoc above the dew point .
e. when weather conditions are unsuitable such as in high winds or rain .
f. when the surface in direct strong sunlight num method of application num .
tie and finishing coats may be applied by spray brush or roller except that the following conditions shall apply specification num protective treatment of steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name a .
on site application of paint by spray can be carried out only after the contractor has taken every precaution to ensure that there is no danger of overspray damaging property or passing traffic .
b .
special precautions shall be taken to prevent paint staining concrete surfaces .
c. paint thickness specified shall be maintained on all edges by stripe painting .
num acceptance testing num introduction num .
paintwork shall be subject to visual examination and measurement of the dry film thickness after the application of each type of coating .
galvanised surfaces shall be subject to visual examination and measurement of the galvanising thickness as detailed in this clause .
num visual examination num .
all surfaces shall be subject to a visual examination after blast cleaning and after priming and after application of top coats .
each coat of paint shall be free of cracks and wrinkles and blisters and lumps or any other defects .
whenever these defects occur the whole paintwork system of the affected area shall be removed by abrasive blast cleaning as set out in clause num and replaced at the contractors expense .
num measuring instrument num .
the contractor shall measure the dry film thickness using a non destructive type film thickness gauge .
the gauge shall be either a .
a magnetic instrument used in accordance with as num methods of test for paints and related materials method num except that gauges of the tinsley type shall not be used .
or b .
an instrument operating on the eddy current principle and used in accordance with british standard num methods of test for paints part cnum .
num procedure num .
in order to determine the dry film thickness of each coating the following procedure shall be adopted specification num protective treatment of steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name a .
dry film thickness gauges shall be calibrated using shims of known thickness set on the blast reference sample .
the calibration procedure shall consist of taking not less than num readings on the shim on the reference blast sample and from these determining the mean reading .
this mean reading shall be subtracted from the known shim thickness to produce a correction factor which shall be added algebraically to all subsequent readings of dry film paint thickness in order to obtain the true above peaks value .
i. alternatively the gauge itself may be adjusted to yield the appropriate reading equivalent to the known shim thickness .
in this case not less than num readings shall be taken until the gauge mean reading is equivalent to the known shim thickness .
ii .
this calibration shall be maintained throughout the duration of the contract except where blasting techniques or procedures are varied in which case the calibration procedure shall be repeated .
b .
readings shall subsequently be taken of the total dry film thickness after the application of each type of coating .
c. at each stage the contractor shall use the average reading for that surface .
d. the dry film thickness for any coating is the difference between the values obtained for this coating and the average total dry film thickness at the completion of the preceding coating .
e. film thickness measurements will be taken at random to suit the shape of the area being tested and the number of such measurements shall be given as below i .
for large flat surfaces like the webs and flanges of beams the number shall be one per square metre .
ii .
for hand railing panels the number shall be six per linear metre .
iii .
for guard railings the number shall be four per linear metre .
iv .
for guardrail posts the number shall be four per post .
num .
for assessing the compliance of a coating with the thickness requirement of this specification all measured values of the dry film thickness on each surface shall equal or exceed the specified minimum dry film thickness for that coating .
surfaces not meeting this requirement shall receive further coats of primer or finishing coat as appropriate to build up the paint thickness required .
specification num protective treatment of steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num protection num .
the paint system shall be fully cured before any components are handled .
it shall be properly protected during all transport and erection procedures to maintain it in a clean and undamaged condition .
in particular proper precautions are to be taken during lifting operations to ensure a minimum of damage is caused by slinging or guying or supporting or similar operations .
num site repairs num .
repairs to areas of damaged paintwork shall be carried out at the time of application of the final finishing coat except that where corrosion of the steel may occur adequate cleaning and protective priming shall be carried out immediately .
num .
areas of paintwork which have been damaged and areas of site welded connections shall be cleaned by power wire brush to as num class st num followed by abrasive paper to provide a surface profile .
in addition the edge of the surrounding undamaged paint shall be feathered with abrasive paper .
num .
in areas of site welded connections all weld splatter and slag shall be removed by mechanical means and all sharp edges and rough welds shall be rounded off before cleaning .
num .
the damaged areas and areas of site welded connections shall then be painted as laid down in clauses num to num .
the new paint shall overlap the existing paint by at least num mm allround the affected area .
num .
areas of galvanising which have been affected by welding or otherwise damaged shall be thoroughly painted with zinga liquid galvanising or similar approved cold galvanised paint followed by the required amount of finishing paint .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num protective treatment of steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa schedule of surface treatments treatment no .
description of treatment surfaces to be treated num .
galvanise hdgnum all steel unless otherwise specified num .
galvanise hdgnum sweep blast cleaning in accordance with as num highbuild epoxy numpack num microns ndft polyurethane or acrylic gloss numpack num microns ndft kerbside face of guardrails .
num .
abrasive blast to class sa num epoxy zincrich primer num microns ndft epoxy micaceous iron oxide num microns ndft polyurethane or acrylic gloss numpack num microns ndft exposed surfaces of structural members num .
hot metal spray for pot bearings only exposed surfaces of structural members in severe atmospheres where galvanising is impractical .
num .
single coat inorganic zinc silicate num microns ndft exposed surfaces of structural members where galvanising is impractical .
specification num protective treatment of steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
num .
system design by contractor num although there has been a move towards contractor design of protective systems there is a concern that this could lead to excessive management problems in the future .
consequently the specification has been kept in a prescriptive form as required by as num .
num .
scheduled surface treatments annexure numa num annexure a lists preferences but needs to be modified for each contract .
num hot metal spray would be a preferred contract specific requirement to be added where required at this stage .
num .
corrosion protection of steel piles clause num num insert clause num where required .
specification num protective treatment of steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num corrosion protection of steel piles num .
piles shall receive corrosion protection as specified herein and to the extent indicated on the drawings .
the corrosion protection system shall be abrasive blast cleaning followed by an approved twopack epoxy paint system which conforms with apas num .
the surface to be painted shall be abrasive blast cleaned as detailed in clause num of this specification .
before painting the cleaned surface shall be dry and free from dust .
painting shall not take place when climatic conditions are unsuitable as detailed in clause num .
the paint shall be applied in one coat to give a total dry film thickness of not less than num microns .
coating shall be applied as soon as possible after blast cleaning before deterioration has taken place and in any case within four hours .
any surface showing deterioration before being coated shall be rejected .
acceptance testing of paintwork shall be in accordance with clause num .
a minimum period of seven days shall elapse to permit paint to harden before handling or driving piles .
where piles are to be spliced the corrosion protection treatment shall be omitted or removed for num mm each side of the weld .
should pile protection be damaged during pile driving any such operation shall cease to permit reinstatement as specified .
pile driving shall not proceed until the reinstatement compound has cured .
areas of paintwork which have been damaged and areas of site welded connections shall be cleaned andor repaired as specified in clause num .
any piles which are to be embedded in pilecaps shall have the corrosion protection removed from the end of the pile to within num mm of the surface of the concrete .
specification num protective treatment of steelwork num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title protective treatment of steelwork revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
clause deletes shows as not used .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
project managers review completed .
specification guidance notes deleted .
table of contents updated .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num timber bridges copyright main roads western australia specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date num num num num num num num num specification num added to clause additional information added regarding schedule of maintenance activities clauses deleted .
information is covered by in document no .
num preventative maintenance standard for timber bridges .
clause split into type num and type num pile repair sections for clarity product name amended .
product name amended methodology of treatment of timber decking removed .
information is covered by in document no .
num preventative maintenance standard for timber bridges .
timber end grain sealing and outside stringer maintenance removed .
treatment tables for stringers bedlogs bearers and decking removed .
information is covered by in document no .
num num preventative maintenance standard for timber bridges .
sdse num whole document reformatted sco num annexure numa coloured plastic plug system added for borocol treatment sdse num num num minor change to main roads website address sdse num num replaced reference to fibremesh c num with emaco snumc grout sdse num num reference to annexure numa added .
clause numbers updated in table num and table transferred to annexure numa so num guidance notes new note num clause numbering added and subsequent notes renumbered whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num species num num quality num num tolerances for allowable defects in sawn timber num num stacking of sawn timber num num proprietary timber preservation products num num num not used num operations num num carpentry num num bridge timber preservation and general maintenance num num num not used num num installation of bolted and threaded rod connections num num pile repair num num halfcap repair and replacement num num stringer and corbel replacement num num fastener maintenance num num bolt tightening num num walings and braces num num num not used num concrete overlays num num preparation of timber decking for a concrete overlay num num adjustment to road surface levels at approach slabs and expansion joints num num site cleanup num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num table num schedule of timber preservation and general maintenance num specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num modifications to navigation pier protective systems num num adjustment of road levels num num additional routine maintenance works num specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num timber bridges general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the technical requirements for maintenance and refurbishment of bridge timber .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num hot dipped galvanised coatings on threaded fasteners as num timber structures as num timber hardwood visually stressgraded for structural purposes as num termite management as num guide to the properties of paints for buildings latex exterior gloss as num guide to the properties of paints for buildings primer wood solverborne interiorexterior australiannew zealand standards anzs num guide to the painting of buildings anzs num steel reinforcing materials other standards mrwa document no .
num preventative maintenance standard for timber bridges mrwa document no .
num roadways mrwa drawing no .
num pile bands curved washer fabrication details main roads specifications specification num environment specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num clearing specification num falsework specification num concrete for structures specification num formwork specification num structural steelwork specification num minor steel items specification num protective treatment of steelwork num num not used products and materials num species num .
all sawn timber used in the works shall be western australian jarrah eucalyptus marginata .
num quality num .
sawn timber shall be structural grade number num in accordance with as num and as num and shall be back sawn .
num tolerances for allowable defects in sawn timber num insect holes num .
clean holes which are isolated and not in groups free from insect life and decay and less than nummm in diameter will be tolerated provided the density of the timber is not unduly affected .
num gum veins num .
these will be accepted provided they are clean tight gum veins as distinct from gum pockets or cavities free from decayed tissue and are not closer together than nummm .
num waney edges num .
sapwood on the corner of a piece of sawn timber shall not be cause for rejection unless it exceeds nummm on either face of the piece .
num shrinkage num .
the sizes shown on the drawings are nominal sizes and the timber shall have excess size to the extent of nummm per nummm on both transverse directions .
no shrinkage allowance is required on the longitudinal direction .
specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num stacking of sawn timber num .
immediately on delivery sawn timber shall be stacked off the ground on suitable bedlogs which shall be spaced such as to prevent permanent warping .
num .
sawn timber shall be stacked so that there is a minimum clear air space of nummm between pieces of timber to allow for proper ventilation and seasoning .
num proprietary timber preservation products num .
this specification nominates specific proprietary products for suggested use .
these products have a history of satisfactory performance for the relevant activities .
however where such proprietary timber preservation products are listed it shall read or similar approved throughout .
num .
any alternative products shall be submitted to the superintendent for consideration for approval with the contractor giving at least num week written notice of intended use .
hold point num .
suitable epoxy as referenced throughout this specification shall be one with high sg and low rate cure with low exothermic heat output with good bond to saturated timber .
num num not used operations num carpentry num .
the whole of the timber work shall be executed to the best standard of workmanship for bridge carpentry .
no round timber shall be dressed except as shown on the drawings or as specified .
num .
all joints facing checking scarfing birdsmouthing and shouldering shall be accurately made in order to obtain tightly fitted joints requiring no wedging or packing .
num .
unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings each piece of timber shall be without joints for its full length and shall have the ends sawn square and wrought perfectly true at all contact surfaces .
num .
the holes for bolts and spikes and other fasteners shall be drilled accurately and all mortises holes and tenons and scarfs and joints shall be cut so as to fit accurately and tightly .
num .
the holes for bolts shall be bored with augers nummm larger in diameter than the bolts .
holes for spikes and drift bolts shall be nummm smaller in diameter than the spike or drift bolt .
num .
where slotted holes are shown on the drawings the holes shall be positioned such that the bolts are free to move in the direction of shrinkage .
specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
squared timber shall be so fixed that the surface which was further from the heart of the tree will be the outer surface of the work .
the heart side of all squared timber shall be placed downwards except in the case of bracing and similarly situated members when it shall be placed next to the timber to which it is fastened .
the contractors attention is specifically drawn to the importance of this requirement when fixing decking planks .
num bridge timber preservation and general maintenance num .
bridge timber preservation treatment and general maintenance shall be undertaken in accordance with the requirements detailed below .
num .
the specific timber maintenance activities required for the bridge shall be as specified on the drawings .
num .
preventative maintenance activities shall occur shall occur in a num yearly cycle .
routine maintenance activities shall occur as required .
num .
table num at annexure numa describes all standard preservation treatment and routine maintenance activities and the corresponding activity code number referenced in document no .
num preventative maintenance standard for timber bridges available for information only .
copies of this document are available from the main roads website at www.mainroads.wa.gov.au under standards and technical structures engineering design note all downloaded copies are uncontrolled .
num .
all work shall be carried out in accordance with document no .
num preventative maintenance standard for timber bridges .
num .
residual pesticides must not be allowed to enter the water body or environment other than that being treated .
drop sheets or similar method of containment must be used .
chemical toxicity and application risk information from the manufacturers published recommendations and material safety data sheets shall be observed .
num num not used num installation of bolted and threaded rod connections num .
in addition to the original bolts stringers and corbels shall be bolted as scheduled on the drawings .
install num .
all new and replacement bolts nuts washers and spikes shall be of mild steel and be galvanised to as num .
bolts shall have well forged square or hexagonal or cup heads as appropriate or shown on the drawings and square or hexagonal nuts with threads accurately cut for a minimum length of nummm or five times the diameter of the bolt whichever is the greater .
num .
the contractor shall determine accurately the lengths of all bolts and make allowance for shrinkage of the timbers .
ends of bolts shall be cut off not more than one half of the diameter beyond the nut .
specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
single square washers shall be used against timber behind all nuts and bolt heads with the exception where the bolt bears against round timber then curved washers shall be used as detailed in drawing no .
num .
the minimum size of washers shall be as shown below .
in the case of bolt heads sunk flush with the surfaces of the timbers then the heads shall be tightly fitted into round countersunk holes without washers .
all such countersinks shall be tightly packed with denso paste to prevent lodgement of water .
nuts or bolt heads shall not be packed out with wood or any other packing material .
diameter of bolt nummm nummm nummm washer num x num x num num x num x num num x num x num num .
prior to the installation of all new or replacement connectors into the timber the inside of each hole shall be sterilised with boracol numrh and each bolt shall be coated and each hole filled with denso paste .
num .
bolts and threaded rods shall be tightened to the tightness achievable with an ordinary spanner without crushing the timber under the washer .
following tightening the exposed ends of all bolts and threaded rods shall be coated in denso paste to facilitate tightening in the future .
further tightening may be required to accommodate creep in the timber .
num pile repair num .
piles shall be assed to determine the appropriate pile repair type type num type num or type num .
repair details are referenced in mrwa document no num structures engineering practice notes .
num type num and type num pile repairs num .
defective piles shall be potted as detailed on the drawings .
piles that are required to be pottedshall be exposed by excavating below ground level to the depths shown on the drawings .
working room shall be kept to a minimum .
piles num .
during pile repair work the bridge superstructure shall be adequately supported in accordance with the requirements of specification num falsework .
temporary props shall be located on stable ground unaffected by excavations .
num .
before cutting the timber piles the location and extent of the deterioration shall be determined by drilling using nummm diameter augers .
piles to be repaired as shown on the drawings shall be cut off not less than a minimum of nummm beyond the location where a nummm annulus of solid timber is first encountered and any pipe encountered is less than one third of the diameter of the pile .
cuts shall be made square and true to the axis of the pile to ensure steel replacement sections will be located concentric and square to the cut surfaces .
specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the cut surface at the top of the timber pile shall be given a heavy brushing with the diffusible fungicide boracol numrh .
following the fungicide treatment the top surface shall be sealed using elastoseal heavy duty reinforced with crommlein polyfabric .
num .
for potted piles temporary shimming of the suspended section of the pile will be required until the bearing angles at the base of the suspended section are fully installed .
this is to ensure full load transfer without deflection of the superstructure .
permanent shimming may be required to ensure full load transfer capacity as approved by the superintendent .
shimming shall be undertaken in a manner that does not damage the water proof membrane .
num type num pile repairs num .
all pier piles nominated as requiring splinting or epoxy repair shall have all bolts and loose rotten material removed from the area of encapsulation .
these piles shall be thoroughly cleaned with a high pressure water jet and compressed air .
this process shall continue until a quality of wood is exposed that when drilled produces timber particles of nummm length .
the newly exposed section shall then be sterilised with boracol numrh .
at this stage a final assessment shall be made of the pile condition as the removal of unacceptable material on a pile classed as a type c may reveal a type d num .
the pile classification shall be agreed with the superintendent prior to commencing corrective action .
hold point num .
piles classified as type a require no further treatment .
num .
piles classified as type b shall be wrapped with a nummm clear acrylic which extends a minimum of nummm and a maximum of nummm below the deteriorated zone and a minimum of nummm and a maximum of nummm above the deteriorated zone .
the bottom of the acrylic wrap shall be fastened as shown on the drawings and the wrap shall then be filled with epigen mrd epoxy or similar approved by the superintendent .
the epoxy shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
num .
piles classified as types c and d shall be splinted as shown on the drawings .
the suspended section of pile in a type d repair will require shimming off to ensure full load transfer without deflection of the superstructure .
num .
the splint shall be positioned vertically on the pile with the clearances specified on the drawings .
a nonshrink cementitious grout conbextra uw by fozroc or similar approved shall be used to fill the void inside the steel splint for the full height of the splint .
the grout shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num halfcap repair and replacement num .
halfcaps shall be repaired as detailed on the drawings .
during halfcap repair and replacement works the bridge superstructure shall be adequately supported in accordance with the requirements of specification num falsework .
halfcaps num .
an accurate survey shall be made of the seating and alignment of the existing halfcaps .
num .
pfc halfcaps shall be installed straight without distortion and halfcap seating shall be cut accurately to provide the minimum seating specified without distorting the steel halfcaps .
existing halfcaps not adequately seated on pile checkouts shall have brackets or shimming plates installed as detailed on the drawings .
num .
packing between timber and steel halfcap strengthening shall be in accordance with the drawings .
only new seasoned jarrah timber packers shall be used as detailed on the drawings .
num .
packing shall be such that a continuous support is provided to the existing timber halfcap .
the existing timber may need to be shaped to ensure continuous support .
num .
pfc halfcaps shall be fabricated in accordance with specification num structural steelwork and surface treated in accordance with specification num protective treatment of steelwork .
num .
all pile end grain exposed as a result of any halfcap works shall be sterilised with boracol numrh in accordance with document no .
num num preventative maintenance standard for timber bridges num stringer and corbel replacement num .
stringers and corbels shall be replaced as detailed on the drawings .
during stringer and corbel replacement works the bridge superstructure shall be adequately supported in accordance with the requirements of specification num falsework .
stringers and corbels num .
new steel stringers and corbels shall be fabricated in accordance with specification num structural steelwork and surface treated in accordance with specification num protective treatment of steelwork .
num .
new steel stringers and corbels shall be installed into final position in such a manner that ensures the stringers accept dead load from the deck .
jacking may be required to ensure full contact with the underside of the deck planks to allow full transfer of dead load .
num .
where gaps between the deck planks and the top flange of the stringer still exist after jacking they shall be packed using steel shims or masteremaco snum or similar approved by the superintendent to ensure that a minimum of num of each deck plank is bearing on the top flange of the stringer .
specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num fastener maintenance num .
all existing threaded fastenings within num metres of groundline or waterline shall be removed for checking .
fused nuts may be released by application of heat and applying a good quality penetrating oil .
application of force by jacking may be required to remove the bolt from the member .
maintenance num .
the condition of each fastening shall be checked .
if the thread condition is considered acceptable and corrosion of bolt and rod is minimal to allow reuse of the fastener the fastener may be reinstalled .
note it is rare for an old bolt or fastener near the groundline or waterline to be in good enough condition for reuse .
num .
reuse of fasteners shall be proposed to the superintendent for consideration for approval prior to any reuse .
hold point num .
if the thread condition has deteriorated such that nuts can no longer be screwed on and tightened or if any of the shaft section has been lost due to corrosion the fasteners shall be replaced with equivalent sized galvanised threaded rods in accordance with the clause num of this specification .
num .
the condition of the hole through the timber element shall be checked for enlargement or extension into areas of dry rot surrounding the hole .
num .
if the hole enlargement is minimal less than nummm larger than the fastener diameter the inside of the hole shall be thoroughly cleansed and treated with diffusible fungicide and the hole packed with denso paste .
num .
if the hole enlargement is large greater than or equal to nummm larger than the fastener diameter the hole shall be reinstated by sleeving and filling the remaining void with a suitable epoxy filler once the hole has been cleansed and all deteriorated material has been removed .
num .
alternatively in the cases of timber braces or walers the braces or walers may be relocated above the old pile holes with new holes drilled into piles and filled with denso paste .
num .
in severely deteriorated situations sleeving or other pile repairs shall be installed in accordance with the clause num of this specification where nominated on the drawings .
num .
prior to installing fasteners all fastener holes shall be filled with denso paste .
num .
all new or reused fasteners shall be coated with denso paste before being installed in accordance with clause num of this specification .
num bolt tightening num .
all existing bolts greater than num metres from the groundline or waterline shall be tightened .
if the thread condition has deteriorated such that nuts can no longer be screwed on and tightened they shall be replaced with the equivalent sized galvanised threaded rods in accordance with the installation of bolted and threaded rod connections clause of this specification .
tightening specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num walings and braces num .
all existing timber walings and braces shall be checked for condition of timber in particular splitting of ends and deterioration around connectors .
walings and bracing num .
where shown on the drawings timber walings and braces requiring relocation shall have new holes drilled for new connectors .
the new holes shall be away from existing holes which shall be cleaned out to remove all deteriorated timber and then filled with epoxy .
the minimum offset of holes shall be three connector diameters clear from sound timber surrounding the existing holes .
num .
wherever possible existing braces to be relocated which have splits or deteriorated ends or with deterioration around end connections should be reused by cutting off deteriorated ends and then rotating the braces upwards at the bottom connection and redrilling to suit new connectors .
num .
all existing walings within num millimetres of groundline as measured from the underside of the waling shall be removed from piers to prevent deterioration of the timber piles at the groundline .
num .
all existing walings subject to inundation within the usual water splash zone as indicated on the piles by water splash zone shall be raised by nummm above water splash zone markings on piles as measured from the underside of the waling .
num .
all holes left in timber piles following the removal or relocation of walings and braces shall be cleaned out to remove all deteriorated timber and then filled with epoxy .
num .
holes that have increased in size by more than num millimetres larger than the original connector diameter shall be treated in accordance with clause num of this specification .
where cut outs in timber piles for walings have exceeded nummm in depth type b repairs shall be mandatory .
num .
more severe deterioration and larger cut outs for walings shall be repaired using either type c or d repairs as detailed on the drawings .
num num not used concrete overlays num preparation of timber decking for a concrete overlay num general num .
the timber decking shall be prepared in the order of the clauses shown below .
specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num removal of existing deck overlay num .
the existing road pavement or concrete deck overlay shall be removed from one half of the bridge at a time .
the section to be removed shall be separated by saw cutting to give a uniform line .
the material shall be removed in such a manner that does not cause damage or excessive loading to the bridge and in particular the timber decking .
num .
the contractor shall ensure that any plant used to strip the material over the deck planks do not overload exposed deck planks .
the proposed plant shall be checked for load effects on the deck planks and stringers .
tracked vehicles shall not be permitted .
num .
details of the machine proposed to strip the existing road pavement or concrete overlay and all structural checks shall be submitted to the superintendent for approval at least num weeks prior to intended use .
hold point num .
the removed material shall be disposed of in accordance with local government requirements for the disposal of waste material .
num cleaning of timber decking num .
the upper surfaces of the deck planks shall be cleaned by removing all gravel and other loose timber and foreign material with a water jet spray .
num replacement of timber decking num .
timber deck planks found to have a minimum thickness of sound timber less than nummm shall be replaced .
num .
when it is required to replace individual deck planks the deck planks shall be replaced using either nummm x nummm seasoned jarrah or concrete on permanent formwork .
where two or more adjacent deck planks require replacement the deck planks shall be replaced with permanent formwork and a layer of slnum reinforcement fabric in accordance with asnzs num .
the slnum fabric shall be in addition to the reinforcement shown on the drawings .
the slnum fabric shall be placed with nummm cover .
the concrete shall be poured in the same pour as the concrete overlay .
the concrete shall comply with specification num concrete for structures .
the concrete shall be formed in accordance with specification num formwork .
num .
the superintendent shall inspect the timber deck planks prior to replacement of any timber decking .
hold point num tightening of timber decking num .
all connections between deck planks and stringers or spiking rails shall be decked for tightness and continuous bearing .
num .
the tightness shall be checked by placing a bar between the decking planks .
if vertical movement or more than nummm of horizontal movement occurs then the connection shall be tightened .
specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
continuous bearing between the deck planks and the top of the seating surface of the stringers or spiking rails shall be checked .
if there is less than num bearing then the connection shall be tightened .
num .
loose deck planks shall be tightened by firstly driving the existing spikes at the connection until they are flush with the top surface of the decking .
then if the connection is not tight additional spikes shall be driven adjacent to the existing spikes .
num layer of hessian num .
a layer of hessian fabric as detailed on the drawings shall be placed on the timber decking in preparation of placing the concrete .
the hessian shall be lapped and nailed down as required to ensure that all decking remains covered during the placement of overlay concrete .
num preservation treatment of timber decking num .
timber decking shall be treated prior to placement of the overlay concrete .
treatment of timber deck shall comply with the requirement with document no .
num preventative maintenance standard for timber bridges .
num adjustment to road surface levels at approach slabs and expansion joints num .
the contractor shall arrange the adjustment of the road surface levels at the approach slabs and expansion joints prior to opening each half of the overlay to traffic .
num .
a minimum numm length of transition shall be applied beyond each end of the bridge as required to transition between the finished overlay or approach slab levels and existing road pavement levels .
maximum and minimum grades shall be in accordance with main roads document no .
num roadways but generally shall be between num and num .
make up of road level shall made good by use of road pavement material similar to existing .
num site cleanup num .
at the completion of the required works the contractor shall ensure that the site is cleaned up to a standard at least equal to its condition prior to commencing the works with all rubbish debris and excess building materials removed from site .
rubbish and debris shall be taken to the relevant local authority rubbish tip and all fees and charges shall be paid by the contractor .
cleanup num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa table num schedule of timber preservation and general maintenance clause no .
preservation treatment activity activity code no .
activity required timber endgrain sealing num num num bolt tightening and fastener maintenance num num groundline treatment of piles num num waterline treatment of piles in permanent water numa num fungicide treatment of timber decking planks num num fungicide treatment of timber stringers num routine maintenance of outside timber stringers num treat abutment end of wandoo stringers end spans only num num fungicide treatment of abutment bedlogs and bearers num num fungicide treatment of halfcaps fungicide treatment of timber bearers and pier bedlogs off ground num repair of split piles num repair of split stringers scarf splits less than nummm long num treatment fungicide of gravel pavement num num timber handrail maintenance num num deck drainage maintenance num removal of deck vegetation num num vegetation and debris clearing under bridges num regulatory and warning signs num marine organism protection num num termite inspection and treatment num activity code numbers refer to the activities listed in the preventive maintenance standard for timber bridges document no .
num which is available for information only .
note num insert yes or no under activity required against each activity code no .
note num if required include document num in the information for tenderers .
note num complete separate table for each bridge no .
note num delete these notes .
specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
num .
clause numbering num any proposed changes to specification clause numbers must be communicated to structures information and standards manager for comparable changes to document no num structures engineering practice notes and standard drawings as cross references from these documents to specification clause numbers exist .
num if clauses are not required for a particular project the preferred method is to retain the clause number but delete the clause text and mark the clause number as not used .
num .
concrete overlays clause num num concrete work for new concrete overlays must be appropriately specified by including specifications num num num num etc .
as required .
num .
navigation piers protective systems clause num num where modifications or repairs are required to bridge navigation piers insert clause num or a suitable variation to ensure pier protection systems are reinstated at the completion of repairs to at least their original condition .
num .
adjustment of road levels num where the adjustment of levels is to form part of the contract for example where a new concrete overlay requires the road level at each end of the bridge to be raised over a suitable transition length either clause num will need to be extendedmodified or alternatively a more detailed description inserted in contract specific requirements to include a specific road specification .
such a specification could be inserted as clause num using the headings shown .
num .
additional routine maintenance works clause num num if the contract includes additional routine maintenance works such as fungicide treatment or other needs a selection of such needs should be made from the clauses in contract specific requirements .
specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num if necessary ensure a copy of document num is included as part of the information for tenderers .
num if any fungicide treatment is included in the contract and the treatment reservoir holes are required to be capped with plastic plugs the colour of the plugs shall be specified as per document num specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num modifications to navigation pier protective systems num .
the contractor shall allow for removing the rubber tyre and timber fendering system from the navigation pier piles that require repair .
num .
the location of the navigation pier piles requiring repair are shown on the drawings .
num .
tyres shall be modified to encase the new steel splints and reinstalled to their original position on completion of the splinting operation .
the timber fendering shall be reinstalled using cleats attached to the equal angles of the pile splints as shown on the drawings .
tyres and timber damaged during the removal modification and reinstatement process shall be replaced by the contractor at no cost to the principal .
num adjustment of road levels num .
survey num .
earthworks if any num .
pavement num .
resurfacing num additional routine maintenance works num fungicide treatment of timber stringers num .
all timber stringers requiring fungicide treatment shall be treated by injection of diffusible borate fungicide timbor or polybor powder or slurry or boracol numrh .
fungicide stringers num .
the dosage rate shall be determined using the average stringer diameter calculated for each stringer measured at midspan and at both supports .
num .
the entire volume of each stringer nominated for treatment shall be treated with diffusible boron based fungicide powder to achieve a boric acid equivalent bae of at least numkgm or with boracol numrh to achieve a bae of at least numkgm .
the amount of borate powder or boracol required to treat each stringer to meet this requirement shall be calculated from the design charts in document no .
num preventative maintenance standard for timber bridges .
num .
the minimum application locations shall be drilled reservoirs at supports and at midspan where no existing pipes holes or splits exist .
specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num fungicide treatment of timber piles num .
all timber piles requiring fungicide treatment shall firstly be treated with sufficient diffusible boron based fungicide in treatment reservoirs within the piles in the groundline zone to achieve a boric acid equivalent bae in the timber of at least num kgm of timber .
the amount of borate powder or boracol required to treat each stringer to meet this requirement shall be calculated from the design charts in document no .
num preventative maintenance standard for timber bridges .
fungicide piles num .
where piles have previously been treated at the groundline the number and location of existing treatment reservoirs shall be checked to determine whether they conform to this requirement and modified as required to suit if they have not been .
num .
where piles have not previously been treated treatment reservoirs nummm in diameter shall be drilled at groundline and at nummm above groundline .
holes shall be drilled downwards into the piles at an angle of approximately num degrees to the vertical and be evenly spaced around the perimeter with ground level holes staggered relative to the holes at nummm above .
the maximum practical length of hole that can be drilled in most piles is nummm limited by intersection with adjacent holes and drill bit lengths .
num .
the number of reservoirs required shall be calculated for each pile based on their measured diameter and the information in document no .
num num preventative maintenance standard for timber bridges .
a maximum of num treatment holes total shall be drilled in any pile at or around the groundline .
for nummm diameter standard reservoir drill bits the treatment volume is numml nummm length of hole .
where the required treatment volume can not be fitted into the available drilled reservoirs during the initial visit a subsequent treatment shall be carried out by topping up the reservoirs between one and three months after the initial visit .
num .
treatment reservoirs shall only be drilled through sound timber away from checks and splits .
each reservoir shall be filled with liquid fungicide and if the fluid level drops quickly in a hole due to leakage the treatment in that hole shall be supplemented with num no .
nummm diameter polesaver rods .
num .
after treatment each reservoir hole shall be capped with a plastic plug of the same colour as specified in document no .
num preventative maintenance standard for timber bridges .
num .
the contractor shall record the treatment or retreatment date for the bridge to enable scheduling for the next treatment .
fungicide usage and batch number of chemical applied shall also be recorded for each pile .
num .
piles in permanent water shall be treated to the waterline zone of each pile carried out in accordance with document no .
num preventative maintenance standard for timber bridges .
num .
potted piles shall all be scheduled for standard treatment in the zone above the level of the concrete collar carried out in accordance with the treatment required at ground level .
specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num fungicide treatment of bedlogs and bearers num .
all timber bedlogs and bearers requiring fungicide treatment shall be drilled using nummm drill bits with holes drilled at as steep an angle as possible to pass through the centre and pass through into rot zones typically at the far faces of the bedlog or bearer .
num .
the bedlogs and bearers shall be treated with a slurry consisting of numkg of solubor powder to num litres of water or boracol numrh pumped into the drilled holes to achieve the dosage rates as shown in document no .
num num preventative maintenance standard for timber bridges .
num .
hole spacings shall be numm to numm along bedlogs or bearers located specifically in the vicinity of the areas of dry rot occurring in the bedlogs or bearers .
num .
sufficient holes and repeat dosages shall be applied to achieve an application rate of numkg of boric acid equivalent bae per cubic metre of timber based on the actual slurry mixture strength used hole lengths drilled and actual diameters .
if boracol numrh is used the application rate shall be at least numkgmnum bae .
num fungicide treatment of halfcaps num .
the halfcap shall be saturated with water one day prior to proposed fungicide treatment to encourage take up of hygroscopic boracol in the treatment to follow .
fungicide halfcaps num .
the diffusible boronbased fungicide boracol numrh shall then be applied in brush form to the halfcap with repeat doses as necessary until a level of boric acid equivalent bae of num kgmnum of timber has been achieved in the halfcap .
repeat doses shall be delayed by at least an hour to allow full absorption of each application .
num .
normally num or num repeat doses will be required to achieve this bae level .
the actual number of applications required to achieve the required bae level is a function of the timber thickness and the absorption rate of the halfcap .
for halfcaps nummm x nummm the total application rate required of absorbed boracol numrh to achieve numkgmnum of bae has been calculated at num litresm .
num .
the amount of boracol numrh to be applied to the halfcap to achieve the absorbed level of bae required shall take into account all losses .
num deck drainage maintenance num .
bridges noted as requiring deck drainage maintenance and not requiring construction of a concrete overlay shall have all existing drainage outlets whether through horizontal holes in timber kerbs or vertically through decks both known as scuppers cleaned out to remove all debris and to allow the continued free flow of drainage water through them .
deck drainage specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
scupper flashing as detailed shall be installed under all side discharge scuppers mounted on the outside stringers to minimise the discharge of water onto them .
where scuppers are located over piers the scupper flashing shall be shaped to discharge water from the scuppers away from the halfcaps below .
where this is not practical scuppers shall be sealed by packing with suitable jarrah timber blocks .
num .
where vertical scuppers discharge onto stringers scupper flashing shall also be mounted on the affected stringers .
num vegetation and debris clearing under bridges num .
refer to specifications num clearing and num environment for clearing permissions and limit of clearing .
num .
all clearing works are to comply with document no .
num preventative maintenance standard for timber bridges .
clearing num .
the area of land under each bridge from num metres beyond each abutment and extending to num metres past the bridge edge or to the road reserve boundaries whichever is the greater is designated to be the control area for the bridge .
num .
under certain circumstances where vegetation does not pose a fire hazard or affect the free flow of water under the bridge and it is considered to be of special significance or of special aesthetic value it may be retained subject to the approval of the superintendent .
num .
bridges that are located within water catchment areas or are in areas of special control such as the avon valley swan river trust etc .
may be controlled by specific regulations for vegetation clearance and their acts which prevail over the main roads act and the local government act .
in such circumstances vegetation clearing shall be carried out in accordance with the prevailing act and regulations .
num termite treatment and eradication num .
the contractor shall carry out a detailed inspection of the bridge and surrounding area up to numm from the bridge for any evidence of termite activity .
termite treatment num .
termite eradication measures shall be initiated for all affected areas with a report produced by the contractor detailing treatment method and application rates .
it is recommended that termidor termiticide or a similar alternative approved by the superintendent be used .
the proposed application technique shall be specified in the tender submission .
num .
permanent aluminium tags shall be fixed to the bridge at abutment num so as to be clearly visible by others .
the tag shall contain the following information by metal stamping bridge number name of treating company date of treatment chemical used licence number of pest control operator and date for reinspection .
num .
all treatment sites shall be marked with coloured paint for identification and monitoring .
specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall prepare a report and submit it to the superintendent within num weeks of initial treatment outlining details of initial detailed inspection exact location of termite activity and treatment methods .
num .
the contractor shall reinspect the bridge after a period of num months .
if active termites are found they shall be eradicated at no cost to the principal .
num .
the contractor shall prepare a followup report and submit it to the superintendent within num weeks of reinspection outlining details of current termite activity and treatment .
the report shall be specific with regards to exact locations of treatment site accompanied by sketches .
num embankment widening num .
any embankment widening required for pathways traffic safety barrier terminations and the like shall be constructed to similar standards to the existing adjacent embankment if not detailed on the drawings .
num timber handrail maintenance num .
the existing handrail to the footpath on the bridge is to receive maintenance work for information only refer activity code no .
num of document no .
num preventive maintenance standard for timber bridges followed by repainting .
the entire surface of the handrail both posts and rails shall be repainted .
num .
prior to painting all surfaces shall be prepared by removal of the existing paint system to a sound surface then washing scraping sanding and filling as appropriate and in accordance with asnzs num section num .
num .
damaged or unserviceable railings spacer blocks and posts shall be removed .
num .
new posts spacer blocks railings and delineators where necessary and as indicated on the drawings shall be installed ensuring good general rail alignment .
num .
all structural fixings and anchorages shall be tightened except at expansion joints on steel flex beam railing .
num .
all surfaces shall receive a minimum of three coats of paint as follows one coat of primer to as num two coats of gloss to as num rails shall be painted white and posts white above the deck and black below in accordance with the existing colour scheme .
all paint shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations unless specified otherwise in this specification .
num .
during all preparation and painting operations the contractor shall ensure that no material falls into the river .
specification num timber bridges num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title timber bridges revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager contracts .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num bridge bearings copyright main roads western australia specification num bridge bearings num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date num num a minimum of two cubes shall be taken from each batch of mortar mixed is amended to a minimum of two cubes shall be taken per grout pad .
sdse num whole document reformatted sco num whole document complete review no change asdse num num num amended sdse num table num new table coefficient of friction for unlubricated sliding surfaces added whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num bridge bearings num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num num elastomeric bearings num num pot bearings num num num not used num design and manufacture num num general num num acceptance tests for elastomeric bearings num num design of pot bearings num num acceptance tests for pot bearings num num rejection num num transport and delivery num num num not used num installation num num location and fixing of elastomeric bearings num num location and fixing of pot bearings num num inspection of pot bearings num num installation of elastomeric bearings num num installation of pot bearings num num tolerances for installation num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num supply of bearings by principal num specification num bridge bearings num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num bridge bearings general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the design manufacture testing delivery and installation of bridge bearings .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num bridge design bearings and deck joints australiannew zealand standards asnzs num structural steel hot rolled bars and sections asnzs num hotdip galvanised zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles num num not used num elastomeric bearings num .
elastomeric bearings to be supplied under this contract shall comprise of laminated rubber elastomeric bearings and are designated on the drawings by their as part numbers as given in tables anum to anum of as num .
num .
bearings shall be of the sizes shown on the drawings within the tolerances given in appendix c of as num .
num pot bearings num .
all materials used in the manufacture of the pot bearings shall conform to the relevant australian standards .
the bearing units shall be simple to maintain or maintenance free and shall be suitably protected against corrosion and the ingress of dirt and other material .
nonmetallic materials shall be chemically inert .
num .
all exposed ferrous material components shall be hotdip galvanised in accordance with the requirements of asnzs num and shall have a minimum thickness of num microns .
specification num bridge bearings num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the elastomer shall be natural rubber of ihrd num num complying with the requirements of as num .
rubber pads shall have metallic sealing rings and in no case shall the clearance between sealing ring and cylinder exceed num micrometres with the ring hard up on any side of the pot .
num .
where sliding pot bearings are proposed the ptfe pad shall consist of sheet manufactured from num virgin polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe resins .
the ptfe pad shall contain lubricant retention cavities complying with the requirements of clause num of as num .
num .
the contractor shall lubricate the bearing surface of the ptfe pad with dow corning dc num or similar approved by the superintendent .
num .
where constrained bearings are proposed the sliding surfaces of the constraints shall be of approved materials exhibiting a coefficient of friction of not more than num .
num num not used design and manufacture num general num .
bearings shall comply with the requirements of as num except as varied by this specification .
acceptance of bearings will depend on satisfactory completion of load tests as set out in clause num for elastomeric bearings and in clause num for pot bearings .
num acceptance tests for elastomeric bearings num general num .
the load testing of bearings is part of the acceptance requirements of this specification .
all tests shall be carried out in a testing laboratory certified by the national association of testing authorities australia for the type of bearing and class of test concerned .
num .
testing shall be carried out on completion of manufacture of all bearings .
acceptance of bearings will be dependent upon satisfactory completion of the tests detailed below testing a .
compression test in accordance with clause num. b .
stability test in accordance with clause num. c. proof loading in accordance with clause num. d. determination of bearing stiffness in accordance with clause num .
num .
a full description of the sequence and method of application of loads shall be recorded by the contractor .
specification num bridge bearings num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
test loads shall be applied slowly and at a uniform rate .
when the specified loading has been attained it shall be maintained steady sufficiently long for a physical examination of the bearing or for two minutes whichever is the greater before unloading .
if any damage occurs then the load and time at which any damage begins to occur shall be recorded .
num compression test num .
all bearings shall be loaded individually to num times the rated load at zero rotation and zero shear given on the drawings or in the relevant table of the as num .
num stability test num .
num of bearings of the same capacity and type shall be loaded in pairs under the rated load at zero shear .
num .
lateral deflections of rectangular bearings shall be recorded in directions parallel to width and length dimensions .
one bearing in the pair shall then be rotated through num in the horizontal plane .
the pair shall then be reloaded with the maximum rated load and the lateral deflection parallel to each dimension again recorded at the same points on the nonrotated bearing .
from these two results the lateral deflections for each bearing alone shall be calculated .
num .
in case of bearings which are circular in plan one bearing shall be rotated with respect to the other for a series of equal loads until an orientation producing maximum lateral deflection is located .
the bearings shall then be loaded under the maximum rated load and the maximum radial lateral deflection measured .
the bearings shall be permanently marked and then reloaded with one bearing rotated through num with respect to the other .
the lateral radial deflection shall then be measured at the same point on the nonrotated bearing and the lateral deflection for each bearing alone shall be calculated .
num .
any bearing in which the lateral deflection in any direction under the test load is greater than num of the vertical height of the bearing shall be rejected .
num proof loading num .
the contractor shall carry out the tests set out in table num on one pair of bearings of each type and capacity .
the bearings shall be loaded in stacked pairs in the test apparatus .
num .
during the test described at b or c in table.num the net contact area shall be not less than num of the unloaded bearing area .
specification num bridge bearings num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num proof loading test a the rated load at zero rotation and maximum shear plus num x the maximum rated shear deflection .
b num x rated load at zero rotation and maximum shear plus num x the maximum rated shear deflection .
c num x the maximum rated shear deflection plus num x rated load at zero rotation and maximum shear .
num stiffness num .
bearings shall be tested to determine their compressive and shear stiffness .
num .
all bearings shall be tested for compressive stiffness in accordance with clause dnum of asnum .
testing for compressive stiffness may be carried out in conjunction with the compression test .
the mean compressive stiffness of all bearings tested shall be within num of the value given in as num and the compressive stiffness of any individual bearing shall be within num of the mean .
num .
num of bearings of each type with a minimum of two bearings shall be tested for shear stiffness in accordance with clause dnum of as num .
the shear stiffness of any bearing shall be within num of the value given in as num .
num design of pot bearings num .
the bearings shall be free to rotate and to accommodate expansion and contraction of the structure in the directions and to the extents indicated on the drawings .
throughout the range of movements indicated the bearings shall be capable of carrying the vertical and lateral loads as set out on the drawings .
num .
dimensional requirements of the bearings and arrangements for fixing are given on the drawings .
variations from these may be acceptable details must be submitted at time of tender .
num .
where bearing units are required to permit movements by sliding the sliding requirement and frictional characteristics shall be in accordance with clause num and clause num of as num respectively .
num .
the design of all bearings shall also take into account the combinations of loads and associated criteria specified for the acceptance testing .
specification num bridge bearings num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num acceptance tests for pot bearings num .
upon completion of manufacture and before final assembly of all the bearing units the contractor must notify the superintendent in writing that the bearings are ready for inspection .
the superintendent shall inspect the internal components of each bearing unit prior to final assembly of the bearings .
hold point num .
to prevent the possibility of metaltometal contact under service conditions all sliding bearings must be checked after final assembly and there must be a minimum clearance of nummm between any opposed horizontal metal surfaces .
num .
pot bearing acceptance tests are required and shall be carried out in the presence of the superintendent at a testing laboratory certified by the national association of testing authorities australia for the type of bearing and class of test concerned .
load testing shall be in accordance with clause num of as num and as outlined below .
testing num .
testing shall be carried out on completion of manufacture of all bearing types .
the contractor shall give at least num weeks written notice of intention to test bearings to the superintendent to enable adequate arrangements to be made for inspection .
hold point num .
a minimum of two bearing units from num identical bearings or part thereof of each type supplied shall be tested by the contractor in the presence of the superintendent .
num .
test loads shall be applied slowly and at a uniform rate .
in tests where both vertical and horizontal loads are required they may be applied simultaneously or independently .
where horizontal and vertical loads are applied independently the horizontal load shall be applied after the vertical load .
when the specified loading has been attained it shall be maintained steady sufficiently long for a physical examination of the bearing or for two minutes whichever is the greater before unloading .
num .
where the pot bearing is a sliding type the coefficient of friction shall be determined by a separate test under the vertical load from permanent effects only .
before determining the coefficient of friction the bearing sliding surfaces under load shall be moved forward and backward once to bed the surfaces .
the horizontal load in the direction of sliding shall be monitored continuously throughout the test .
the coefficient of friction shall be determined by the ratio of the horizontal load measured when the surfaces of the bearing just begin to slide to the applied vertical load and shall be the average value from three separate tests .
the tests shall be carried out with the ptfe in the unlubricated condition .
the maximum measured coefficient of friction must not exceed the values specified in table num for the relevant stresses on the ptfe .
on completion of testing the bearing surface shall be lubricated with dow corning dc num or similar approved by the superintendent .
specification num bridge bearings num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num coefficient of friction for unlubricated sliding surfaces bearing pressure num mpa num mpa num mpa num mpa num mpa coefficient of friction num num num num num note friction values for intermediate bearing pressures shall be linearly interpolated .
num .
should any bearing exhibit any signs of damage or permanent distortion either during or after test loading or should the horizontal coefficient of static friction exceed the value specified in clause num this shall constitute a failure under test and shall be cause for rejection of all bearings of the type represented .
bearings exhibiting any signs of damage or permanent distortion before testing shall be rejected .
num .
the satisfactory test performance of any bearing does not preclude it from being rejected if it shows signs of damage or permanent distortion after delivery .
num .
all costs incurred in testing shall be borne by the contractor and considered as incidental to the supply of bearings .
num rejection num .
where a bearing is rejected on the basis of unacceptable test performance the contractor may elect to test all bearings of the type represented and only bearings successfully passing the tests may be accepted .
in addition all replacement bearings shall be acceptance tested .
the cost of all additional testing shall be at no cost to the principal .
num transport and delivery num .
the contractor shall take all necessary precautions to prevent damage to the bearings during handling storage and delivery to site .
num .
all elastomeric bearings shall be clearly labelled with the project name as part number and test number referred to in the test certificate together with any other relevant information .
num .
all pot bearings shall be marked and identified in accordance with clause num of as num .
num .
if bearings are to be lifted by crane they shall be lifted on a properly designed platform .
wire rope slings shall not contact the bearings during handling .
num num not used installation num location and fixing of elastomeric bearings num .
all bearings shall be placed on mortar pads and shall be located in position on the abutments and piers by steel dowels which shall protrude through the lower outer steel plate unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
specification num bridge bearings num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num location and fixing of pot bearings num .
fixing arrangements including oversize holes are indicated on the drawings to accommodate construction tolerances .
the bearings shall be proportioned to accommodate the oversize holes together with appropriate bolts and washers unless alternative arrangements are approved .
num .
the bearing units shall be constructed so as to be capable of being temporarily secured in their correct relative positions during installation and pouring of the deck concrete .
the fixing arrangement of the pot bearings shall be designed to permit future removal of the bearings without raising the bridge deck in excess of nummm and shall accommodate the raising of the bearing level up to nummm resulting from settlement of the structure .
num .
the contractor shall supply all necessary fixings with the pot bearings .
all fixings shall be hotdip galvanised .
num .
the contractor shall supply and install nummm thick galvanised steel shims between the top of each pot bearing and the deck soffit as nominated on the drawings .
shims shall be manufactured from steel grade num to asnzs num and galvanised .
shims shall be slotted and plan size shall be determined to suit the contractors chosen pot bearing dimensions .
the bearing top fixing bolts shall be removable to allow shims to be removed as settlement occurs .
num inspection of pot bearings num .
the internal components of each pot bearing shall be inspected prior to final assembly of the bearing units .
num .
to prevent the possibility of metal to metal contact under service conditions all sliding bearings shall be checked after final assembly and there shall be a minimum clearance of nummm between any opposed horizontal metal surfaces .
num installation of elastomeric bearings num .
all elastomeric bridge bearings shall be installed to the requirements of this specification and the details shown on the drawings .
num .
grout pads shall be well compacted and shall be constructed with formed sides as detailed on the drawings .
bearings may be used to set the levels of the pad but shall be removed for inspection of the finished pad .
num .
the pads shall consist of an approved non shrink cementitious grout with a minimum of num days compressive strength of nummpa when tested using a nummm cube or as specified on the drawings .
a minimum of two cubes shall be taken per grout pad .
num installation of pot bearings num .
the contractor shall be responsible for the installation of the bearings in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations and to the lines and levels shown on the drawings .
specification num bridge bearings num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
grout packing shall be with an approved non shrink cementitious grout mixed and placed in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
num .
the grout shall have a minimum num day compressive strength of nummpa when tested using a nummm cube or as specified on the drawings .
a minimum of two cubes shall be taken per grout pad .
num tolerances for installation num .
bearings shall be installed to the following tolerances a. misplacement of centre lines nummm b .
variation from specified level at centre nummm c. inclination from horizontal num in num num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num bridge bearings num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa supply of bearings by principal description number location time of availability weeks after commencement of contract note this annexure is used in conjunction with clause num and should be varied as required to suit .
delete this note and the annexure where not applicable specification num bridge bearings num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
num .
clause num bearings supplied by the principal if the principal will presupply bearings include clause num and complete annexure numa .
num annexure numa is provided for listing principal supplied items such as pretested bearings in which case the clauses relating to materials manufacture and testing should be deleted clauses num to num .
the description to be entered in annexure numa should include identification with items shown on the drawings as well as the size and weight and the location for pickup of bearings .
num .
bearing type if elastomeric bearings only are specified mark all clauses for pot bearings as not used and delete the other subclauses as appropriate .
if pot bearings only are specified mark all clauses for elastomeric bearings as not used and delete the other subclauses as appropriate .
num .
clause num location and fixing of elastomeric bearings if drawings show elastomeric bearings placed on epoxy pads remove all reference to mortar in this clause and to grout and mortar in num .
specification num bridge bearings num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num bearings supplied by the principal num .
the principal will make available free of charge to the contractor permanent bearings as listed in annexure numa to be used in the works .
num .
the contractor shall be responsible for collecting and transporting and installing the bearings as shown on the drawings .
num .
the items will be available at the commencement of the contract .
num .
the contractor shall supply all dowels mortar and other materials required for satisfactory installation of the bearings .
specification num bridge bearings num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title bridge bearings revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num compression joint seals copyright main roads western australia specification num compression joint seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num whole document complete review no change asdse num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num compression joint seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num general num num num not used num installation num num general num num workmanship num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num types of seals and joints num specification num compression joint seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num compression joint seals general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply and installation of compression joint seals at the junction of bridge abutments and approach slabs and the installation of associated expansion joints .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below main roads specifications specification num concrete for structures num num not used products and materials num general num .
the type of compression joint seal and expansion joint angle shall be as specified on the drawings andor as shown in annexure numa .
num .
compression joint seals shall be or similar approved .
num .
expansion joint angles or edging shall be fabricated from .. and shall be anchored in place by .. cast in place .
num num not used installation num general num .
installation shall be in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations and shall by a method which prevents damage to the seal .
specification num compression joint seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num workmanship num .
all work shall be carried out by capable personnel under the supervision of experienced and competent supervisors to fully satisfy the requirements of this specification .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num compression joint seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa types of seals and joints type of seal or joint location comment note complete above table as necessary and delete this note specification num compression joint seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
specification num compression joint seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num compression joint seals num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title compression joint seals revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num finger plate expansion joint copyright main roads western australia specification num finger plate expansion joint num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num whole document complete review no change asdse num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num finger plate expansion joint num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num finger plate num num epoxy num num num not used num fabrication num num general num num num not used num operations num num installation num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num specification num finger plate expansion joint num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num finger plate expansion joint general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the supply manufacture and installation of finger plate expansion joints .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num ductile cast iron main roads specifications specification num minor steel items num num not used products and materials num finger plate num .
the finger plate shall be cast from grade num iron to as num .
finger plate num epoxy num .
the finger plates shall be installed on an epoxy mortar bed as specified on the drawings strictly in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
the epoxy shall have a minimum num day compressive strength of nummpa when tested using a nummm cube unless specified otherwise on the drawings .
epoxy num .
the epoxy shall contain suitable graded sand filler .
num .
the contractor shall forward details of the proposed mix for approval by the superintendent and shall prepare samples for determination of compression strengths .
hold point specification num finger plate expansion joint num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used fabrication num general num .
the expansion joint shall be a purpose made finger plate assembly with cover plates as detailed on the drawings .
num .
the pattern for the finger plate and a sample casting shall be submitted to the superintendent for approval before final casting is carried out .
hold point num .
the finger plate and all associated minor items of steel work shall be manufactured and delivered in accordance with specification num minor steel items .
num num not used operations num installation num .
the finger plates shall be installed within tolerances of nummm laterally and nummm vertically .
installation tolerances num .
the installation procedure for the finger plates shall be as follows a .
cast in anchor sockets and debonding sleeves when pouring abutment back wall and abutment diaphragm using a jig to accurately locate sockets in both plan position and depth .
b. lightly scabble the concrete surface of the finger plate recess .
c. when supporting concrete has reached specified num day strength install finger plates to correct position and level using rubber packing pieces .
d. remove finger plates and lightly coat underside with an approved bond breaker .
e. form up expansion gap with expanded polystyrene to retain epoxy mortar .
f. prime concrete surface that is to receive epoxy mortar .
g. pour epoxy mortar bed level with the top of the rubber packers .
h. lightly secure hold down bolts just sufficiently to locate plate on packers .
i .
when epoxy mortar has hardened remove plates and then remove packers and make good the voids with epoxy mortar .
specification num finger plate expansion joint num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name j .
when epoxy mortar has reached the specified strength replace plates and tighten holding down bolts to the specified torque .
k. fill annular gap between nut and plate with sand filled epoxy .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num finger plate expansion joint num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
specification num finger plate expansion joint num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num finger plate expansion joint num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title finger plate expansion joint revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num waterproof membrane copyright main roads western australia specification num waterproof membrane num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num num guidelines for the application of waterproof membranes to bridge decks added in references sdse num num new reference asdse num num curing of seal num new hold point whole document complete review no change asdse num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num waterproof membrane num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num strip membranes num num primer num num num not used num preparation num num cleaning num num num not used num application num num strip membrane num num bituminous seal num num asphalt num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num specification num waterproof membrane num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num waterproof membrane general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the installation of waterproof membranes to bridge structural elements including the application of a bituminous surfacing prior to the placement of asphalt .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below main roads specifications specification num bituminous surfacing specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing specification num concrete for structures main roads standards num guidelines for the timing of bituminous surfacing treatments num guidelines for the application of waterproof membranes to bridge decks num num not used products and materials num strip membranes num .
all waterproof strip membranes shall be bituthene products or similar approved .
an alternative strip membrane with properties similar to that of bituthene num or num may be used subject to the approval of the superintendent .
num .
waterproof strip membranes shall be applied at the following locations andor as shown on the drawings a .
to the longitudinal strip between the bridge deck and the mortar bedding to the precast kerbing .
specification num waterproof membrane num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name b .
to the back face of all contraction and construction joints in abutments and retaining walls .
c. locations where precast elements abut or join .
num .
bituthene num shall only be applied to a surface that does not require subsequent asphalt surfacing .
num .
bituthene num shall be applied to the top surface of the bridge deck as shown on the drawings .
num primer num .
a water or solvent based primer shall be used to bond the strip membrane to the concrete substrate .
the primer shall be compatible for use with the membrane system and applied in accordance with the manufacturers published requirements .
num num not used preparation num cleaning num .
the contractor shall ensure that the minimum concrete curing period has been achieved prior to the removal of the curing method in accordance with specification num concrete for structures .
num .
the contractor shall remove all dust loose or adherent matter from the surface of the deck .
num .
the contractor shall remove all of the curing agent film or matter from the surface of the deck by an appropriate method .
curing agent num num not used application num strip membrane num .
the contractor shall allow the concrete to air dry after removal of the curing material or method prior to the application of the strip membrane system for a minimum period as per the following a .
where a solvent based primer is to be used as part of the strip membrane system the minimum airdrying period shall be num days .
b .
where a water based primer is to be used as part of the strip membrane system the minimum airdrying period shall be num days .
c. where alternative products require longer airdrying time than specified above then the minimum airdrying time shall be in accordance with the manufacturers published requirements .
specification num waterproof membrane num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
prior to the application of the strip membrane the contractor shall demonstrate to the superintendent that all curing agent film or matter has been removed and the concrete deck has dried sufficiently to meet the requirements of the strip membrane application procedures of the manufacturer .
hold point num .
the strip membrane shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers published requirements .
num .
all joints in the strip membrane shall have a minimum overlap of nummm .
num .
the strip membrane shall not be exposed to direct sunlight during periods of hot weather and shall be temporarily covered with a suitable reflective foil laminate to reduce the occurrence of blisters and bubbles developing in the membrane .
exposure num .
if blisters or bubbles are evident in the strip membrane prior to the application of a bituminous seal on a bridge deck they shall be repaired before application of the bituminous seal .
blistering num bituminous seal num .
if blisters or bubbles are evident prior to the application of bituminous seal on a bridge deck they shall be repaired before the application of the bituminous seal .
num .
a bituminous seal shall be applied by either of the following methods a .
where conventional bituminous sealing is to be applied a dilute emulsion prime and a waterproof rubberised seal shall be applied in accordance with specification num bituminous surfacing and the drawings .
the bituminous seal shall be applied to the surface of the bridge deck within num hours of the strip membrane being placed .
b .
where polymer modified bituminous pmb sealing is to be applied a dilute emulsion prime and a waterproof seal shall be applied in accordance with specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing and the drawings .
the bituminous seal shall be applied to the surface of the bridge deck within num hours of the strip membrane being placed .
pmb seals num .
the bituminous seal shall be allowed to cure to remove cutting oils prior to asphalt being placed .
the length of curing will vary depending on the quantity of cutting oil and the weather conditions at the time of curing .
guidance is available in main roads document num .
num asphalt num .
if blisters or bubbles are evident prior to the application of the asphalt on a bridge deck they shall be repaired before the application of the asphalt .
blistering num .
asphalt shall not be applied if blistering is evident in the bituminous seal in areas of the bridge deck to be subjected to vehicle movements .
specification num waterproof membrane num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
prior to application of the asphalt the contractor shall demonstrate to the superintendent that the bituminous seal has been cured for a sufficient period of time to remove volatile oils .
hold point num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num waterproof membrane num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
num .
strip membranes num the description of the extent of waterproofing membranes must be checked against the design drawings and modified if appropriate .
num .
bituminous seal num within perth and its environs main roads wa policy is to apply rubberised seals in accordance with specification num bituminous surfacing .
at sites distant from perth a pmb seal in accordance with specification num polymer modified bituminous surfacing may be applied in lieu of a rubberised seal due to the requirement for increased holding times .
at remote sites a pmb suited to site blending may be used .
specification num waterproof membrane num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num waterproof membrane num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title waterproof membrane revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num concrete general works copyright main roads western australia specification num concrete general works num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date num added australian standard .
amended text for other standards .
sbde num num added and against constituents deleted para num aggregate durability .
num amended text in paras num num and num .
added new para num aggregate durability num clause admixtures added text para num .
num deleted clause reinforcement num deleted clause formwork num clause curing and protection .
amended text para num num clause concrete surfaces deleted para num .
num replaced reference water services specification section spnum cementitious materials for concrete to australian technical infrastructure committee atic specification spnum cementitious materials for concrete .
sbde num num replaced all references wss spnum to atic specification spnum num added reference to wss spnum sde num num added clauses on cement annexure numa added concrete request for registration form num new clause added titled aggregate sde num guidance notes guidance note concerning paving joints and surface finish added sde num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num concrete general works num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num aggregate num products and materials num num cement num num admixtures num num class of concrete num num num not used num operations num num general num num mixing of concrete num num placing of concrete num num testing num num curing and protection num num concreting in hot weather num num concrete surfaces num num conformance and nonconformance num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num cementitious materials for concrete request for registration by manufacturer num specification num concrete general works num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num concrete general works general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the mix design the supply and delivery placing compaction finishing curing and protection of concrete for general nonstructural works where normal n class concrete has been specified .
num .
concrete for bridgeworks manufacture of reinforced concrete box culverts and other major structures is covered in specification num concrete for structures .
major concrete structures num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num methods of testing concrete as num specification and supply of concrete as num chemical admixtures for concrete mortar and grout admixtures for concrete as num chemical admixtures for concrete mortar and grout methods of sampling and testing admixture for concrete mortar and grout as num aggregates and rock for engineering purposes part num concrete aggregates as num concrete structures .
as num formwork for concrete part num documentation and surface finish as num liquid membraneforming curing compounds for concrete as num general purpose and blended cements australiannew zealand standards asnzs num steel reinforcing materials specification num concrete general works num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name other standards australian technical infrastructure committee atic specification spnum cementitious materials for concrete main roads specifications specification num quality systems specification num falsework specification num concrete for structures specification num formwork specification num steel reinforcement num definitions num general num .
concrete in general shall consist of a mixture of cement water coarse aggregate and fine aggregate .
constituents num .
the strength of concrete shall be defined as the average num day compressive strength of a minimum of two standard nummm diameter by num mm long cylinders taken from the same sample and made and cured and tested in accordance with as num .
strength num finished concrete num .
in its finished state the concrete shall be sound dense durable free from honeycombing and shall have the strength and other properties specified .
finished state num .
the exposed surfaces shall be smooth and dust free and conform to the shape tolerances specified .
num .
concrete shall comply with as num except as varied by the requirements of this specification .
num aggregate num .
fine aggregates for concrete shall be natural sand or a combination of natural and manufactured sand and shall comply with the requirements of as num .
the maximum amount of water absorption for fine aggregates shall not exceed num percent and num percent respectively .
fine aggregates num .
coarse aggregates for concrete shall be crushed igneous rock or crushed or screened river gravel conforming to the requirements of as num .
the maximum amount of water absorption for coarse aggregates shall not exceed num percent .
coarse aggregates num .
the durability of coarse aggregates shall be assessed according to test methods of as num .
the acceptance criteria for these tests shall be that for a concrete exposure classification c unless otherwise specified .
durability specification num concrete general works num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
all aggregates proposed for use in the works shall comply with the requirements of the alkalireactive materials clause of as num .
aggregates that are classified as slowlyreactive or reactive shall not be used .
alkalireactive materials num .
the contractor shall provide proper means of storing the aggregates .
each nominal size of coarse aggregate and fine aggregate shall be kept separated and suitable precautions shall be taken to prevent the aggregates from being contaminated by the ground or by windblown dust or other foreign matter .
storage num .
the grading of the individual aggregates shall conform to the overall limits for these materials given in as num .
sampling for the purposes of carrying out tests shall be in accordance with as num testing num .
aggregates shall meet the durability criteria for concrete exposure classification c of as num .
aggregate durability products and materials num cement num .
unless otherwise specified all cement used in the works shall comply with the requirements of type gp cement as specified in as num and australian technical infrastructure committee atic specification spnum .
the contractor shall provide manufacturers test certificates showing all cement has been sampled tested and conforms in all respects with as num and atic specification spnum .
testing num .
blended cement shall be a combination of type gp cement and ground granulated iron blastfurnace slag complying with as num and atic specification sp num .
the densified silica fume to be added to the blended cement shall be finely divided and comply with asnzs num and atic specification spnum .
blended cement num .
cement for manufacture of concrete shall comply with the requirements of atic specification spnum .
the cementitious material registration scheme cmrs shall be used to confirm that the cement complies with atic specification spnum .
the standard application form for cmrs registration is given in annexure numa .
certification num .
prior to manufacturing of concrete the contractor shall confirm that the cement complies with atic specification spnum and shall provide the cmrs registration number for the cement to the superintendent for approval of the cement .
hold point num .
the contractor shall use cement in approximately the chronological order in which it is delivered from the manufacturer .
transportation units and storage bins for bulk cement shall be weatherproof and shall be constructed so that there is no dead storage .
the contractor shall demonstrate that the storage bins for bulk cement do not have any dead storage .
if dead storage exists the bins shall be emptied completely at least once every three months .
cement delivered in bags shall be stored in weatherproof structures having floors raised above the ground .
cement that is more than three months old shall not be used .
specification num concrete general works num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
concrete manufactured from cement not conforming to this specification or from cement that has deteriorated and become unsuitable for use shall be rejected num admixtures num .
admixtures may be used in concrete to modify workability but will not be permitted for the purpose of reducing cement content .
however the admixture shall have no harmful effect whatsoever upon the quality of the concrete or upon any reinforcement or other fixture embedded therein .
admixtures compliance num .
any admixture when tested in accordance with as num shall comply with the requirements of and be used in accordance with as num .
num class of concrete num .
the class of concrete shall be normalclass as specified on the drawings .
normal class concrete num .
unless otherwise noted slump and aggregate size is as follows a .
maximum aggregate size nummm aggregate size b .
maximum slump nummm slump num .
specifying supply parameters for normalclass concrete .
normalclass concrete shall be specified in accordance with as num including all of the following concrete supply a .
standard strength grade to be designated as one of nnum nnum nnum nnum or nnum strength grade b .
the slump at point of acceptance c. intended method of placement d. the maximum nominal size of aggregate and e. project assessment to provide additional test data if required by the supplier .
num num not used operations num general num .
requirements for falsework shall be in accordance with specification num falsework .
falsework num .
requirements for formwork shall be in accordance with specification num formwork .
formwork num .
requirements for steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with specification num steel reinforcement .
reinforcement specification num concrete general works num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num mixing of concrete num .
production and delivery for the concrete shall be in accordance with the requirements of as num except that additional water shall not be introduced into a mixed batch of concrete and the period for completion of discharge from the commencement of mixing shall not exceed num minutes .
batch plant transit mixers num placing of concrete num .
prior to the placement of any concrete the contractor must certify to the superintendent that all falsework formwork reinforcement levels placement procedures and curing procedures to be employed comply with the requirements of the technical specification .
hold point num .
before commencement of each concrete pour the contractor must demonstrate to the superintendent that sufficient vibrators and spares are available and tested .
the number of working vibrators required must not be less than one for each num cubic metres of concrete placed per hour .
the number of standby vibrators must not be less than num of the number of working vibrators with a minimum of one .
hold point num .
concrete shall be conveyed from onsite mixers to its final position without delay and by methods which will not permit segregation andor loss of material .
all the concrete shall be placed in its final position within ninety minutes of the materials having been placed in the mixer .
transport placing num .
concrete shall be placed in a manner which will prevent segregation .
concrete shall be spread in horizontal layers with the first layer not exceeding nummm in compacted thickness and the thickness of subsequent layers limited to num of the length of the immersion vibrators used .
placing shall be continuous between specified or approved construction joints .
num .
during placing concrete shall be compacted using mechanical or pneumatic immersion vibrators to remove all voids and air bubbles .
immersion vibrators shall have a frequency of not less than num hertz and where concrete class num or num finish is specified shall be fitted with approved rubber caps .
the largest practical size of vibrator should be used .
vibration num .
care shall be taken during placing to see that no foreign substances are included in the concrete .
foreign substances num .
the location of all construction joints shall be as indicated on the drawings or approved by the superintendent .
construction joints shall be made on true vertical and horizontal planes and the surface shall be roughened to remove all laitance and expose the aggregate to provide a thorough bond with concrete cast subsequently .
the roughened surface shall be thoroughly cleaned with water to remove loose chips and any foreign matter .
immediately before fresh concrete is cast against the joint the hardened concrete surface shall be thoroughly wetted .
construction joints specification num concrete general works num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num testing num general num .
all minor structural works shall be tested in accordance with sub clauses num and num below and in accordance with structural concrete quality verification requirements in specification num quality systems .
general non structural concrete works may be accepted on the basis of project testing certification provided by the concrete supplier .
testing requirements num .
sampling and testing of concrete specimens shall be in accordance with as num parts num to num .
concrete test cylinders shall be nummm diameter by nummm long .
rubber caps may be used for the capping of test cylinders as allowed in as num .
sampling testing num .
the contractor shall have available not less than num concrete moulds slump cone and tray and rod .
num compressive strength analysis num .
any batch of concrete shall be deemed to comply with the strength requirements of this specification if compliance a .
every concrete test specimen in the batch has a num day compressive strength greater than num of the characteristic strength and b .
the average num day compressive strength of the concrete test specimens in the batch is equal to or greater than the characteristic strength .
num curing and protection num .
freshly placed concrete shall be protected from the sun wind and rain and prevented from drying out too quickly .
num .
all concrete surfaces shall be cured by one of the following methods for not less than five num days a .
continuous wetting .
b. spraying with an approved curing compound complying with the requirements of as num .
such curing compound shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
c. wrapping with polythene or similar film to provide an airtight cover .
d. maintaining the formwork in position for the curing period .
num .
the contractor shall ensure that the method of curing shall not result in any staining of exposed surfaces of concrete .
num concreting in hot weather num .
the requirements of as num for temperature of the concrete at the point of discharge shall be met for all concrete works undertaken in hot weather .
in addition placement of concrete shall only be permitted providing placement temperature specification num concrete general works num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name a. the concrete mix temperature during placement shall at no time exceed numc mix temperature and either b. the ambient shade temperature does not exceed numc and is falling shade temperature or c. the ambient shade temperature is less than numc and rising provided that the placement can be completed before the ambient temperature exceeds numc .
num concrete surfaces num .
the type of formed concrete surface finish shall be as shown on the drawings and shall comply with the requirements of section num of as num .
formed surface finish num .
the type of unformed surface finish shall be as shown on the drawings and shall be in accordance with table num below .
unformed surface finish table num unformed surface finishes for concrete designated finish type of concrete finish maximum allowable surface irregularities unum a wood floated finish to produce a uniform surface without surface pitting or cavities nummm abrupt or nummm in a numm template unum a high quality steel trowelled finish having a dense smooth impervious finish without surface pitting or cavities nil abrupt or nummm in a numm template unum a high quality mechanical steel trowelled finish having a dense impervious finish without surface pitting or cavities nummm abrupt or nummm in a numm template unum a wood floated surface with a broomed finish nummm abrupt or nummm in a numm template num conformance and nonconformance num .
concrete that shows evidence of poor workmanship such as honeycombing or is porous due to inadequate compaction or due to segregation or concrete that fails to comply with this specification in regard to strength or tolerances or finishes or other requirements shall be deemed to be nonconforming .
nonconforming num .
if at any time the concrete fails to meet any of the requirements of this specification concreting operations shall be suspended until corrective measures are taken at no cost to the principal .
operations suspended specification num concrete general works num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num concrete general works num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa atic cementitious materials for concrete request for registration by manufacturer cement or blend details product name type proportions manufacturer place of manufacture source of constituent materials cement clinker fly ash slag limestone gypsum grinding aids supply details dispatching supplier contact name contact phone no .
contact address suppliers abn send this form with the sample to rta chemical and materials laboratory att laboratory officer unit h num st. hilliers rd auburn nsw num for rta laboratory use only date of registration registration no specification num concrete general works num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the senior bridge design engineer .
clause num class of concrete the project manager shall select the appropriate concrete grade in clause num concrete paving the project manager shall ensure that constructioncontractionexpansion joint details and the paving surface finish are preferably included on the contract drawings or failing this that details are clearly described within the contract specific requirements section of the specification .
specification num concrete general works num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num concrete general works num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title concrete general works revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager contracts .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num fencing copyright main roads western australia specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num num num num num num num num num num num relevant standards changed from as to asnzs as num as num as num as num as num as num as num as num asdse num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num concrete footings num num bricks num num limestone blocks num num mortar num num steelwork num num timber num num fibre cement num num electric fence components num num gates num num num not used num sampling and testing of masonry works num num bricks num num limestone blocks num num mortar num num sample masonry num num num not used num earthworks num num general num num clearing and topsoil removal num num excavation num num acceptance of bearing surfaces to carry loads num num foundation improvement num num protection of bearing surfaces num num backfilling num num damaged areas num num num not used num construction num num materials storage num num equipment num num survey control num num existing fences num specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num construction tolerances num num waterway crossings num num earthing system isolation num num concrete works num num brick and limestone block work num num timber workmanship num num fibre cement fencing num num steel sheet fencing num num chainwire fencing num num agricultural fencing num num straining of wires num num gates num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num handover requirements num num asbuilt requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num fence details num specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num fencing general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of all operations involved in the supply and installation of fencing and gates including concrete footings and fence materials of brick and limestone timber fibre cement sheet metal chainwire and agricultural fencing including electric fencing .
num .
locations and types of fencing shall be as specified in annexure numa unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num steel tubes and tubulars for ordinary service as num methods of testing soils for engineering purposes as num the specification and supply of concrete as num tensile strength as num preservative treatment sawn and round timber as num timber structures as num galvanised railless chainwire security fences and gates as num timber hardwood visually graded for structural purposes as num steel nails metric series as num coated steel wire fencing products for terrestrial aquatic and general use as num timber softwood visually graded for structural purposes as num masonry structures australian standards new zealand standards asnzs num coldformed structural steel hollow sections specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name asnzs num built in components for masonry construction wall ties asnzs num cellulose cement products part num corrugated sheets as numnzs electrical installations as numnzs electrical installations electric fences as numnzs zinc and zincaluminium alloy coatings on steel wire as numnzs steel reinforcing materials as numnzs hot dipped galvanised zinc coatings on fabricated ferrous articles main roads test methods mrwa num dry density ratio main roads specifications specification num general requirements specification num quality systems specification num environment specification num clearing specification num earthworks specification num minor steel items specification num concrete general works specification num antigraffiti num num not used products and materials num concrete footings num .
concrete used in the construction of footings and any other concrete elements of fencing shall be in accordance with the drawings and specification num concrete general works .
num .
concrete shall be class nnum unless otherwise specified in the drawings .
num .
reinforcing steel used in the construction of reinforced concrete footings columns coping and any other reinforced concrete elements of fencing shall be in accordance with asnzs num and specification num .
reinforcing steel specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num bricks num .
bricks used in the construction of panels piers and any other brick elements of fencing shall be clay bricks uniform in shape texture colour and size with sharp arises free from distortion and other defects .
bricks shall have a minimum compressive strength of nummpa .
brick properties num .
bricks shall be in accordance with the dimensions and colours as shown on the drawings .
dimensions and colours num .
wall ties shall be in accordance with asnzs num .
num limestone blocks num .
limestone used in the construction of panels piers or any other limestone element of fencing shall be either sawn limestone blocks or reconstituted limestone blocks .
all blocks shall be of a high standard and supplied from the same source to ensure a uniform colour .
sawn limestone shall be free from dust topsoil vegetation or fine material .
limestone blocks shall have a minimum density of numkgmnum .
limestone properties num .
a degree of chipping to sawn corners and flaws in limestone blockwalls will be acceptable subject to the superintendents approval and quantified by samples .
patching or repairs of limestone blocks will not be accepted .
blocks used for piers and pier cappings shall be selected for evenness of texture colour and hard sharp edges .
quality num .
limestone blocks shall be in accordance with the dimensions as shown on the drawings .
dimensions num mortar num .
mortar shall comply with as num .
mortar shall consist of num part of portland cement num part of lime putty and num parts of yellow builders sand .
the measured parts in mixes shall be mixed mechanically to an even colour and consistency with the minimum amount of water for workability components and proportions num .
where specified admixtures shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
num .
mortar colour shall be in accordance with that detailed on the drawings .
colouring pigments shall be thoroughly mixed with the cement before adding other components num .
mortar colour for limestone fencing shall match closely that of the surrounding limestone blockwork .
limestone fencing num steelwork num .
all steelwork used in the construction of steel sheet fencing including panels posts tracks and connection fittings shall be in accordance with the drawings and the manufacturers published specifications .
sheets shall have uniform colour shape and size free from defects .
steel sheet fencing specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
all steelwork used in the construction of fibre cement fencing including capping verge posts and connection fittings shall be in accordance with the drawings and the manufacturers published specifications fibre cement fencing num .
all structural steelwork used to support pine timber lap panelling shall be in accordance with the drawings and specification num minor steel items .
pine lap fencing num .
all steelwork used in the construction of chain mesh and agricultural fencing including wire posts droppers pipe mesh and connection fittings shall be in accordance with the drawings and comply with the following australian standards andor specifications and requirements as may be otherwise noted .
agricultural and chain mesh fencing a .
wire products and wire coating to as num. b .
steel pipes to as num and as num steel line posts shall be star pickets punched and pointed finished either galvanised or black varnished and of the length shown in the drawings .
c. steel droppers shall be galvanised and of the length shown on the drawings .
d. all galvanising of components as required to asnzs num and asnzs num. e. chainwire to as num .
all wire size and spacing shall be in accordance with the drawings .
num timber num general num .
all hardwood timber used in the construction of fencing including strainers rails struts and line posts shall be jarrah or white gum sound free from knots decay and insect decay in the sapwood .
hardwood timber num .
hardwood timber shall be in accordance with as num .
num .
all sawn timber used in the construction of fencing shall be seasoned pine white gum or jarrah and having a minimum structural grade fnum in accordance with as num and as num .
sawn timber num .
all pine wood material used in the construction of fencing shall be cca copper chrome arsenic pressure treated in accordance with as num unless otherwise stated .
cca treatment num .
steel nails shall be manufactured in accordance with as num .
nails num .
all nails shall be hot dipped galvanised to numgmnum coating mass all in accordance with asnzs num .
galvanising num .
timber shall be in accordance with the dimensions as shown on the drawings .
dimensions specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num timber tolerances num .
insect holes subject to the superintendents approval clean holes which are isolated and not in groups free from insect life and decay and less than nummm in diameter will be tolerated provided the density of the timber is not unduly affected .
insect holes num .
gum veins subject to the superintendents approval gum veins will be accepted provided they are clean tight gum veins as distinct from gum pockets or cavities free from decayed tissue and are not closer together than nummm .
gum veins num .
waney edges subject to the superintendents approval sapwood on the corner of a piece of sawn timber shall not be cause for rejection unless it exceeds nummm on either face of the piece .
waney edges num .
shrinkage the sizes shown on the drawings are nominal sizes .
the timber shall have a tolerance on the specified size of nummm nummm .
shrinkage num .
deviation hardwood timber shall not exceed nummm deviation from straightness when measured from a stringline or straight edge over the length of the individual element as dimensioned on the drawings .
deviation num fibre cement num .
fibre cement sheeting used in the construction of corrugated fencing shall be of a high standard and supplied from the same source .
sheets shall be uniform in shape colour and size free from distortion and other defects .
they shall consist of portland cement ground sand cellulose fibre and water in accordance with asnzs num and have a density of numkgm .
fibre cement properties num .
sheets shall be in accordance with the dimensions and colours as shown on the drawings .
dimensions and colours num electric fence components num .
components used in the installation of electric fences including but not limited to energisers earth grounding systems leadout cables insulators clamps switches and offset brackets shall be in accordance with asnzs num .
no components other than those detailed in the manufacturers published specifications shall be used without prior approval from the superintendent .
electric fence components num gates num .
gate frames for agricultural and chainwire fences shall be manufactured from circular hollow section steel complying with asnzs num and galvanised in accordance with asnzs num .
gates for other fence types shall be manufactured in accordance with the relevant manufacturers published specifications .
num .
mesh prefabricated wire and other wire products shall be in accordance with clause num .
specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
other minor fittings such as hinges bolts and the like shall be manufactured from steel in accordance with the drawings and specification num minor steel items as appropriate and hotdipped galvanised in accordance with the requirements of asnzs num .
num num not used sampling and testing of masonry works num bricks num .
the contractor shall submit samples of brickwork units with the manufacturers certificate for approval to the superintendent before placing orders .
the manufacturers certificate shall show compressive strength tensile strength and absorption values of the bricks .
the samples shall indicate the full range of texture and colour and consist of at least six units .
units built into the works shall conform to and fall within the range of appearance properties of the approved samples .
hold point num limestone blocks num .
the contractor shall submit samples of limestone block units with the manufacturers certificate for approval to the superintendent before placing orders .
the samples shall indicate the full range of texture and colour and consist of at least six units .
units built into the works shall conform to and fall within the range of appearance properties of the approved samples .
hold point num mortar num .
samples of mortar shall be prepared for the works for the approval of the superintendent .
mortar used in the works shall conform to the approved mix and samples .
samples num .
when tested in accordance with as num mortar shall achieve compressive strength of at least nummpa for samples taken from site mixes and nummpa for samples taken from laboratory mixes .
preparation and test results num .
a mortar compression test shall be undertaken at the laboratory at the beginning of the works to establish the compressive strength as required by the specification .
the contractor shall undertake mortar compression tests using site mixes on a regular basis to maintain the required compressive strength results .
frequency of testing on site shall be one test every numm of fence or part thereof .
method of sampling and testing shall be in accordance with as num .
sampling specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num sample masonry num .
the contractor shall construct a full height sample of masonry fence as part of the works and for the approval of the superintendent .
the sample fence shall consist of one full width panel and two piers one at either end to the dimensions specified on the drawings .
joints shall be finished in accordance with the drawings .
the works shall conform to the approved sample fence .
masonry work associated with the works shall not commence until the sample fence has been approved by the superintendent .
the sample panel and piers may be a section of the fence .
hold point num .
nonmasonry infill panels are not required to be included as part of the sample for approval .
infill panels num num not used earthworks num general num .
this section of the specification covers clearing and earthworks for the construction of the fencing footings and driving or sinking of strainers and posts and includes clearing excavation foundation improvement and backfilling .
num clearing and topsoil removal num .
prior to the commencement of any clearing operations the contractor shall certify to the superintendent that clearing areas are correctly defined .
trees tagged by the contractor or the superintendent for retention shall be confirmed for retention with the superintendent .
hold point num .
clearing shall be in accordance with specification num clearing .
num .
a nominal width of the work site shall be cleared along the fence alignment prior to starting the fencing works .
the width of clearing for fencing shall not exceed three metres either side of the fence through areas of natural vegetation or as directed by the superintendent .
width of clearing num .
where applicable clearing operations shall be undertaken in accordance with the procedures for dieback control as specified in specification num environment .
dieback control num .
topsoil removal shall be undertaken in accordance with specification num earthworks .
num excavation num .
excavated material for fencing and foundations shall be stockpiled for use as backfill around the fencing and foundations .
specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
excess material or excavation material which the superintendent may deem to be unsuitable for use in fence foundations or as backfill around fencing and foundations shall be excavated as directed by the superintendent and shall be removed to spoil areas in accordance with specification num earthworks .
num .
the void created from excavation of unsuitable material shall be backfilled with suitable fill material in accordance with this specification or as directed by the superintendent and compacted in accordance with clause num .
num acceptance of bearing surfaces to carry loads num .
where foundations have been excavated all the soil below the founding level shall be compacted .
num .
undisturbed soil below footings shall be proof compacted with a plate compactor and disturbed soil below foundations shall be compacted to a minimum dry density ratio of num and tested in accordance with wa num .
num .
when foundations in perth sands have been excavated the contractor shall compact the bearing surface and test the compaction with a standard perth falling weight penetrometer in accordance with as num fnum num .
the minimum acceptable blow count is num blows per nummm for the whole of the first nummm depth for all footings .
num .
if the soil below the founding level does not meet the requirements of this clause it shall be compacted until it complies or replaced in accordance with clause num .
num foundation improvement num .
if the foundation material is deemed by the superintendent as unsuitable for fence foundation the soil shall be either replaced as per clause num or by compacted layers of sand fill satisfying the requirements of clause num .
num .
the thickness of each layer of foundation improvement material shall be limited to enable the specified compaction to be obtained for the full depth of the layer for the equipment being used and in any case shall not exceed nummm before compaction .
num .
the foundation improvement material shall be tested to ensure compliance with clause num .
num protection of bearing surfaces num .
the exposed bearing surface at the bottom of each excavation shall be adequately protected from disturbance by the contractors operations or by the action of stormwater or ground water .
protection num .
any material at the bottom of an excavation which becomes unsuitable shall be removed and replaced with fill complying with clause num and compacted in accordance with clause num or replaced by additional blinding concrete .
replacement material specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
any disturbed surface may be lightly watered and compacted with a hand operated mechanical compactor .
disturbed surface num backfilling num general num .
backfilling around fencing and foundations shall be in accordance with levels shown on the drawings using suitable fill material excavated from the foundations .
num .
the fill shall be placed carefully so as not to damage the fencing and concrete foundations .
num .
fill shall be placed in continuous horizontal layers of not more than nummm uncompacted thickness and each layer shall be separately compacted to a similar density to the surrounding material .
layer thickness num suitable fill material num .
suitable fill material shall meet the requirements of specification num earthworks .
num damaged areas num .
all necessary precautions shall be taken so as to prevent damage to growing trees and shrubs outside designated areas and to selected trees within areas designated for clearing .
in the event of any unauthorised damage to vegetation areas rehabilitation shall be arranged as directed by the superintendent at the contractors expense .
num .
the exact location of all services shall be established onsite prior to the commencement of the works .
excavation to locate services shall be by shovel or by hand to avoid any damage or disruption to the service .
services num .
the superintendent shall arrange for the repair of damage to services not made good by the contractor and deduct the costs of repair from payment due to the contractor .
num .
damage to private property or other public facilities shall be rectified by the contractor to an acceptable standard at no cost to the principal .
num num not used construction num materials storage num .
all fencing materials shall be stored in a manner that will not damage the material .
num equipment num .
industry standard equipment shall be provided for the execution of the works and shall be maintained in a safe operating condition at all times .
standard equipment specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall use an approved friction type wire strainer incorporating nonscarring wire grip and a tension gauge with calibrating springs for measurement of tension during straining of wires .
wire strainer num survey control num .
the fence alignment shall be set out in accordance with the drawings .
the provision of any additional markers and sight pegs shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
num .
survey marks shall not be removed or disturbed .
disturbed survey marks shall be reestablished in accordance with specification num general requirements and at no cost to the principal .
num existing fences num .
existing fence shall not be cut without first being tied back to a strainer post .
electrified fences shall be reconnected into existing systems .
num .
arrangements shall be made at the contractors own expense for the removal and disposal of redundant fencing including the pulling out of timber and steel posts stumps and strainers rolling up of all prefabricated wire netting plain and barbed wire into bundles demolition of brick limestone fibre cement and steel sheet fencing excavation of concrete and the complete clean up and removal from site .
footing post and strainer holes shall be backfilled using suitable fill material to ground level .
removal num construction tolerances num .
sections of fence between changes in horizontal direction shall be straight .
num .
the fence shall be fully constructed within the road reserve .
no part of the fence shall be constructed beyond the road reserve boundary unless specified on the drawings .
num .
the following tolerances shall apply a .
plan tolerances shall be within nummm of the alignment shown on drawings .
walls b .
height nummm c. cross section nummm d. verticality nummm per numm e. position in line nummm fencing f. vertical num g. fabric width nummm chainwire mesh h. panel nummm i. vertical num specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name j. footing dimensions nummm footings k. size nummm limestone blocks num waterway crossings num .
waterway crossings shall be erected at the positions where the fence crosses gullies drains and streams and shall be in accordance with the drawings .
num earthing system isolation num .
wire fencing in close proximity to high voltage power lines shall be protected with an earthing system isolation in accordance with asnzs num and western power requirements as specified on the drawings or as otherwise directed by the superintendent .
num concrete works num general num .
the construction of concrete elements of fencing shall be carried out to the dimensions shown on the drawings .
concrete used for the construction of the concrete elements shall comply with specification num concrete general works .
num .
the contractor shall advise the superintendent of the time and date of concrete placement not less than num hours prior to any proposed placement .
hold point num strip footing control joints num .
control joints shall be constructed at maximum intervals of num metres or at the locations shown on the drawings .
num .
materials used for the joints such as dowels grease caps and fortecon layers and installation details shall be in accordance with the drawings .
num brick and limestone block work num general num .
bricks and limestone blocks shall be stacked on supports clear of the ground and kept dry free from dust dirt and staining and shall be covered with tarpaulins or plastic sheeting .
num .
bricks and limestone blocks shall not be laid in wet weather .
num .
the works shall be set out accurately plumb and properly bonded according to the drawings with no part rising more than nummm above the adjacent unfinished brickwork .
corners and other advanced rising work shall be racked .
setting out num .
bricks and limestone blocks moved after initial laying shall be relaid in fresh mortar .
specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
new brick and limestone block work shall be temporarily braced to withstand lateral loads .
num .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings brickwork shall be built using a gauge of num courses to nummm .
num .
all walls shall be built in stretcher bond unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
brickwork bond num .
the first bed joint shall be laid on footings using a full bed of mortar .
num joints num .
bricks and limestone blocks shall be laid on a full bed of mortar with frogs if any uppermost and perpends filled with mortar .
num .
joints in brickwork shall be formed uniformly in external facework to suit the gauge and match existing joints as follows joint finishes a. facework to be rendered or plastered shall have joints raked to nummm depth .
b. facework to be exposed to view shall have joints raked or rolled as shown on the drawings .
c. facework not exposed to view shall have joints cut off flush .
num .
joints in limestone blocks external facework shall be formed uniformly to suit the gauge and match existing unless otherwise specified .
joints shall be worked with the jointing tool to a dense smooth finish .
num .
mortar joints in limestone blockwork shall be nummm nominal depth or width and shall be finished flush with the exposed face of the fence .
num brick facework num .
facework shall be set out to suit bends and to avoid cutting of bricks .
num .
facework shall start approximately two courses below adjacent finished ground level .
num .
facework shall be laid to avoid changes of colour beyond the range of bricks in the approved sample panel .
num .
perpends in alternate courses shall be kept in vertical alignment .
num brick damp proof course num .
damp proof courses if required are shown on the drawings num .
dampproof course additives shall be used in accordance with manufacturers published recommendations .
num .
additives shall be mixed with mortar and applied from the footing to the top joint of the first course immediately above ground .
location specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num brick and block work cleaning num .
brick and limestone block work shall be cleaned on completion in such a manner so as to protect adjacent surfaces including joints from cleaning solutions .
num .
the contractor shall seek approval from the superintendent before commencement of cleaning works .
hold point num .
joints shall not be scrubbed during cleaning works .
num .
the brick manufacturer and limestone block manufacturersupplier shall be consulted before attempting to remove any unusual stains .
num .
brick and limestone block work shall be washed with water after cleaning and surplus water shall be mopped off with a clean sponge .
num .
the brick and limestone block work shall first be drenched with water before applying cleaning solution to remove mortar droppings from the facework .
num brick masonry control joints num .
control joints shall be installed at a maximum distance of num metres unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
num .
control joints shall consist of galvanised expansion ties backing material and sealant as specified on the drawings .
num .
materials used for masonry control joints and installation details shall be in accordance with the drawings .
num timber workmanship num stacking of sawn timber num .
immediately on delivery sawn timber shall be stacked off the ground on suitable bedlogs spaced such as to prevent warping .
stacking num .
sawn timber shall be stacked so that there is a minimum clear air space of nummm between pieces of timber to allow for proper ventilation and seasoning .
num carpentry num .
the whole of the timber work shall be executed to the best standard of workmanship for fence construction and shall be in accordance with asnum .
num .
unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings each piece of timber shall be without joints for its full length and shall have the ends sawn square and wrought perfectly true at all contact surfaces .
num fibre cement fencing num .
fibre cement sheets shall be handled and stored with due care to ensure edges and corners are protected from chipping .
handling and storage specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
prior to installation the contractor shall inspect all fibre cement sheeting for damage .
damaged sheets shall not be incorporated into the works and be replaced as directed by the superintendent at no cost to the principal .
hold point num .
fibre cement fencing shall be installed in accordance with the drawings and the manufacturers published specifications .
installation num .
all cutting of fibre cement sheeting shall be carried out in openair situations or in wellventilated space in accordance with the manufacturers published specifications and in compliance with recommended safe working practices .
cutting num steel sheet fencing num .
prior to installation the contractor shall inspect all steel sheeting for damage .
damaged sheets shall not be incorporated into the works and be replaced as directed by the superintendent at no cost to the principal .
hold point num .
steel sheet fencing shall be installed in accordance with the drawings and the manufacturers published specifications .
num chainwire fencing num tubular steel framing num .
all strainer and post assemblies with inclined bracing struts including fence ends corners other horizontal changes in direction gateways and water crossings shall be erected in accordance with the drawings .
num .
all unbraced intermediate posts shall be erected in accordance with the drawings .
num .
all strainers and posts shall be cast in insitu concrete in accordance with the drawings and shall be capped .
num .
rails shall be screwed and socketed to strainers and posts in accordance with the drawings .
num .
all strainers posts horizontal bracing and rails shall have dimensions and spacing in accordance with the drawings .
num .
post spacings may be altered by plus or minus num metre in those sections of ground where localised rock is encountered .
where large rocks are encountered post holes are to be drilled to the required depth in accordance with the drawings or as otherwise directed by the superintendent .
rock num chainwire mesh num .
chainwire mesh shall be fastened to end posts and rails with wire on each diamond in accordance with the drawings .
num .
mesh shall be laced to intermediate posts if on the inside of posts at changes in horizontal direction otherwise all other mesh shall be fixed at mid height with tie wire in accordance with the drawings .
specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
all chainwire mesh shall have top and bottom selvedges knuckled .
num .
all railless chainwire mesh fences shall have three strainer wires top bottom and central with the exception of nummm high chainwire mesh fence which shall have two strainer wires top and bottom .
mesh shall be fastened to strainer wires with galvanised netting clips .
num strainer wire num .
helicoil strainer wire shall be tensioned between anchorage points at all changes in horizontal direction and at maximum spacings in accordance with the drawings .
end posts shall be propped during tensioning if used as an anchorage point .
num barbed wire num .
high tensile galvanised barbed wire shall be installed and fastened to each post in accordance with the drawings .
num tie wire num .
standard galvanised tie wire shall be used for connections in accordance with the drawings .
num agricultural fencing num strainers num .
all strainer assemblies including end corner single strainers and strainers with inclined compression struts at horizontal changes in directions gateways and water crossings shall be erected in accordance with the drawings .
num .
timber strainers shall be driven sunk or buried into the ground to depths in accordance with the drawings .
num .
steel strainers shall be capped and cast in insitu concrete in accordance with the drawings .
num posts num .
all posts shall be erected in accordance with the drawings .
steel posts are to be capped .
num .
posts shall be either driven or sunk into the ground at the minimum depth below natural surface as detailed and spaced apart at maximum distances in accordance with the drawings .
depth and spacing num .
post spacings may be altered by plus or minus num metre in those sections of ground where localised rock is encountered .
where large rocks are encountered post holes are to be drilled to the required depth in accordance with the drawings or as otherwise directed by the superintendent .
rock specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num galvanised prefabricated wire num .
prefabricated wire shall be fastened to each post at vertical locations with a minimum of three wires tied per post top bottom and central or in accordance with the drawings .
num .
bottom wires shall be above the ground surface in accordance with the drawings .
where surface irregularities occur additional posts shall be placed between specified post spacings as necessary to ensure clearance requirements for bottom wires as specified are achieved .
ground clearances num .
prefabricated wire shall be attached to line posts with nummm high tension standard galvanised plain wire or purpose made tie fasts or post clips in accordance with the drawings .
num .
prefabricated wire shall be attached to plain barbed wire or horse sighter wire above utilising one coupling clip per span or as otherwise directed .
num barbed wire num .
high tensile galvanised barbed wire shall be installed and fastened to each post in the positions specified in the drawings .
the strained wire shall be tensioned around the strainer and tied off .
num plain wire num .
high tensile galvanised plain wire shall be passed through line posts and strained or fastened to line posts after straining in the positions specified in the drawings .
num tie wire num .
standard galvanised tie wire shall be used for connections in accordance with the drawings .
num horse sighter wire num .
highdensity polymer monofilament horse sighter wire shall be attached to agricultural fencing where required to protect livestock in accordance with the drawings .
num .
horse sighter wire shall be fastened to posts in accordance with manufacturers published specifications .
num .
where horse sighter wire is to be threaded through posts protective sleeves shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers published specifications .
num electrified wire num .
electrified wire shall be high tensile galvanised wire unless otherwise specified in the drawings .
num .
electrified wire shall be fastened to strainers and posts using approved methods in accordance with the drawings the manufacturers published specifications and satisfying the requirements of asnzs num .
specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
where erecting electric fencing on the border of a public thoroughfare warning signs shall be installed in accordance with asnzs num and in compliance with local authority regulations .
warning signs num straining of wires num .
all horizontal wires shall be strained to tensions specified in the drawings or in accordance with the manufacturers published specifications using a wire strainer as specified at clause num .
num .
all wires including prefabricated wire shall be strained up to and shall not exceed the manufacturers recommended maximum tensions .
num .
the contractor shall take all precautions necessary to avoid kinking and overstraining of the wire during handling and erection .
num gates num .
all new gates or gates to be relocated from existing fences shall be installed at locations in accordance with the drawings or as otherwise detailed in annexure numa .
num .
the contractor shall supply all hinges bolts and the like as required in accordance with the drawings or the manufacturers published specifications .
num .
gates shall be consistent with the existing fences on either side of the gate unless otherwise directed by the superintendent .
num .
strainers posts columns or piers used to support gates shall be positioned in the ground so that gate panels are able to swing freely in both directions and when brought into line do not overlap nor have a gap wider than nummm unless otherwise specified in the drawings or manufacturers published specifications .
num num not used as built and handover requirements num handover requirements num .
the contractor shall at the handover provide a set of asconstructed drawings any relevant material certificates equipment and tools required to maintain the infrastructure e.g .
any specialized tools gate keys etc .
to the superintendent .
num asbuilt requirements num .
at the completion of works the contractor shall provide the following information a .
straight line kilometre slk of the start and end of fence and side of road .
b .
type of structure e.g .
fence wall retaining wall etc .. specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name c. date the structure was constructed or installed .
num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa fence details table num.a.num fence locations lot number road name details of fence locations drawing no fence type gate details table num.a.num fence types fence type description type a type b type c type d specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the senior road engineer urban .
num .
acceptance of bearing surfaces to carry loads clause num num this clause is for granular materials .
an alternative specification may be required for other materials which should be included in contract specific requirements .
num .
fence details annexure numa num tables in annexure numa are to be filled in or deleted and replaced with not used as required where these details are shown on the drawings .
specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num fencing num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title fencing revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date specification num noise walls copyright main roads western australia specification num noise walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted sco num num reference to specification sbde num num antigraffiti added earthworks deleted operations added before clause num num paragraph num amended clause numbering and references corrected num contract specific clause num amended num replaced reference to perth falling weight penetrometer with perth sand penetrometer test sde num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num noise walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num concrete footings posts and wall panels num num bricks wall panels and piers num num mortar num num reinforcing steel for concrete footings posts and wall panels num num limestone blocks num num num not used num sampling and testing num num concrete noise walls sample panel num num brick noise walls brickwork units num num brick noise walls mortar num num brick noise walls sample panel num num limestone noise walls limestone blocks num num limestone noise walls mortar num num limestone noise walls sample panel num num num not used num operations num num earthworks num num clearing and topsoil removal num num excavation num num acceptance of bearing surfaces to carry loads num num foundation improvement num num protection of bearing surfaces num num backfilling num num unsuitable and excess material num num concrete works num num footing tolerances num num strip footing control joints num num concrete noise wall panels and posts num num concrete wall tolerances num num concrete wall panel surface finish num specification num noise walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num brickwork num num limestone blocks num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num specification num noise walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num noise walls general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of all operations in the supply and construction of noise walls including earthworks concrete footings and columns and materials for brick and limestone noise wall infill panels .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num methods of testing soils for engineering purposes as num the specification and supply of concrete as num concrete structures as num masonry structures as num portland cement australiannew zealand standards asnzs num builtin components for masonry construction asnzs num masonry units and segmental pavers asnzs num steel reinforcing materials main roads test methods mrwa num dry density ratio mrwa num chlorides and total soluble salts in soil and water mrwa num calcium carbonate content main roads specifications specification num quality systems specification num earthworks specification num excavation and backfill for structures specification num falsework specification num noise walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num concrete for structures specification num formwork specification num steel reinforcement specification num concrete general works specification num limestone retaining walls specification num antigraffiti num num not used products and materials num concrete footings posts and wall panels num .
concrete used in the construction of footings and any other concrete elements of noise walls shall be in accordance with the drawings and specification num concrete general works .
num .
concrete used in the construction of posts wall panels and any other major structural concrete elements of noise walls shall be in accordance with the drawings and specification num concrete for structures .
num bricks wall panels and piers num .
bricks used in the construction of panels piers and any other brick elements of noise walls shall be clay bricks uniform in shape texture colour and size with sharp arises free from distortion and other defects .
bricks shall have a minimum compressive strength of nummpa .
brick properties num .
bricks shall be in accordance with the dimensions and colours as shown on the drawings .
dimensions and colours num mortar num .
mortar shall comply with as num .
mortar shall consist of num part of portland cement num part of building lime num parts of fine aggregate and colouring pigments as required .
the measured parts in mixes shall be mixed mechanically to an even colour and consistency with the minimum amount of water for workability .
admixtures only when specified shall be used as specified and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
mortar colour shall be in accordance with the drawings .
colouring pigments shall be thoroughly mixed with the cement before adding other components .
components and proportions num .
mortar mixed on site shall be used within num minutes of mixing .
retempering of mortar shall not be permitted .
any mortar which has begun to set prior to use shall be rejected .
specification num noise walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num reinforcing steel for concrete footings posts and wall panels num .
reinforcing steel used in the construction of reinforced concrete footings posts and wall panels and any other reinforced concrete elements of noise walls shall be in accordance with asnzs num and specification num steel reinforcement .
reinforcement num .
the contractor shall store reinforcing steel above ground level and shall protect it from damage and deterioration .
num .
reinforcement placed in the works shall be clean and free from all loose rust millscale dirt grease and other foreign substances which would impair the bond between steel and concrete .
num .
after being placed in position all reinforcement shall be maintained by the contractor in a clean condition until it is embedded in the concrete .
num limestone blocks num .
the stone used for the retaining walls shall be natural or reconstituted limestone with individual blocks being free from any foreign matter shakes pockets veins or other defects and generally sound and clean and of uniform colour and texture .
limestone properties num .
limestone blocks shall also be in accordance with the dimensions and colours as shown on the drawings and conform to the following requirements quality a. calcium carbonate content num minimum by weight in accordance with wa num dimensions b .
dry density numkgmnum minimum tested by direct measurement the weight of a known size cubecore after oven drying at num degrees celsius for num hours c. unconfined compression strength nummpa for natural limestone and nummpa for reconstituted limestone tested using a corecube sample cut to normal test size to be tested for crushing strength d. dimensions as indicated on the drawings with a tolerance of nummm .
num num not used sampling and testing num concrete noise walls sample panel num .
the contractor shall construct an num m long full height sample panel of wall as part of the works for the consideration of the superintendent to become the approved sample panel .
further fabrication or installation of noise walls shall not commence until the sample panel has been approved by the superintendent .
hold point specification num noise walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
concrete testing shall be in accordance with specification num concrete for structures .
num brick noise walls brickwork units num .
the contractor shall submit samples of brickwork units with the manufacturers certificate for approval to the superintendent before placing orders .
the manufacturers certificate shall show compressive strength tensile strength and absorption values of the bricks .
the samples shall indicate the full range of texture and colour and consist of at least six units .
test certificates for compliance shall be num per num bricks .
units built into the works shall conform to and fall within the range of appearance properties of the approved samples .
hold point num brick noise walls mortar num .
the contractor shall prepare samples of mortar for brickwork for the approval of the superintendent .
mortar used in the works shall conform to the approved mix and samples as specified on the drawings .
samples num .
mortar shall be prepared in accordance with clause num .
mortar shall be classification mnum and when tested in accordance with as num shall achieve sufficient compressive strength to meet requirements of table num of asnum for characteristic compression strength of masonry .
preparation and test results num .
the contractor shall undertake a mortar compression test at the laboratory at the beginning of the works to establish the compressive strength as required by the specification .
the contactor shall undertake mortar compression tests using site mixes on regular bases to maintain the required compressive strength results .
frequency of testing on site shall be one test every numm of wall .
method of sampling and testing shall be in accordance with as num .
sampling num brick noise walls sample panel num .
the contractor shall construct an numm long full height sample panel of wall as part of the works and for the approval of the superintendent .
joints shall be finished in accordance with the drawings .
the works shall conform to the approved sample panel .
further brickwork associated with the works shall not commence until the sample panel has been approved by the superintendent .
the sample panel may be used as a section of the noise wall .
hold point num limestone noise walls limestone blocks num .
the contractor shall submit samples of limestone blocks with the manufacturers certificate for approval to the superintendent before placing orders .
testing certificates for compliance to be num per num blocks for natural limestone and num per num for reconstituted limestone .
the manufacturers certificate shall show compressive strength dry density and calcium carbonate content values of the blocks .
the samples shall indicate the full range of texture and colour and consist of at least num units .
units built into the works shall conform to and fall within the range of appearance properties of the approved samples .
hold point specification num noise walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num limestone noise walls mortar num .
the contractor shall prepare samples of mortar for limestone jointing for the approval of the superintendent .
mortar used in the works shall conform to the approved mix and samples as specified on the drawings .
samples num .
when tested in accordance with as num mortar shall achieve a compressive strength of at least nummpa for samples taken from site mixes and nummpa for samples taken from laboratory mixes .
test results num .
the contractor shall undertake a mortar compression test at the laboratory at the beginning of the works to establish the compressive strength as required by the specification .
the contactor shall undertake mortar compression tests using site mixes on regular bases to maintain the required compressive strength results .
frequency of testing on site shall be one test every numm of wall .
method of sampling and testing shall be in accordance with as num .
sampling num limestone noise walls sample panel num .
the contractor shall construct an numm long full height sample panel of wall as part of the works and for the approval of the superintendent .
joints shall be finished in accordance with the drawings .
the works shall conform to the approved sample panel .
further works shall not commence until the sample panel has been approved by the superintendent .
the sample panel may be a section of the retaining wall .
hold point num num not used operations num earthworks num .
this section of the specification covers earthworks for the construction of the noise wall strip footings and includes excavation foundation improvement and backfilling .
earthworks item shall be carried out as specified hereafter and as detailed on the drawings .
num clearing and topsoil removal num .
the contractor shall clear a sufficient width of the work site at the wall location prior to starting excavation .
topsoil in the cleared area shall be removed to a minimum depth of nummm by the contractor and stockpiled for reuse at a location approved by the superintendent .
the stockpiled topsoil shall be respread by the contractor over the cleared area to a minimum depth of nummm and surplus removed from site .
num excavation num .
the contractor shall excavate to the lines and grades shown on the drawings .
the actual dimensions for excavation shall in all cases be no more than that required for the placement of protective works if necessary and any working space required .
specification num noise walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall stockpile excavated material for use as backfill .
num .
any excavated material considered unsuitable by the superintendent shall be removed to the nominated spoil site .
num .
if excavation below the footing is required it shall be backfilled and compacted with embankment quality material in accordance with specification num earthworks .
the backfill shall be compacted to at least the density of the surrounding material if not specified on the drawings .
num acceptance of bearing surfaces to carry loads num .
when foundations have been excavated all the soil below the strip footings shall be compacted by the contractor .
bearing surface num .
undisturbed soil below footings shall be proof compacted by the contractor with a plate compactor and disturbed soil below foundations shall be compacted to a minimum dry density of num to the minimum depth as given on the drawings and tested in accordance with wa num .
num .
when foundations in perth sands have been excavated the contractor shall compact the bearing surface and test the compaction in accordance with soil strength and consolidation tests determination of the penetration resistance of a soil perth sand penetrometer test as set out in asnum .
the minimum acceptable blow count is num blows per num mm for the whole depth as shown on the drawings .
num .
testing frequency shall be num test per numm of wall length or num test per wall panel whichever is the greater frequency .
num .
if the soil does not meet the requirements of this clause it shall be compacted by the contractor until it complies unless otherwise directed by the superintendent .
num foundation improvement num .
if directed by the superintendent the soil shall be excavated and either re compacted by the contractor if it meets the requirements of clause num or replaced by compacted layers of suitable fill satisfying the requirements of clause num .
the excavation shall be carried out to a depth as directed by the superintendent .
num .
the thickness of each layer of backfill material shall be limited to enable the specified compaction to be obtained for the full depth of the layer for the equipment being used and in any case shall not exceed nummm before compaction .
num .
the backfilled material shall be retested by the contractor to ensure compliance with clause num .
num protection of bearing surfaces num .
the exposed bearing surface at the bottom of each excavation shall be adequately protected from disturbance by the contractors operations or by the action of stormwater or ground water .
protection specification num noise walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
any material at the bottom of an excavation which becomes unsuitable shall be removed and replaced with fill complying with clause num and compacted in accordance with clause num or replaced by additional blinding concrete .
num .
alternatively the disturbed surface may be lightly watered and compacted with a hand operated mechanical compactor until it complies with clause num .
num backfilling num general num .
the contractor shall backfill around foundations and noise walls as shown on the drawings using suitable material excavated from the foundations unless otherwise approved by the superintendent .
num .
the fill shall be placed carefully by the contractor so as not to damage the wall and concrete foundations .
num .
the contractor shall place fill in continuous horizontal layers of not more than nummm uncompacted thickness and shall separately compact each layer to a similar density to the surrounding material .
num suitable fill material num .
suitable fill material shall meet the requirements of specification num earthworks .
num unsuitable and excess material num .
all unsuitable and excess material shall be removed from site and disposed of by the contractor .
num concrete works num .
the contractor shall carry out the construction of concrete footings to the dimensions shown on the drawings .
concrete classes used for the construction of the concrete footings shall be as shown on the drawings and conform to as num .
the concrete construction requirements shall comply with specification num concrete general works .
num .
the contractor shall advise the superintendent of the time and date of concrete placement not less than num hours prior to any proposed placement .
hold point num footing tolerances a .
variation of dimensions in plan and elevation nummm b. misplacement of eccentricity of centreline nummm c. variation in specified level nummm specification num noise walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num strip footing control joints num .
the contractor shall construct construction joints at maximum intervals of numm and at the locations shown on the drawings .
num .
materials used for the joints such as dowels grease caps and fortecon layers and installation details shall be in accordance with the drawings .
num concrete noise wall panels and posts num .
the contractor shall carry out the construction of major concrete noise wall elements such as panels and posts to the dimensions shown on the drawings .
concrete classes used for the construction of the concrete elements shall be as shown on the drawings and conform to as num .
the concrete construction requirements shall comply with specification num concrete for structures .
num concrete wall tolerances num .
concrete noise walls shall be constructed to the following tolerances a .
variation from vertical or specified batter nummm b. misplacement or eccentricity of centreline nummm c. variation from specified level of surfaces nummm d. horizontal deviation bow nummm over a numm straight edge num concrete wall panel surface finish num .
concrete wall panel surface shall be class num grey finish in accordance with as num in the first instance unless specified otherwise on the drawings .
initial surface finish num .
further surface treatment such as painting shall be preceded by cleaning by water blasting .
num .
further surface treatment such as painting system patterns textures etc .
shall be specified in detail by the designer to the specific individual requirements of the project .
further surface treatment num brickwork num general num .
the contractor shall stack bricks on supports clear of the ground and keep them dry and free from dust dirt and staining and shall cover them with tarpaulins or plastic sheeting .
num .
bricks shall not be laid in wet weather .
num .
the contractor shall set out the works according to the drawings with no part rising more than nummm above the adjacent unfinished brickwork .
corners and other advanced rising work shall be racked by the contractor .
setting out specification num noise walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
bricks moved after initial laying shall be relaid in fresh mortar by the contractor .
num .
new brickwork shall be temporarily braced by the contractor to withstand lateral loads .
num .
the contractor shall build brickwork having nummm bricks to a gauge of num courses to nummm .
num .
the contractor shall build all walls in stretcher bond unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
brickwork bond num .
the contractor shall lay the first bed joint on footings and solid blocks on a full bed of mortar .
num joints num .
the contractor shall lay bricks on a full bed of mortar with frogs if any uppermost and shall fill perp ends solidly with mortar .
num .
the contractor shall form joints uniformly in external facework to suit gauge and to match existing unless otherwise specified and shall work joints with the jointing tool to a dense smooth finish .
num .
the contractor shall cut off joints flush in walls that are not exposed to view and will not be rendered or plastered .
the contractor shall rake out joints to nummm depth in brickwork to be rendered or plastered .
the contractor shall roll joints in facing bricks or walls exposed to view .
joint finishes num facework num .
the contractor shall set out face work to suit bends and to avoid cutting of bricks .
facework num .
the contractor shall start face work approximately two courses below adjacent finished ground level .
num .
the contractor shall lay face brick to avoid changes of colour beyond the range of bricks in the approved sample panel .
num .
the contractor shall keep perp ends in alternate courses in vertical alignment .
num damp proof course num .
the contractor shall use cementaid everdure caltite additive to provide a dampproof course .
num .
the contractor shall mix the additive with the mortar and apply it from the footing to the top joint of the first course immediately above ground .
location num brickwork cleaning num .
the contractor shall clean brickwork on completion and shall take care to protect adjacent surfaces from cleaning solutions .
specification num noise walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall not apply cleaning solutions to joints and shall not scrub joints .
num .
the contractor shall consult the brick manufacturer before attempting to remove unusual stains and shall obtain approval from the superintendent before commencing cleaning .
brick stains num .
the contractor shall wash brickwork with water after cleaning and shall mop off surplus water with a clean sponge .
num .
to remove mortar droppings from clay brickwork the contractor shall drench the brickwork with water before applying the cleaning solution .
num brick masonry control joints num .
the contractor shall install control joints at a maximum distance of numm or at the locations shown on the drawings .
num .
control joints shall consist of galvanised expansion ties backing material and sealant as specified on the drawings .
num .
materials used for masonry control joints and installation details shall be in accordance with the drawings .
num limestone blocks num general num .
the contractor shall stack limestone blocks on supports clear of the ground and keep them dry and free from dust dirt and staining and shall cover them with tarpaulins or plastic sheeting .
num .
limestone blocks shall not be laid in wet weather .
num .
the contractor shall set out the works according to the drawings .
num .
the first course of units shall be laid on top of the prepared bedding sand and be levelled and checked for alignment .
num .
additional courses shall be laid in squared work with joints fully mortared and levelled and checked for alignment .
num .
the walls shall be laid with a front face batter of numhnumv .
num joints num .
the contractor shall lay blocks on a full bed of mortar and shall fill perp ends solidly with mortar .
wall joints num .
mortar joints shall be nominally nummm in width .
num .
the joint shall be raked back from the block face so that the joint can be faced at a later date with cream coloured mortar to match the limestone colour .
specification num noise walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num facing num .
the contractor shall prepare trial mortar mixes for facing to match the limestone colour .
trial mortar mixes shall be prepared until a suitable match is obtained as approved by the superintendent .
num .
the facing shall occur in a single operation after the wall has been completed and all movement has been taken up .
num .
the exposed face shall be cleaned of all excess mortar as the work progresses .
num finishing tolerances num .
limestone retaining walls shall be laid to the following tolerances a. horizontal position of any element in plan nummm b .
maximum deviation from plumb nummm per numm height c. maximum horizontal deviation nummm over a numm as num app h edge d. deviation in any bed joint from horizontal nummm in any numm or nummm total e. deviation in thickness of bed joint nummm or perp end f. maximum step between blocks nummm block to block num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num noise walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the senior design engineer .
num .
general this specification has been written to cover concrete brick and limestone noise walls .
if only one type is specified in the works delete other clauses relating to the other wall types .
num .
clause num acceptance of bearing surfaces to carry loads note this is for granular materials .
alternative specification may be required for other materials num .
clause num concrete wall panel surface finish need to insert the detailed surface finish treatment based on the contract specific requirements at num or delete subclause num .
num .
clause num antigraffiti paint insert clause num under contract specific requirements if required .
specification num noise walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
num antigraffiti coating systems num .
antigraffiti paint coating systems shall be nonsacrificial except where the coating is to be installed on a limestone substrate clear or pigmented coating to a specified colour and comply with the requirements of specification num antigraffiti .
num .
the contractor shall apply antigraffiti paint only to the roadside face of the noise wall or as specified on the drawings .
specification num noise walls num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title noise walls revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager commercial .
num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date main roads western australia specification num limestone retaining walls page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num limestone retaining walls copyright main roads western australia main roads western australia specification num limestone retaining walls page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num limestone retaining walls revision register date clause number description of revision authorised by num june num whole document complete review no change asdse num aug num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp main roads western australia specification num limestone retaining walls page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num num not used num products and materials num num concrete footings num num limestone blocks num num mortar num num reinforcing steel for concrete footings num num num not used num earthworks num num general num num clearing and topsoil removal num num excavation num num acceptance of bearing surfaces to carry loads num num foundation improvement num num protection of bearing surfaces num num backfilling num num unsuitable and excess material num num num not used num concrete works num num general num num strip footing control joints num num num not used num limestone blockwork num num general num num joints num num drainage num num facing num num finish tolerances num num antigraffiti coating num num sample panel num num num not used num as built and handover requirements num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num main roads western australia specification num limestone retaining walls page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num limestone retaining walls general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of details as shown on the drawings including a earthworks for the construction of massgravity retaining walls including excavation foundation improvement and backfilling .
b concrete works for footings .
c limestone works for retaining wall panels .
num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num methods of testing soils for engineering purposes as num specification and supply of concrete as num concrete structures as num masonry structures as num portland and blended cements as num earthretaining structures australiannew zealand standards asnzs num steel reinforcing materials main roads test methods wa num dry density ratio percent wa num calcium carbonate content main roads specifications specification num earthworks specification num excavation and backfill for structures specification num steel reinforcement main roads western australia specification num limestone retaining walls page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num concrete general works specification num antigraffiti num num not used products and materials num concrete footings num .
concrete used in the construction of footings and any other concrete elements of retaining walls shall be in accordance with the drawings and specification num concrete general works .
concrete num limestone blocks num .
the stone used for the retaining walls shall be natural or reconstituted limestone with individual blocks being free from any foreign matter shakes pockets veins or other defects and generally sound and clean and of uniform colour and texture .
limestone num .
limestone blocks shall also be in accordance with the dimensions and colours as shown on the drawings and conform to the following requirements a calcium carbonate num minimum by weight in content accordance with wa num caconum b dry density numkgmnum minimum tested by direct measurement the weight of a known size cubecore after oven drying at num degrees celsius for num hours density c unconfined compression nummpa for natural limestone and strength nummpa for reconstituted limestone tested using a corecube sample cut to normal test size to be tested for crushing strength strength d dimensions as indicated on the drawings with a tolerance of nummm .
tolerances main roads western australia specification num limestone retaining walls page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the contractor shall submit samples of limestone blocks with the manufacturers certificate for approval to the superintendent before placing orders .
testing certificates for compliance to be num per num blocks for natural limestone and num per num for reconstituted limestone .
the manufacturers certificate shall show compressive strength dry density and calcium carbonate content values of the blocks .
the samples shall indicate the full range of texture and colour and consist of at least num units .
units built into the works shall conform to and fall within the range of appearance properties of the approved samples .
hold point num mortar num general num .
mortar shall comply with as num .
mortar shall consist of num part of portland cement num part of building lime num parts of fine aggregate and colouring pigments as required .
the measured parts in mixes shall be mixed mechanically to an even colour and consistency with the minimum amount of water for workability .
admixtures only when specified shall be used as specified and in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
mortar colour shall be in accordance with the drawings .
colouring pigments shall be thoroughly mixed with the cement before adding other components .
mortar num .
mortar mixed on site shall be used within num minutes of mixing .
retempering of mortar shall not be permitted .
any mortar which has begun to set prior to use shall be rejected .
num sampling and testing num .
the contractor shall prepare samples of mortar for limestone jointing for the approval of the superintendent .
mortar used in the works shall conform to the approved mix and samples as specified on the drawings .
samples num .
when tested in accordance with as num mortar shall achieve a compressive strength of at least nummpa for samples taken from site mixes and nummpa for samples taken from laboratory mixes .
test results num .
the contractor shall undertake a mortar compression test at the laboratory at the beginning of the works to establish the compressive strength as required by the specification .
the contractor shall undertake mortar compression tests using site mixes on regular bases to maintain the required compressive strength results .
frequency of testing on site shall be one test every numm length of wall .
method of sampling and testing shall be in accordance with as num .
sampling num reinforcing steel for concrete footings main roads western australia specification num limestone retaining walls page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
reinforcing steel used in the construction of reinforced concrete footings and any other reinforced concrete elements of retaining walls shall be in accordance with asnzs num and specification num steel reinforcement .
the contractor shall store reinforcing steel above ground level and shall protect it from damage and deterioration .
reinforcement placed in the works shall be clean and free from all loose rust millscale dirt grease and other foreign substances which would impair the bond between steel and concrete .
after being placed in position all reinforcement shall be maintained by the contractor in a clean condition until it is embedded in the concrete .
reinforcem ent num num not used earthworks num general num .
this section of the specification covers earthworks for the construction of the retaining walls and includes excavation foundation improvement and backfilling .
earthworks item shall be carried out as specified hereafter and as detailed on the drawings .
num clearing and topsoil removal num .
the contractor shall clear a sufficient width of the work site at the wall location prior to starting excavation .
topsoil in the cleared area shall be removed to a minimum depth of nummm by the contractor and stockpiled for reuse at a location approved by the superintendent .
the stockpiled topsoil shall be respread by the contractor over the cleared area to a minimum depth of nummm and surplus removed from site .
clearing num excavation num .
the contractor shall excavate to the lines and grades shown on the drawings .
the actual dimensions for excavation shall in all cases be no more than that required for the placement of protective works if necessary and any working space required .
excavation num .
the contractor shall stockpile excavated material for use as backfill .
num .
any excavated material considered unsuitable by the superintendent shall be removed to the nominated spoil site .
num .
if excavation is required it shall be backfilled and compacted with embankment quality material in accordance with specification num earthworks .
the backfill shall be compacted to the density given on the drawings .
main roads western australia specification num limestone retaining walls page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num acceptance of bearing surfaces to carry loads num .
blocks shall be laid on a compacted sand base of minimum depth as given on the drawings .
bearing surface num .
when foundations have been excavated all the soil below the base shall be compacted by the contractor .
num .
undisturbed soil shall be proof compacted by the contractor with a plate compactor and base material shall be compacted to a minimum dry density of num to the minimum depth as given on the drawings and tested in accordance with wa num .
num .
when foundations in perth sands have been excavated the contractor shall compact the bearing surface and test the compaction with a standard perth falling weight penetrometer in accordance with as num .
the minimum acceptable blow count is num blows per nummm for the whole depth or as shown on the drawings .
num .
the contractor shall separately compact each horizontal layer of not more than nummm uncompacted thickness .
num .
testing frequency shall be num test per numm of wall length or num test per wall panel whichever is the greater frequency .
num .
if the soil does not meet the requirements of this clause it shall be compacted by the contractor until it complies unless otherwise directed by the superintendent .
num foundation improvement num .
if directed by the superintendent the soil shall be excavated and either recompacted by the contractor if it meets the requirements of clause num or replaced by compacted layers of sand fill satisfying the requirements of clause num .
the excavation shall be carried out to a depth as directed by the superintendent .
the thickness of each layer of backfill material shall be limited to enable the specified compaction to be obtained for the full depth of the layer for the equipment being used and in any case shall not exceed nummm before compaction .
the backfilled material shall be retested by the contractor to ensure compliance with clause num .
foundation improveme nt num protection of bearing surfaces num .
the exposed bearing surface at the bottom each of excavation shall be adequately protected from disturbance by the contractors operations or by the action of stormwater or ground water .
protection main roads western australia specification num limestone retaining walls page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
any material at the bottom of an excavation which becomes unsuitable shall be removed and replaced by the contractor with fill complying with clause num and compacted in accordance with clause num or replaced by additional blinding concrete .
alternatively the disturbed surface may be lightly watered and compacted with a hand operated mechanical compactor .
num backfilling num .
the contractor shall backfill around foundations and retaining walls as shown on the drawings using suitable material excavated from the foundations unless otherwise approved by the superintendent .
backfilling num .
the fill shall be placed carefully by the contractor so as not to damage the retaining wall and concrete foundations .
num .
the contractor shall place fill in continuous horizontal layers of not more than nummm uncompacted thickness and shall separately compact each layer to a similar density to the surrounding material .
num .
suitable fill material shall meet the requirements of specification num earthworks .
num unsuitable and excess material num .
all unsuitable and excess material shall be removed from site and disposed of by the contractor .
num num not used concrete works num general num .
the contractor shall carry out the construction of concrete elements of retaining walls to the dimensions shown on the drawings .
concrete classes used for the construction of the concrete elements shall be as shown on the drawings and conform to as num .
the concrete construction requirements shall comply with specification num concrete general works .
num .
the contractor shall advise the superintendent of the time and date of concrete placement not less than num hours prior to any placement .
hold point num strip footing control joints num .
the contractor shall construct construction joints at maximum intervals of numm or at the locations shown on the drawings .
footing joints main roads western australia specification num limestone retaining walls page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
materials used for the joints such as dowels grease caps and fortecon layers and installation details shall be in accordance with the drawings .
num num not used limestone blockwork num general num .
the contractor shall stack limestone blocks on supports clear of the ground and keep them dry and free from dust dirt and staining and shall cover them with tarpaulins or plastic sheeting .
num .
limestone blocks shall not be laid in wet weather .
num .
the contractor shall set out the works according to the drawings .
num .
the first course of units shall be laid on top of the prepared bedding sand and be levelled and checked for alignment .
num .
additional courses shall be laid in squared work with joints fully mortared and levelled and checked for alignment .
num .
the walls shall be laid with a front face batter of numh to numv .
num joints num .
the contractor shall lay blocks on a full bed of mortar and shall fill perpends solidly with mortar .
wall joints num .
mortar joints shall be nominally nummm in width .
num .
the joint shall be raked back from the block face so that the joint can be faced at a later date with cream coloured mortar to match the limestone colour .
num drainage num .
drainage weepholes are permitted only where shown on the drawings .
drainage num .
where required drainage shall be provided behind the retaining wall as shown on the drawings .
num facing main roads western australia specification num limestone retaining walls page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the contractor shall prepare trial mortar mixes for facing to match the limestone colour .
trial mortar mixes shall be prepared until a suitable match is obtained as approved by the superintendent .
facing num .
the facing shall occur in a single operation after the wall has been completed and all movement has been taken up .
num .
the exposed face shall be cleaned of all excess mortar as the work progresses .
num finish tolerances num .
limestone retaining walls shall be laid to the following tolerances tolerances a horizontal position of any element in plan nummm b maximum deviation from specified batter nummm per numm height c maximum horizontal deviation nummm over as num app h a numm edge d deviation in any bed joint from nummm in horizontal any numm or nummm total e deviation in thickness of bed joint nummm or perpend f maximum step between blocks nummm block to block num antigraffiti coating num .
antigraffiti coatings shall be a low gloss clear sacrificial coating applied in accordance with specification num antigraffiti .
antigraffiti num .
the contractor shall apply antigraffiti coatings to all exposed faces of the limestone wall except faces abutting private property .
num sample panel main roads western australia specification num limestone retaining walls page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num num .
the contractor shall construct an numm long full height sample panel of wall as part of the works and for the approval of the superintendent .
joints shall be finished in accordance with the drawings .
the works shall conform to the approved sample panel .
further works shall not commence until the sample panel has been approved by the superintendent .
the sample panel may be a section of the retaining wall .
hold point num num not used as built and handover requirements num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used main roads western australia specification num limestone retaining walls page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification num guidance notes delete these guidance notes from final document after using for reference all edits to downloaded tdp documents shall be tracked most word processing software allows this to be done automatically .
deletions shall be struck through e.g .
example .
insertions shall be in italics e.g .
example .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted then the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
num .
clause num concrete footings if concrete footings are not required for mass limestone retaining walls and only a sand base is detailed on the drawings then the clauses relating to concrete footings need to be marked not used specifically clauses numb num num and num num .
num .
clause num acceptance of bearing surfaces to carry loads note this is for granular materials .
alternative specification may be required for other materials .
num .
clause num backfilling if reinforced earth retaining walls are specified on the drawings geostraps for reinforcement as opposed to galvanised steel reinforcing strips are only permitted on noncritical structures .
these are defined as numm in wall height without any vehicle surcharge loading .
provision must be written into this clause for any reinforced limestone retaining walls .
main roads western australia specification num limestone retaining walls page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num contract specific requirements to add or delete the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
none at this time .
main roads western australia specification num limestone retaining walls page num of num contract xxxxx document num issue num specification amendment checklist specification name no num revision no _______ title limestone retaining walls project manager name _______________signature _______________date______ checked by name _______________signature _______________date______ contract no _______contract description___________________________________ item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked change mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materialsproductsclauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from mcp .
num .
clause deletions shown as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection testing parameters included in spec num test methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date _______________ specification num antigraffiti copyright main roads western australia specification num antigraffiti num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name revision register clause number description of revision authorised by issue date whole document reformatted to corporate guidelines sco num num document numbers amended sdse num annexure numa list of approved antigraffiti coatings moved to a separate document asdse num annexure numa removal of graffiti off texcote enduroshield and universal num asdse num annexure numc annexure numd renamed as annexure numc annexure numa acceptance of surfaceshield s and hdh .
removal of surfashield ts and lz asdse num annexure numa acceptance of enviroflon num asdse num annexure numa acceptance of weathermax hbr asdse num annexure numa acceptance of cavalcade coatings sdse num clause num of guidance note included technical guidelines and new website address sdse num whole document replace reference to department of housing and works mrwa specification test method with main roads w.a mrwa test method sdse num annexure numa amended .
sdse num annexure numa manufacturer of enviroshield f g enduroshield and universal num corrected sdse num whole document complete revision of issue num to new format mcp num specification num antigraffiti num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contents clause page no general num num scope num num references num num definitions num num num not used num products and materials num num general num num antigraffiti coatings num num graffiti removal materials num num paint num num num not used num antigraffiti coatings num num substrate surface preparation num num application num num antigraffiti coating systems num num effectiveness of antigraffiti coatings num num not used num graffiti removal num num surveillance of construction works num num general num num painting over graffiti num num num not used num asbuilt and handover requirements num num asbuilt information num num num not used num contract specific requirements num num num not used num annexure numa num approved antigraffiti coatings num annexure numb num paint colours num annexure numc num designated graffiti sites num specification num antigraffiti num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name specification num antigraffiti general num scope num .
the work under this specification consists of the provision of graffiti prevention measures by the application of antigraffiti coatings to roadside furniture and structures including bridges noise walls retaining walls traffic controller boxes and similar features .
antigraffiti coatings num .
the scope also includes the removal of graffiti andor the painting over of graffiti .
graffiti removal num .
the scope excludes the application of antigraffiti coatings to the faces of traffic signs .
the use of a protective overlay film for the protection of sign faces is described in specification num signs .
signs excluded num references num .
australian standards main roads western australia standards and main roads western australia test methods are referred to in abbreviated form e.g .
as num mrs num or wa num .
for convenience the full titles are given below australian standards as num metal finishing preparation and pretreatment of surfaces removal of oil grease and related contamination as num metal finishing preparation and pretreatment of surfaces abrasive blast cleaning as num colour standards for general purposes australiannew zealand standards asnzs num paints and related materials methods of test application properties brushing asnzs num paints and related materials methods of test application properties conventional spraying asnzs num paints and related materials methods of test application properties roller coating asnzs num paints and related materials methods of test application properties airless spraying asnzs num paints and related materials methods of test adhesion pulloff test asnzs num guide to the painting of buildings specification num antigraffiti num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name other standards astm dnum test method for nondestructive measurement of dry film thickness of applied organic coatings using an ultrasonic gauge main roads standards num test method for anti graffiti products specifications graffiti removers nonsacrificial antigraffiti coatings sacrificial antigraffiti coatings test methods for effectiveness of graffiti removers nonsacrificial antigraffiti coatings sacrificial antigraffiti coatings main roads specifications specification num quality systems num definitions num .
sacrificial antigraffiti coatings shall indicate those coatings normally applied to highly porous substrates such as natural limestone or limestone derivatives and can also apply to lower porosity substrates .
sacrificial coatings num .
nonsacrificial antigraffiti coatings shall indicate those coatings intended to be resistant to graffiti removers .
non sacrificial coatings num num not used products and materials num general num .
materials required to complete the works shall be supplied delivered and applied by the contractor .
num .
prior to the use of any materials on works within the contract product data sheets and current materials safety data sheets detailing the properties of the proposed products shall be provided to the superintendent .
hold point num .
all coatings and treatments shall be applied in accordance with good painting practice and in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
num antigraffiti coatings num .
antigraffiti coatings shall be selected from the list of approved coatings at annexure numa .
specification num antigraffiti num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the selected antigraffiti coating system used shall carry a guaranteed graffiti removal life of not less than num years from the date of application for non sacrificial coatings and not less than num years from the date of application for sacrificial coatings .
guaranteed life num .
antigraffiti coatings shall satisfy the requirements with specifications for sacrificial antigraffiti coatings or specifications for nonsacrificial antigraffiti coatings under testing method for antigraffiti products manual .
testing method num .
the contractor shall demonstrate that the proposed coating system fulfils the claims of the manufacturer with respect to coating properties for the particular substrate surfaces .
num .
the antigraffiti coating systems shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
coatings shall be assessed in accordance with method for assessing the effectiveness of sacrificial anti graffiti coatings or method for assessing the effectiveness of nonsacrificial anti graffiti coatings under testing method for antigraffiti products manual and shall achieve a minimum rating of num in accordance with the scale detailed in table num .
effectiveness table num effective ratings for antigraffiti coatings rating result num no graffiti removed num some graffiti removed but no more than num num between num and num graffiti removed num between num and num graffiti removed num most graffiti removed with only shadowing remaining num graffiti completely removed num .
a contractors alternative antigraffiti coating system shall only be considered by the superintendent when a written submission includes the following alternative coating system a .
certification in accordance with clause num and is approval for use by mrwa certification and approval b .
the manufacturers specification and published recommendations and c. the manufacturers materials safety data sheets num .
on request by the superintendent the contractor shall provide test samples or panels accompanied with nata certification of colour gloss thickness and adhesion at no cost to the principal .
the panels shall be compressed cement sheet and shall be used for testing in accordance with mrwas testing method for antigraffiti products assessment .
test samples specification num antigraffiti num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num graffiti removal materials num .
graffiti removal materials selected by the contractor shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations and material safety data sheets .
num .
chemical graffiti removers shall satisfy the requirements given in specifications for graffiti removers under testing method for antigraffiti products manual .
num .
the remover shall be able to fulfil the claims of the manufacturer with respect to removal properties for the particular surfaces on which it is designed to be used .
num .
the graffiti remover shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
removal shall be assessed in accordance with method for assessing the effectiveness of graffiti removers under testing method for antigraffiti products manual and shall achieve a minimum rating of num in accordance with the scale detailed in table num .
effectiveness num paint num .
paint shall be of the colour and type as indicated in annexure numb and in accordance with as num .
num num not used antigraffiti coatings num substrate surface preparation num .
the surface to be treated shall be prepared in accordance with asnzs num and the manufacturers published recommendation for the antigraffiti coating system .
surface preparation num .
all dust dirt grease and oil contaminants including remnants of curing membranes and any other surface contaminants shall be removed by non destructive means followed by water washing .
remove contaminants num .
where a clear antigraffiti coating system is specified the substrate shall be free of all graffiti graffiti shadows paints or any other surface contaminants which would be visible through the coating unless the substrate or steel work is intentionally painted .
num .
where shadows of previously removed graffiti are likely to be clearly visible through a coating the contractor shall advise the superintendent prior to the application of the antigraffiti coating system .
shadows num .
some of the smoother concrete surfaces may require whip blasting with a fine grade garnet or surface etching with an approved acid wash followed by a water wash in order to provide adequate adhesion of the coating system .
whip blasting operations shall be carried out in accordance with the appropriate regulations .
smooth concrete surfaces num .
excess materials shall be disposed of to the contractors spoil site .
specification num antigraffiti num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num application num general num .
antigraffiti coatings shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations and asnzs num .
num .
antigraffiti coatings shall not be applied under the following conditions restrictions to application a. the site of work is exposed to a wind speed exceeding numkmhr b. where wind borne debris may contaminate the uncured surface of the freshly applied coating c. when the ambient temperature exceeds numc or is below numc d. when the relative humidity exceeds num e. when there is any chance of rain spatter or run off including leakage through deck joints contaminating the surface and adversely effecting the adhesion to the substrate f. where the surface temperature of the substrate is less than numc above the dew point or exceeds numc or g. where the substrate surface is wet or damp .
num traffic controller boxes num .
special care is required during the application of antigraffiti coatings on traffic signal controller housings .
for the purpose of this specification the following terms are defined a .
a traffic signal controller housing shall be the complete external surface of the traffic signal controller housing with the exception of the following components traffic signal controller i. door latches at the front of the housing ii .
facility switch latch and brand plate on the top left hand side of the housing iii .
concrete plinth on which the housing is mounted iv .
telstra door and latch on the middle right side of the housing and v. light sensing device on the top right side of the housing .
b .
a facility switch shall be the mechanical switching device usually situated on the side of the controller which can be accessed externally .
facility switch num .
all decals shall be removed from the traffic signal controller prior to the application of an antigraffiti coating .
when the coating system is complete and cured the decals shall be replaced .
the decals shall be replaced in accordance with the drawings at annexure numc .
decals specification num antigraffiti num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the applied coating shall not impede the function or operation of key locks latches doors or photocells .
num .
the top air vent of the controller box shall be sealed when using pressured application and cleaning equipment to stop the ingress of moisture and paint into the sensitive electronic components and removed at the completion of application of the antigraffiti coating .
damage to the traffic controller box andor electronic contents as a result of the application process shall be repaired at no cost to the principal .
protection of equipment num .
the contractor shall ensure that the coated works are protected from adverse conditions dust and debris during the curing period of the coating system .
num antigraffiti coating systems num .
the coating system shall be a nonsacrificial except where the coating is to be installed on a limestone substrate clear or pigmented coating to a specified colour .
type of coating num .
the coating system shall be an acrylic copolymer polyurethane or polyurea type and shall be nonyellowing and uvresistant for the guaranteed life of the coating system .
the coating shall be impermeable to chlorides carbon dioxide and water but allow the transmission of water vapour .
num .
the coating system shall not affect the recoat ability of the substrate material .
num .
where a prime or tiecoat is required as part of the antigraffiti system the primer or tiecoat shall be a different colour to that of the final nominated colour .
num .
nominated colours specified at annexure numb are in accordance with as num .
the coating pigments shall be colourfast and not subject to fading or discoloration .
colour num .
the finished coating system shall be of uniform thickness colour and appearance and shall be free of any defects that may impair the performance or appearance of the coating for the life of the coating .
num .
the finished cured coating system shall have a minimum installed thickness of numm encompassing a minimum antigraffiti coating dry film thickness dft of numm .
the dry film thickness shall be measured in accordance with astm dnum using a digital coating thickness gauge suited for single or multiple coating layers which has been calibrated for use on concrete steel and similar surfaces to which the coatings are applied .
dry film thickness num .
the selected coating system shall have a minimum adhesion value as detailed in table num and table num .
adhesion value specification num antigraffiti num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name table num nonsacrificial coating adhesion to selected substrates substrates minimum result by asnzs num .
num concrete slab nummpa compressed cement sheet greater than the cohesive strength of the sheet table num sacrificial coating adhesion to selected substrates substrates minimum result by asnzs num .
num concrete slab nummpa num .
natural limestone and limestone derivatives shall be coated with a sacrificial anti graffiti coating system conforming to specifications for sacrificial antigraffiti coatings under testing method for antigraffiti products manual .
num .
excess materials shall be disposed of to the contractors spoil site .
num effectiveness of antigraffiti coatings num .
nonsacrificial antigraffiti coatings shall be certified for effectiveness in accordance with method for assessing the effectiveness of nonsacrificial anti graffiti coatings under testing method for antigraffiti products manual .
num .
sacrificial antigraffiti coatings shall be certified for effectiveness in accordance with method for assessing the effectiveness of sacrificial antigraffiti coatings under testing method for antigraffiti products manual .
num .
certification of the coating shall include the results of a. graffiti removal after num hours and num hours after application b. graffiti removal after artificial weathering c. graffiti removal after artificial salt spray exposure d. attack by alternate removal agents e. adhesion to selected substrates f. scratch resistance g. burn resistance and h. weathering resistance .
specification num antigraffiti num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
the contractor shall provide test certificates from a nata registered testing laboratory for the thickness and adhesion of the applied coating .
num .
the contractor shall produce certification that the coating system has been applied in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
num .
the contractor shall forward the original signed certificates to the superintendent for retention .
num .
coating materials shall be subject to examination by the superintendent and shall be accompanied by certificates of supply stating the place date and quantity of manufacture including appropriate batch numbers to permit full traceability of product .
num not used graffiti removal num surveillance of construction works num .
the contractor shall systematically inspect road and bridge construction works for graffiti at least on a weekly basis during the contract period including immediately after weekends or public holidays .
particular attention shall be given to obvious graffiti targets such as bridges and other major structures with a large surface area .
inspections num .
where an inspection discovers graffiti on completed works or on those parts of the works that would normally be left for some time before completion cleaning shall be initiated and completed within num hours .
graffiti that is of a sensitive nature defined as including the following racist sexist obscene and of similar context shall be removed within num hours .
cleaning and removal num .
cleaning and removal of graffiti shall comply with the requirements of the specification .
num general num .
where works in progress have been subjected to graffiti attack the contractor shall remove the graffiti without damage to the substrate within the following detailed intervention level .
a .
any sign structure or roadside area highly visible to the public and the content is considered to be offensive graffiti shall be removed within num hours of detection .
num day b .
any designated graffiti site in accordance with annexure numc graffiti shall be removed within num days of detection .
num days c. any other graffiti graffiti shall be removed within num days of detection .
num days num .
typical graffiti removal methods shall include but not be limited to a. abrasive blast cleaning b .
chemical cleaning specification num antigraffiti num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name c. steam cleaning and d. pressurised liquid blast cleaning num .
the contractor shall be responsible for ensuring the compatibility of the proposed cleaning method without injurious affect to any installed coatings paint systems and uncoated substrates except sacrificial coatings for limestone .
num graffiti removal num .
where the nature or composition of the graffiti is such that the contractors selected removal treatment may cause damage to the substrate the contractor shall seek written authorisation from the superintendent prior to commencing the treatment .
hold point num .
for coated substrates the accepted standard of graffiti removal shall be no residual graffiti being visible .
num .
for uncoated substrates the complete removal may not be possible due to the absorbency of the substrate material .
under these circumstances the superintendent may allow some residual paint staining or shadowing to remain .
num .
the graffiti message tag or configuration shall not be intelligible or clearly visible from a. a distance of numm from a substrate to pedestrians or b. a distance of numm to a roadway .
num .
chemical removers used for the cleaning of sacrificial coatings shall conform to clause num .
num .
damage to the substrate or substrate coating caused by the contractor shall be rectified at no cost to the principal .
num .
excess material shall be disposed of to the contractors spoil site .
num painting over graffiti num .
where removal of graffiti is inappropriate or impractical graffiti shall be painted over with paint in accordance with asnzs num .
num .
the surface to be painted over shall be prepared in accordance with asnzs num .
num .
the paint shall be num acrylic .
the colour and level of gloss shall be specified by the superintendent and will be as specified at annexure numb .
num .
excess materials shall be disposed of to the contractors spoil site .
specification num antigraffiti num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num num not used asbuilt and handover requirements num asbuilt information num .
the contractor shall produce and submit a graffiti report upon completion of each instance of graffiti removal .
the report shall contain a comprehensive photographic record of all graffiti supported with written detail as to the location description area and treatment and removal cost of the graffiti .
reporting num .
photographs shall be of nominal size nummm x nummm and imprinted with the date and shall clearly show the graffiti and a gauge scaled at one metre intervals .
photographs shall be forwarded to the superintendent as hard copy along with the negatives or digital file associated with the photograph .
hard copies of digital photographs shall be certified as a true representation of the graffiti and dated by the contractor .
photographs num .
the gauge shall be used in all photographs depicting graffiti and shall not be permanently fixed or drawn on the defaced surface .
num .
the photographs shall be accurately labelled and presented in anum size clear photo pockets .
num num not used contract specific requirements num num not used specification num antigraffiti num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numa approved antigraffiti coatings a list of approved antigraffiti coatings is available on the main roads western australia website under the num series building roads tender preparation specifications num series num antigraffiti specification num antigraffiti num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numb paint colours num .
the following colours shall be the predominate colours used for the works .
colour n num storm grey colour n num koala grey colour n num pearl grey colour t num smoke blue num .
clear coating shall be used on limestone walls and exposed aggregate concrete finishes .
num .
refer to drawings for further information .
specification num antigraffiti num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name annexure numc designated graffiti sites the following areas are known graffiti sites that may impact on the works .
the contractor shall take all necessary precautions to prevent acts of graffiti upon the works .
site comment note complete above table as necessary or denote as no known sites if none exist and delete this note specification num antigraffiti num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name guidance notes for reference only delete guidance notes from final document num .
all edits to downloaded specifications shall be made using track changes to clearly show addeddeleted text .
num .
if all information relating to a clause is deleted the clause number should be retained and the words not used should be inserted .
num .
the proposed documents with tracked changes shall be submitted to the project manager for review prior to printing the final batch of documents .
when this final printing is carried out the tracked changes option is to be turned off .
num .
before printing accept all changes in the document turn off track changes and refresh the table of contents .
num .
the custodian of this specification is the structures design and standards engineer .
num .
approved antigraffiti coatings annexure numa due to the increasing availability of many different types and application of antigraffiti coatings coming onto the market annexure numa should be reviewed every num months and updated as required .
technical guidelines testing of all anti graffiti products should be carried out in accordance with testing method for anti graffiti products document no .
num sources of information for this document refer to main roads western australia waterloo crescent east perth num telephone num num or www.mainroads.wa.gov.au then click on the following links building roads standards technical structures engineering design note a suitable instrument for the measurement of dry film thickness is the positector num dry film thickness gauge manufactured by pcwi international pty ltd num alhambra avenue cardiff nsw num num .
annexure numb paint colours annexure numb lists some typical colours of antigraffiti coatings .
project manager to select the colour that would suit the project from the selection as required e.g concrete surfaces grey provide better uv resistance limestone surfaces clear specification num antigraffiti num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name num .
designated graffiti sites annexure numc the project manager shall obtain information from the tnc manager to identify if these sites exist in the vicinity of the contract .
if no sites exist designate as no known sites .
num .
graffiti removal the project manager shall undertake a survey of existing graffiti of the site with the superintendent prior to the issue of the possession of site to the contractor and arrange for the removal of the graffiti through the term network contract .
under as num general conditions of contract clausenum the contractor is responsible for making good the loss or damage to the work under the contract from the time possession of site is issued through to and until the certificate of practical completion is issued by the superintendent .
loss or damage shall include unfixed items the value of which has been included in a payment certificate things entrusted to the contractor by the principal for the purpose of carrying out the work under the contract things bought on the site by subcontractors for that purpose the works and the temporary works and constructional plant .
for example the contractor is required to remove graffiti that has been applied to a bridge that is part of the works until such time as practical completion is issued .
the contractor is not required to remove graffiti that has been applied to a bridge that is part of the works but for which practical completion has been issued nor to a bridge that does not form part of the works .
insurance in as num contracts applies only to those things referred to in as num clausenum listed above .
specification num antigraffiti num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name contract specific requirements the following clauses are to be placed under the contract specific requirements as required .
after inserting the clause change the clause number and heading to style hnum sp so it appears in the table of contents .
xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp keyword sp num .
insert text main table sp xxx.xx sub heading hnum sp num .
insert text main table sp num .
insert text main table sp specification num antigraffiti num issued num document no dxxxxxx page num of num contract no xxxxx contract name amendment checklist specification no .
num title antigraffiti revision no project manager signature date checked by signature date contract no contract description item description sign off note all changesamendments must be shown in tracked changes mode until approved .
num .
project manager has reviewed specification and identified additions and amendments .
num .
contract specific requirements addressed contract specific materials products clauses added refer specification guidance notes for guidance .
num .
any unlisted materialsproducts proposed and approved by the project manager if yes provide details at num .
num .
standard clauses amended must seek approval from manager contracts num .
clause deletes shows as not used .
num .
appropriate inspection and testing parameters included in spec num text methods minimum testing frequencies verified .
num .
annexures completed refer specification guidance notes .
num .
handover and as built requirements addressed .
num .
main roads qs has approved changes to smm .
num .
project manager certifies completed specification reflects intent of the design .
num .
completed specification independent verification arranged by project manager .
num .
project managers review completed .
num .
specification guidance notes deleted .
num .
table of contents updated .
num .
footer updated with document no .
contract no .
and contract name .
num .
supporting information prepared and submitted to project manager .
further action necessary signed project manager date
