standard specifications for highway construction prepared by professional services section alberta transportation edmonton alberta copyright august num her majesty the queen in right of alberta as represented by the minister of transportation this book or parts thereof may not be reproduced in any form without the written permission of executive director technical standards branch alberta transportation summary of specifications num august num spec .
no .
description section num grade construction num clearing num grading num culverts num riprap num topsoil placement num underground electrical conduits num perforated pipe subdrains num salvage of base course and pavement material num manholes inlets and catch basins num fencing num livestock guards num metal bin retaining wall num removal of miscellaneous structures num concrete andor corrugated steel storm sewer num guardrail and guide posts num seeding num cable ducts num plastic culvert extensions and culvert liners num smooth wall steel pipe culvert extensions and culvert liners num highway street lighting num traffic signals section num surfacing num subgrade preparation num aggregate production and stockpiling num gravel surfacing num asphalt stabilized base course num granular base course num granular fill num cement stabilized base course num asphalt surface treatment num cold milling asphalt pavement num surfacing bridge decks num prime tack fog coats num slurry seal num double seal coat num graded aggregate seal coat num chip seal coat summary of specifications spec .
no .
description num august num num microsurfacing num asphalt pavement crack routing and sealing num asphalt pavement crack sealing num crack repair spray patch num crack repair mill and fill num cutting of pavement num asphalt concrete pavement eps num milled rumble strips num asphalt concrete pavement superpave num sideslope improvement section num miscellaneous num asphalt curb medians traffic islands and flumes num concrete curbs gutters sidewalks medians and traffic islands num hauling section num materials num supply of aggregate num supply of portland cement concrete num supply of asphalt num supply of portland cement num supply of fence material num supply of reinforced concrete culvert num supply of polyvinyl chloride pipe num supply of permanent highway signs posts and bases num supply of line painting materials num supply of livestock guards num supply and install smooth wall steel pipes num supply of corrugated metal pipe and pipe arches num supply of polyethylene pipe num supply of thrie beam and wbeam guardrail num supply box beam guardrail and posts num supply of cable barrier and metal posts num supply flexible guide post traffic delineators num supply of reinforcement num supply of metal bin retaining wall num geotextile summary of specifications spec .
no .
description num august num section num environmental num permanent environmental protection devices num gabion and gabion mattresses section num signing and pavement markings num traffic accommodation and temporary signing num painted roadway lines num pavement messages num permanent highway signing section num specification num clearing august num table of contents num clearing num num general num num description num num clearing in forest protection areas num num clearing num num general num num clearing and timber salvage num num preservation of trees num num hazardous trees num num disposal of clearing debris num num disposal of clearing debris by burning num num disposal of clearing debris by mulching num num measurement and payment num section num specification num clearing august num num num clearing num general num description clearing shall consist of cutting piling removing and disposing of trees brush stumps logs and roots from areas shown on the drawings or as designated by the consultant .
num clearing in forest protection areas clearing in forest protection areas shall be carried out in accordance with the regulations and requirements of the alberta forest and prairie protection act .
num clearing num general the contractor shall cut trees and brush within the areas designated for clearing work and dispose of the resulting debris .
debris from clearing operations shall be contained within the limits of the areas to be cleared and shall not be deposited on adjacent backslopes ditches sideslopes andor roadway surfaces .
any debris from clearing or mulching operations that is inadvertently deposited outside the clearing areas shall be removed immediately .
all costs associated with the removal of debris deposited outside the limits of the areas to be cleared will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
burying of material will not be permitted .
branches from standing trees extending into the rightofway which hang within num m of the ground shall be cutoff close to the trunk in a neat and workmanlike manner .
underbrush and downed trees protruding into the rightofway shall be removed and disposed of .
at the completion of clearing operations the limits of the rightofway shall be left in a condition suitable for fencing .
num clearing and timber salvage areas requiring timber salvage will be identified by the consultant .
generally timber salvage will be required where trees have a stump diameter of num mm or greater .
the contractor shall fell top limb and deck salvageable timber to the satisfaction of the consultant .
the salvaged timber shall be neatly piled in areas designated by the consultant .
num preservation of trees the consultant may require the contractor to preserve certain trees within the rightofway .
underbrush downed timber snags and roots shall be removed from the vicinity of trees designated for preservation and the materials disposed of .
num hazardous trees trees located outside areas to be cleared which in the opinion of the consultant may present a hazard shall be removed and disposed of .
section num specification num clearing august num num num disposal of clearing debris num disposal of clearing debris by burning num general generally debris resulting from the contractors clearing operations shall be disposed of by burning .
unless otherwise approved by the consultant burning of clearing debris shall take place within the rightofway .
the contractor shall obtain authorization from the applicable local authorities prior to burning of clearing debris within municipal districts and counties .
the contractor is advised that during periods of extreme fire hazard in forest protection areas fire permits may be refused .
in the event the contractor is unable to burn the debris through no fault of his own the consultant may direct the contractor to mulch the clearing debris and dispose of it onsite or remove the debris from the rightofway to his own disposal site .
num fire control the contractor shall be solely responsible for ensuring all fires are carefully controlled and are fully extinguished at the completion of clearing operations .
the contractor may be held responsible for damages resulting from improperly extinguished fires .
num disposal of clearing debris by mulching num general when specified in the special provisions or when directed by the consultant the contractor shall dispose of clearing debris by mulching and spreading the resulting material over the cleared area or other area designated by the consultant .
num mulching mulching shall consist of the breaking down of all nonsalvageable timber or snags brush shrubs slash waste wood and wood debris left after clearing andor clearing and timber salvage operations have been completed .
acceptable mulching methods include flailing rotary cutting and grinding pulverizing or chipping .
alternative methods may be used subject to approval by the consultant .
mulching shall be in accordance with the following requirements all mulched materials shall lay flat to the soil .
in cases of convoluted or mixed materials the height protruding above the soil level shall not exceed num m and shall not exceed a single stem protrusion .
no single piece of mulched material shall be longer than num m and shall not exceed num m in diameter .
exceptions to this requirement may be considered by the consultant for large diameter woody materials which upon mechanical manipulation show evidence of debarking but resist breakup into a size of less than num m in diameter .
section num specification num clearing august num num woody material mulched inplace shall have no residual height requirement .
material mulched and stockpiled and then spread over the cleared areas at a later time shall have a maximum residual height of num m. the contractor shall undertake fringe cleanup operations to remove displaced materials in adjacent timber including tangled or hungup material leaning or broken material or any material displaced by the mulching process .
this also includes any material damaged by the mulching process within proximity to the cleared area deemed by the consultant to be a safety hazard .
roadways and adjacent lands shall be inspected for a minimum of num m from the edge of the property or border of the area cleared .
materials deposited on adjacent lands by the contractors clearing or mulching operations shall be returned to the rightofway .
all stumps shall be reduced to ground level using methods acceptable to the consultant .
mulching operations shall not incorporate or mix mulched materials into the subsoil .
in cases where topsoil is limited surface mulching operations shall not be allowed to mix topsoil and subsoil horizons .
num measurement and payment clearing clearing and mulching clearing and timber salvage and clearing timber salvage and mulching will be measured in hectares based on horizontal measurements .
no allowance will be made for uneven or sloping ground .
payment for this work will be made at the unit prices bid for clearing clearing and mulching clearing and timber salvage andor clearing timber salvage and mulching as applicable and will be full compensation for all clearing andor clearing and timber salvage operations disposal of debris by burning mulching or other methods specified by the consultant and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
cutting and removing grain grass weeds brush and shrubs from within areas to be cleared will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
if through no fault of his own the contractor is unable to obtain a burning permit and the consultant directs the contractor to mulch and spread the clearing debris onsite or dispose of these materials offsite payment for this work will be made in accordance with section num extra work of specification num general .
however if in the opinion of the consultant the contractor did not make use of opportunities to burn debris when available these costs will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
clearing of areas required for contractor access to the work and for contractor campsites shall be carried out by the contractor at his expense .
payment will not be made for this work .
section num specification num grading august num table of contents num gradingnum num generalnum num description num num dimensions of excavations and embankmentsnum num materials num num general description of suitable and unsuitable materialsnum num reservation of special materialsnum num description of topsoil and subsoilnum num classes of excavationnum num rock excavationnum num channel excavation num num common excavation num num borrow topsoil excavationnum num borrow excavation num num common andor borrow excavation loaded to trucks num num constructionnum num general requirements num num solid rock excavation num num catch water ditches num num common excavation num num borrow topsoil excavationnum num borrow excavation num num constructing roadways num num approach fills for bridge structures other than bridge culvertsnum num overhaulnum num finishing previous clearing num num finishing interim acceptance of roadway surfaces and maintenance .num num finishingnum num interim acceptance of roadway surfaces num num maintenance requirements and responsibilitiesnum num measurement and paymentnum num generalnum num towing trafficnum num slidesnum num maintenance and traffic accommodationnum num rippable rock excavation num num solid rock excavation num num channel excavation num num common excavation num num borrow topsoil excavation and borrow reclamationnum num borrow excavation num num common andor borrow excavation loaded to trucks num num catch water ditches num num constructing embankmentnum num approach fills for bridge structures other than bridge culvertsnum num overhaulnum num finishing previous clearing num num reservation of special materialsnum num construction completionnum section num specification num grading august num num num grading num general num description grading consists of the excavation of soil materials the salvage of select soil materials the operation of borrow areas and the construction of embankment .
this work includes the removal andor satisfactory placement of all materials necessary for the construction and preparation of embankments slopes drainage works and connections to the required alignment grade and crosssections .
it also includes the excavation for culverts underdrains and foundation pits for bridges trestles buildings and other structures .
num dimensions of excavations and embankments generally the dimensions of the excavations and embankments shall be as shown on the drawings however the dimensions of any or all excavations and embankments may be increased or decreased at any time by the consultant as conditions and circumstances dictate .
num materials num general description of suitable and unsuitable materials the following provides a general description of the materials typically encountered during grading construction and how such materials shall be handled in the course of carrying out the work .
specific requirements concerning the use of these materials are detailed elsewhere in this specification .
materials considered as suitable shall be used for backfilling and constructing embankments .
materials considered as unsuitable shall either be disposed of or salvaged depending on the nature of the material .
vegetation roots stumps and refuse are considered unsuitable materials .
such materials shall be disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the consultant .
topsoil excavated from inside and outside the rightofway is considered an unsuitable material .
topsoil shall be salvaged and subsequently handled as specified elsewhere in this specification .
subsoil excavated from inside the rightofway is considered a suitable material .
subsoil excavated from outside the rightofway or from a roadway which is to be obliterated is considered an unsuitable material and shall be salvaged and subsequently handled as specified elsewhere in this specification .
excess subsoil excavated from dugout borrow sources may be designated as a suitable material by the consultant .
such material will be classified and paid for as borrow excavation .
all other excavated material obtained from inside or outside the rightofway will be considered suitable materials regardless of the moisture content of the material .
during the performance of the work the consultant will be the final authority in determining suitable and unsuitable materials .
section num specification num grading august num num num reservation of special materials the contractor shall notify the department immediately whenever gravel stone or other material which has the potential of being suitable for special use by the department is found .
when required by the department such materials shall be reserved and deposited in suitable locations identified by the department .
num description of topsoil and subsoil in this specification the terms topsoil and subsoil are used to describe separate select soils requiring specific handling during construction .
the following general descriptions are provided to assist the contractor in distinguishing these select soils in the course of carrying out the work .
the specific handling requirements for topsoil and subsoil are specified elsewhere in this specification .
the uppermost layers of soil both inside and outside the rightofway may consist of any or all of the following .
topsoil is the uppermost layer of soil that i contains the majority of plant roots .
ii is normally referred to as the plough layer in agriculture soils .
iii is typically darker in colour than the subsoil layer .
subsoil is the layer of soil directly below the topsoil layer that i contains the lower portion of the root zone .
ii is typically lighter in colour than the topsoil layer .
num classes of excavation all excavation for whatever purpose will be classified as specified herein .
the classifications for solid rock channel excavation common excavation and borrow excavation stipulate excavating and placing the material .
in the event the excavated material is unsuitable the term excavating and placing shall be taken to mean excavating and stockpiling or excavating and disposing as applicable .
num rock excavation num general rock excavation consists of the removal and placement from its original position of rock in solid beds or masses and boulders or detached rock having a volume of num mnum or greater .
num rippable rock when identified in the special provisions any rock that can be ripped by a group num dozer equipped with a ripper as defined in the arhca equipment rental rate guide and excavated using conventional earthmoving equipment will be classified as rippable rock .
excavation of this material will be paid for in accordance with subsection num rippable rock excavation .
section num specification num grading august num num num solid rock rock that can not be ripped by a group num dozer equipped with a single ripper will be classified as solid rock .
excavation of this material will be paid for in accordance with subsection num solid rock excavation .
num channel excavation channel excavation includes the excavation and placing of material excavated for the following purposes improvement of existing watercourses .
watercourse channel realignments .
offset muskeg drainage ditches located parallel to the roadway but not forming the normal contiguous roadway ditch .
excavation for ditch sections adjoining the roadway embankment will not be classed as channel excavation .
trenches excavated for the installation of perforated pipe subdrains .
trenches excavated for the installation of culverts down to the culvert invert elevation including subexcavation for culvert base construction .
in cut sections this is defined as the material excavated for culvert installation subsequent to undercut excavation as shown on the drawings only .
in fill sections this is defined as the material excavated below original ground only .
material excavated during channel excavation operations which meets the specifications for solid rock or rippable rock as described in subsection num rock excavation shall be so classified .
num common excavation common excavation consists of the excavation and placement of material obtained from within the rightofway which does not meet the classification definitions for either channel excavation or common andor borrow excavation loaded to trucks .
material excavated from stockpiles within the rightofway and redistributed over disturbed areas will also be classified as common excavation .
num borrow topsoil excavation borrow topsoil excavation consists of the excavation and salvage of topsoil and subsoil separately from borrow areas and borrow area haul roads .
such materials excavated from a stockpile and redistributed on borrow areas and borrow area haul roads shall also be classified as borrow topsoil excavation .
num borrow excavation borrow excavation consists of the excavation and placing of material obtained from locations outside the rightofway with the following exceptions i the excavation of roadways which are being obliterated will be classified as common excavation .
section num specification num grading august num num ii with the exception of topsoil and subsoil excavated from outside the rightofway as described in num i all other topsoil and subsoil excavated from outside the rightofway will be classified as borrow topsoil excavation .
num common andor borrow excavation loaded to trucks common andor borrow excavation loaded to trucks consists of the excavation loading to trucks and placing of designated materials that are obtained from locations inside the rightofway or from borrow areas shown on the drawings or described in the special provisions .
materials not designated to be loaded to trucks will not be so classified .
num construction num general requirements num restraining of livestock the contractor shall erect and maintain such temporary fences as may be required to prevent livestock or other animals from straying upon the rightofway or adjoining property or upon borrow area perimeters .
the contractor shall at all times provide against the escape of livestock or other animals through openings made by him in rightofway or other fences .
num towing traffic where necessary during grading operations the contractor shall upon orders in writing from the consultant provide sufficient men and equipment to hookup and tow vehicular traffic through the work .
the amount and type of equipment to be used in towing traffic will be stipulated and approved in the orders by the consultant .
the contractor shall be responsible for the hookup of towed vehicles and shall be responsible for any damage caused by such hookup and towing .
num equipment operation on paved surfaces where the location of excavation material necessitates the hauling across or on an existing paved roadway the operation shall be carried out as follows i haul across an existing roadway shall be limited to a single equipment crossing point for each borrow site approved by the consultant .
ii where haul across a road is by conventional earth moving equipment an earth pad or steel plates of sufficient dimensions shall be placed on the existing road surface so that no damage to the highway surface or roadbed is incurred .
steel plates may remain in place throughout the use of the crossings .
unless otherwise permitted by the consultant earth pads shall be placed no sooner than daybreak and removed no later than sunset each day that haul operations are in progress .
in all cases the use of earth pads on existing roads must be addressed by the contractor in his traffic accommodation strategy .
iii where haul along or across a road is undertaken by trucks the prevalent load limit restrictions for haul along roadways or over bridges shall apply .
haul of excavation section num specification num grading august num num material on the existing roadway will only be permitted until completion of sufficient new grade .
iv under no circumstances shall regular grading equipment be allowed to operate on the existing highway surface or use the highway surface as a haul road .
v dust abatement material shall be applied when necessary .
repair of any damage incurred in the pavement or subgrade structure as a result of the haul operations shall be the sole responsibility of the contractor .
the damage shall be repaired and the surface restored to a condition equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of haul operations .
num preservation of survey monuments the contractor shall preserve all survey monuments and property marks along and adjacent to the roadway .
the contractor shall use suitable precautions to protect from damage or disturbance such survey monuments and property marks until their location has been witnessed or otherwise referenced and he shall not remove them until directed by the consultant .
num slides all material in slips slides and subsidences shall be removed by the contractor and either properly disposed of or used in the work .
num construction surfacing maintenance and removal of staged construction sections of new highway which are used for traffic operation prior to the application of base course shall conform to the permanent grade section with temporary connections constructed at the end points as required .
immediately upon completion of the grading or in the case of an alignment revision immediately prior to instituting traffic thereon the roadway shall be gravel surfaced and sprayed with asphalt or other dust abatement material .
the contractor shall be responsible for continuously maintaining the surface in a satisfactory bladed and dustfree condition until the application of the base course .
as practical and where required by the consultant the material removed from the temporary connections shall be utilized for grade construction .
num solid rock excavation num rock cuts all rock cuts shall be excavated to below grade to a depth determined by the consultant and then backfilled to grade with suitable material .
in solid rock cuts where pockets which will not drain are formed below the design roadway elevation by blasting the contractor shall at his own expense provide drainage by ditching to a free outlet as determined by the consultant and backfill both the pockets and the trench to an elevation num m below profile grade with broken rock or coarse gravel .
section num specification num grading august num num num overbreak overbreak will be considered as that portion of rock which is excavated displaced or loosened outside and beyond the slopes or grade as established by the consultant regardless of whether any such overbreak is due to blasting to the inherent character of any formation encountered or to any other cause .
if any rock slide occurs as a result of overbreak all slide debris will be considered as overbreak .
overbreak material may as determined by the consultant be used to replace material which would otherwise have to be obtained from other sources or shall be disposed of to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num preshearing where required by the consultant the contractor shall preshear rock faces to minimize overbreak and produce a stable slope .
num trimming rock slopes slopes undercut at the base or destroyed in any manner by act of the contractor shall be resloped by the contractor at his own expense to the slope as staked by the consultant .
the slopes shall be carefully scaled down and all rocks and fragments likely to slide or roll down the slopes removed to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num catch water ditches catch water ditches shall be constructed in accordance with the typical plans where shown on the profile drawings andor where designated by the consultant .
in the case of a catch water ditch along the top of an excavation the consultant may require that the catch water ditch be constructed prior to commencement of excavation .
num common excavation all topsoil in disturbed areas or to the limits shown on the drawings or in the special provisions or where designated by the consultant shall be salvaged for reuse .
any required stockpiling of topsoil material shall be performed to minimize topsoil losses and contamination of the topsoil and surrounding materials .
following the excavation and salvage of topsoil all other material shall be excavated to the extent specified in subsection num and as shown on the drawings or as determined by the consultant .
suitable material shall be used for constructing embankments .
any unsuitable material encountered shall be disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the consultant .
num borrow topsoil excavation all topsoil and subsoil materials from borrow and borrow haul road areas shall be separately excavated salvaged stockpiled and reused in accordance with the requirements for development and reclamation of borrow areas specified in subsection num borrow excavation .
section num specification num grading august num num num borrow excavation num general the use of borrow excavation for constructing embankments will be allowed only after all common excavations have been completed and the resulting suitable material hauled into the embankment or after all the economic possibilities of obtaining further material by the widening of roadway excavations or ditches have been exhausted .
borrow areas shall be regular in width and if required shall be connected with ditches and drained to the nearest watercourse .
particular care shall be taken to work the area so as to cause a minimum of damage and inconvenience to the land owner .
on completion of the work borrow areas shall be trimmed and left in a neat and uniform condition .
the contractor shall not operate or park equipment in the borrow locations outside of the limits of the actual borrow area haul roads or stockpile sites .
any areas disturbed compacted or otherwise affected by the contractors operations shall be reclaimed to their original condition .
borrow areas will be staked out and crosssectioned by the consultant before the contractor begins work therein .
any material excavated from borrow areas previous to measurement will not be paid for .
when a borrow area is provided by the contractor the contractor shall provide proof of landowner consent and the righttoenter for department employees and the consultant .
borrow areas provided by the department may be entered only with the permission of the consultant .
such areas may be subject to revisions additions or deletions at the discretion of the consultant .
the contractor shall be prepared to accept such borrow location arrangements as will ultimately be made by the consultant and shall have no claim against the department on this account .
changes in borrow locations could result in the required use of soil material of undetermined characteristics and may also affect the equipment fleet required to undertake the work as well as the quantities associated with the work .
the contractor shall not change the location of a borrow area provided by the department without prior approval of the consultant .
when the construction of access or haul roads for borrow areas is required the locations and dimensions of the access roads shall be subject to approval by the consultant .
num notification requirements the contractor shall notify the consultant a minimum ten days prior to commencing i annual activities at the borrow site ii any salvage of topsoil andor subsoil materials iii any replacement of topsoil andor subsoil materials .
if the borrow area is provided by the contractor the contractor shall also inform the local reclamation inspector of the appropriate regulatory agency within this same time frame .
section num specification num grading august num num num predisturbance assessment of borrow areas num general a predisturbance assessment shall be completed for each borrow area in accordance with the procedures detailed in the document titled alberta transportation predisturbance assessment procedures for borrow excavations for road construction may num .
the predisturbance assessment shall be completed in advance of any construction related activity at the site .
when a borrow area is provided by the department the predisturbance assessment of the site will be completed by the consultant .
the contractor shall provide the consultant with sufficient advance notice of his intention to commence construction activities at the borrow site in order for the consultant to complete the predisturbance assessment .
the consultant will provide the contractor with a copy of the predisturbance assessment once it has been completed .
when a borrow area is provided by the contractor the contractor shall be responsible for the completion of the predisturbance assessment at the site .
the predisturbance assessment shall be prepared by a qualified soil specialist as defined in subsection num soil specialist .
the contractor shall not employ the departments consultant to carryout the assessment .
the contractor shall provide the consultant with a copy of the completed predisturbance assessment a minimum of num working days prior to the commencement of construction operations in the borrow area .
num soil specialist a soil specialist is an individual who is proficient in soil classification land management and soil conservation practices and has considerable experience in soil and vegetation impact assessment and problem diagnosis .
individuals with demonstrated field experience with soil conservation and road building practices but no formal education related to soil management and conservation may carry out the pre and post assessments under the supervision of a soil specialist .
num conservation of topsoil andor subsoil on borrow areas and stockpile sites the contractor shall excavate salvage and stockpile the topsoil and subsoil in a manner which prevents contamination of one material with the other .
the materials shall be stockpiled separately in a safe stable and accessible location .
a minimum distance of num m is required between stockpiles of different material type .
if topsoil is to be stockpiled for periods exceeding num months or when required by the consultant the contractor shall protect the stockpile from erosion by applying an approved seed mixture or other approved biodegradable soil stabilizer .
the contractor shall suspend the excavation salvage and stockpiling of topsoil and subsoil materials when wet or frozen or when other adverse conditions are encountered .
the contractor shall not construct stockpiles at locations where they are subject to erosion .
the contractor shall maintain erosion and drainage control in the vicinity of all borrow areas and stockpiles to the satisfaction of the consultant and shall ensure that surface drainage does not adversely affect adjacent lands watercourses or future reclamation operations .
section num specification num grading august num num num buffer zones the contractor shall ensure that an undisturbed buffer zone exists between the disturbed borrow areas and adjacent lands andor permanent structures .
for property boundaries road allowances and permanent structures normal buffer zones shall be num m or equal to the depth of excavation whichever is greater .
dugout borrows shall be a minimum of num m from the rightofway or num m from the highway centerline whichever is greater .
for watercourses or water bodies a minimum num m wide buffer shall be maintained .
stockpiles shall not be situated within num m of a watercourse or permanent structure or within num m of an adjacent property boundary .
extended buffers shall be implemented where local conditions dictate or when directed by the consultant .
num reclamation num general the contractor shall reclaim borrow areas and borrow area haul roads in accordance with the applicable legislation and described in the specifications .
borrow reclamation shall be carried out as soon as practicable after completion of excavation operations in a respective borrow area .
notwithstanding the requirement for expeditious reclamation of borrows reclamation may not be permitted to proceed if in the opinion of the consultant there is insufficient time left in the season to allow vegetation to become established and minimize soil erosion of the reclaimed areas .
num general reclamation conditions for landscape borrows or disturbed areas around dugouts borrow haul roads and stockpile sites no work of any kind shall take place on frozen or wet surface areas or using frozen or wet material .
upon completion of the excavation operations the contractor shall contour the site to match the surrounding lands and to ensure positive drainage .
the entire area shall be scarified to a minimum depth of num m or to the depth of compaction whichever is greater .
where large clay clumps or ridges are prevalent discing shall be carried out following scarification .
all rocks with any dimension greater than num mm shall be removed .
subsoil material my be used for contouring the site only upon approval by the consultant and the reclamation inspector from the regulatory agency having jurisdiction .
topsoil material shall not be used for site contouring .
the contractor shall replace all soil levels in uniform lifts in the reverse order that they were removed .
the contractor shall disc each replaced soil layer .
topsoil shall be redistributed evenly over the entire area and rocks roots and stumps removed in accordance with specification num topsoil placement .
redistribution of topsoil shall only be carried out under suitable weather conditions .
the contractor shall not perform this work when wind conditions are such that material is being carried beyond the designated work areas or is hindered from being applied uniformly .
section num specification num grading august num num the contractor is advised that in areas where dry soils are encountered discing and harrowing may destroy soil structure and lead to loss through wind erosion .
when these types of areas are encountered the contractor shall contact the reclamation inspector to establish alternative procedures for site reclamation .
rock picking shall be carried out to ensure that the rock content of the reclaimed land does not exceed the rock content prior to disturbance .
if the rock content prior to disturbance is unknown the consultant will use adjoining land as a comparator to determine the extent of rock picking required .
generally material salvaged from dugout borrow excavations shall not be replaced inside the dugout .
num seeding of reclaimed areas the contractor shall seed reclaimed sites in accordance with specification num seeding .
the appropriate grass mixture and if applicable the fertilizer type and application rates will be specified in the special provisions .
all disturbed areas resulting in exposed soils within borrow areas and haul roads shall be seeded unless otherwise determined by the consultant .
num postdisturbance assessment of borrow areas the contractor shall notify the consultant immediately upon completion of reclamation operations at a borrow site .
a postdisturbance assessment is required for each reclaimed borrow site .
post disturbance assessments shall be carried out in accordance with the procedures detailed in the document titled alberta transportation postdisturbance reclamation criteria and assessment procedures for borrow excavations for road construction may num with the exception that the vegetation component of the assessment will not be required .
the postdisturbance assessment shall be completed within num days following the completion of the reclamation work at a respective site .
when a borrow site is provided by the department the postdisturbance assessment of the site will be carried out by the consultant .
the consultant will provide a copy of the assessment to the contractor within num calendar days following completion of the assessment .
when the borrow site is provided by the contractor the contractor shall be responsible for the completion of the postdisturbance assessment at the site .
the postdisturbance assessment shall be carried out by a qualified soil specialist as defined in subsection num pre disturbance assessment of borrow areas .
the contractor shall not employ the departments consultant to carry out the assessment .
the contractor shall provide the consultant with a copy of the postdisturbance assessment within num calendar days following completion of the assessment .
num acceptance of reclaimed borrow sites each reclaimed borrow site will be assessed for compliance with the requirements of the section num specification num grading august num num specifications and the reclamation criteria specified in the document titled alberta transportation postdisturbance reclamation criteria and assessment procedures for borrow excavations for road construction may num with the exception that the vegetation criteria component will not apply .
a reclaimed borrow site which does not comply with the requirements of the specifications andor the reclamation criteria shall have remedial work carried out by the contractor at his expense until compliance is achieved .
the contractor will be invoiced num for each time an additional postdisturbance assessment is required .
notwithstanding the foregoing and further to section num construction completion the completion of an acceptable postdisturbance assessment will not release the contractor from his responsibilities with regard to the borrow site until the issuance of the construction completion certificate .
num constructing roadways num embankments embankment shall be constructed by placing shaping adjusting the moisture content where necessary and compacting excavation materials .
only suitable materials shall be used for constructing the embankment except as otherwise approved by the consultant under the specific conditions described herein .
the embankments shall be constructed in conformity with the lines grades and crosssections shown on the drawings or designated by the consultant .
num constructing new roadways num fill sections all topsoil shall be salvaged unless otherwise shown on the drawings described in the special provisions or directed by the consultant .
if the exposed surface is num m or greater below the design subgrade surface it shall be bladed compacted and backfilled using suitable materials placed in successive layers to the required lines and grades .
if the exposed surface is less than num m below the design subgrade surface excavation shall be carried out to num m below the design subgrade surface or to an elevation determined by the consultant and the suitable excavated material used to construct embankments .
the exposed surface shall then be bladed compacted and backfilled using suitable materials placed in successive layers to the required lines and grades .
num cut sections where the design subgrade surface is in cut and following the excavation and salvage of topsoil and subsoil excavation shall be carried out to a depth of num m below the design subgrade surface and the suitable excavated material used to construct embankments .
the exposed surface shall be bladed and compacted and the excavated area backfilled using suitable materials placed in successive layers to the required lines and grades .
section num specification num grading august num num at the transition point from a cut section to a fill section excavation shall be carried out to num m below the design subgrade surface or to an elevation determined by the consultant for a distance of num m in both directions from the transition point and the suitable excavated material shall be used to construct embankments .
the exposed surface shall be bladed and compacted and then backfilled using suitable materials placed in successive layers to the required lines and grades .
num hillside benching when embankments are to be made on a hillside of a nature which in the opinion of the consultant will preclude a proper bond between the existing and the newly placed materials the existing ground on which the embankment is to be placed shall be benched before embankment construction is commenced .
the extent of the benching required including the height of the vertical bench cuts will be determined by the consultant .
otherwise before any embankment is placed on a smooth firm surface the existing ground shall be scarified to obtain a bonding of the new material with the existing ground. . num reconstructing existing roadways num grade widening where existing roadbeds are being widened or the existing embankments and roadway ditches extended the sideslopes and the affected ditch bottoms and backslopes shall be denuded of all vegetation .
all topsoil from these disturbed areas shall be excavated and salvaged .
side slopes shall be benched one level at a time starting at the ditch bottom in order to obtain bonding between the existing grade and the new embankment for all cuts greater than num m in depth .
attempts to obtain bonding through the use of vertical cuts for the full depth of the embankment will not be permitted .
in all cases cuts shall not be steeper than num horizontal to num vertical .
suitable material excavated from the benching operation andor any reconstruction of the ditches and backslopes shall be used for constructing embankments .
material in the existing grade deemed unsuitable by the consultant shall be excavated and replaced with suitable material approved for use by the consultant .
generally unsuitable material shall be disposed of .
however the consultant may direct that the unsuitable material be used in construction of the new sideslopes if he has determined that it will not adversely affect the structural integrity of the roadway .
when it is necessary to cut the roadway surface for construction of the last bench the contractor shall control traffic such that it is not permitted to travel within num m of the edge of the surface cut .
the length of surface cut shall not exceed num km or a length established by the consultant .
in addition the work shall be restricted to one side of the roadway in any work area .
the contractor shall promptly backfill sections of exposed vertical cut to provide safe accommodation of traffic .
for any location where surface cutting is required the contractor shall erect orange coloured reflectorized traffic delineators along the pavement edge at num m intervals all in a manner acceptable to the consultant .
section num specification num grading august num num when base course construction does not immediately follow grade widening or when the surface cut is longer than num km the contractor shall promptly place and compact a wedge of suitable material in the cut area adjacent to the roadway surface .
this wedge of material shall be tapered to a slope no steeper than num horizontal to num vertical .
num embankment placed on existing road prior to the placement of embankment on an existing roadbed material within the roadbed deemed unsuitable by the consultant shall be excavated and replaced with material approved for use by the consultant .
generally unsuitable material shall be disposed of .
however the consultant may direct that the unsuitable material be used in construction of the new sideslopes if he has determined that it will not adversely affect the structural integrity of the roadway .
to obtain bonding between the existing and new embankment materials on sideslopes the existing roadbed sideslopes shall be denuded of vegetation all topsoil excavated and salvaged and where required by the consultant the embankment benched as described in subsection num grade widening .
where a new embankment of num m or less is placed on an existing road which is not surfaced with asphalt material the existing surface shall be scarified to a depth of num m unless otherwise directed by the consultant .
the moisture content in this scarified material shall be adjusted as required and the material compacted to the density requirements in accordance with the the applicable sections of the specifications .
num placing material num use of rock material where rock is being used in the embankment the material shall be carefully distributed and the interstices filled with finer material approved by the consultant to form a dense compact mass .
any large rocks encountered during the construction of the embankment in the final finishing operations which the consultant determines to constitute a hazard to traffic due to size or protrusion from the finished embankment surface shall be removed and disposed of to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num snow ice or frozen material embankment material shall not be placed on frozen earth snow or ice nor shall frozen soils ice or snow be placed in any embankment .
any frozen material in the embankment shall be removed and disposed of at the contractors expense before proceeding with further embankment construction .
num grade settlement embankment shall be constructed so that after settlement is complete the required grade and crosssection is attained at all points .
if at any time before the time of construction completion the embankment settles below the required grade it shall be brought back to the required grade by the contractor .
this work will be paid for at the applicable unit price bid for the class of material used .
section num specification num grading august num num num moisture adjustment and compaction num layer and density requirements unless otherwise specifically permitted by the consultant all material placed in embankments shall be spread and bladed smooth in successive layers not to exceed num m in depth when compacted and to the full width of the crosssection .
each layer shall be compacted by means suitable to the consultant to a minimum of num percent of the maximum dry density established by the moisturedensity relation tests using standard compaction with the exception of the upper num m which shall be compacted in num m layers to a minimum of num percent .
the material in each layer shall be compacted at the optimum moisture content unless otherwise directed by the consultant .
in case of controversy the degree of compaction andor moisture content will be determined by a moisturedensity test before the succeeding layer is placed .
when working with soils that have moderate or greater swelling potential as determined by the consultant the moisture content for compaction shall be within a range of optimum to num percent above optimum or as designated by the consultant .
high plastic clay soils are considered to have moderate to very high swelling potential unless proven otherwise .
when working with predominately silt materials as determined by the consultant the moisture content shall be within a range of num percent below optimum to optimum .
num test methods quality assurance testing for acceptance of the work is the responsibility of the consultant .
tests performed by the consultant will not be considered to be quality control tests .
the contractor shall be responsible for all quality control testing and for all costs associated with quality control testing .
the consultant will from time to time take samples and carry out testing and inspection of the materials incorporated or being incorporated into the work .
the contractor shall cooperate with the consultant for such sampling testing and inspection .
such inspection and testing will not relieve the contractor from any obligation to perform all the work strictly in accordance with the requirements of the contract .
various alternative test methods may be used by the consultant to confirm that specification requirements are being met .
in cases of dispute regarding the degree of compaction andor moisture contents all testing to confirm compliance with the specifications will be carried out by the consultant using the most recent edition of the following standard test methods .
test descriptions method no .
num .
classification of soils for engineering purposes astm designation dnum num a determining the liquid limit of soils aashto designation t num b determining the plastic limit and plasticity index of soils aashto designation t num c particle size analysis of soils aashto designation t num num .
soils identification hand method attnum num .
moisturedensity relation section num specification num grading august num num test descriptions method no .
a standard compaction num num m material attnum b standard compaction num num m material attnum c onepoint attnum num .
density a inplace sand method attnum b inplace balloon method attnum c inplace nuclear method attnum num .
moisture content a oven method soil and gravel attnum part i b microwave oven method attnum part iv c speedy moisture teller attnum d inplace nuclear method attnum num .
correction factors nuclear moisturedensity measurements attnum notes num as modified by the prairie farm rehabilitation administration pfra to include medium plastic clay with the symbol ci .
num in all test methods used as reference in this specification metric sieves as specified in canadian general standards board specifications numgpnumm shall be substituted for any other specified wire cloth sieves in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling .
num in all cases the latest amendment or revision current at the closing date of the tender is implied when reference is made to one of the above standards in the specification .
num compaction operations compaction over the entire surface area of each layer shall be obtained by the use of tamping rollers or other equipment to meet the specified density requirements .
hauling equipment will not be accepted in lieu of compaction equipment .
compaction to the specified density shall be obtained uniformly throughout each layer .
num construction on muskeg or yielding ground where the embankment to be placed traverses muskeg or yielding ground and it is not possible to place the initial embankment lift in a num m compacted depth the contractor may upon approval of the consultant construct the first embankment lift to a depth sufficient to support the construction equipment .
all embankment to be constructed above this support will be constructed in num m compacted depths as hereinbefore specified .
num moisture content adjustments for compaction num drying where moisture content tests indicate that material being used for embankment is above optimum moisture the material shall be thoroughly disced and worked until a uniform optimum moisture content is achieved .
the use of lime or any other additive to assist in drying of material shall be at the contractors discretion .
however the maximum allowable percentage of lime or other additive per mass of section num specification num grading august num num dry soil shall be as shown in the special provisions or as determined by the consultant .
num contractors use of lime the type of lime used shall be pulverized quicklime .
num supply delivery and handling of quicklime where using quicklime the contractor shall order the quicklime at his own expense and a make all arrangements for the delivery of pulverized quicklime in suitable tanker trucks equipped with distribution equipment appropriate for the direct application of the quicklime onto the wet soils .
b so organize his work that all personnel are able to avoid contact with the quicklime .
c take special precautions during windy conditions at the site to avoid damage to personnel livestock and property during the quicklime application .
d shall be responsible for any trucking costs related to standby .
e pay all transportation charges on quicklime returned to the supplier as surplus to requirements for any cause whatsoever .
num construction prior to treatment with the quicklime the soil shall be loosened with suitable equipment .
the contractor shall thoroughly mix the quicklime with the soil until a uniform colour and texture is achieved .
num water for compaction where moisture content tests indicate the material for embankment is below optimum moisture water shall be added .
the material shall be thoroughly disced and broken down water added in amounts as required and the material thoroughly worked to mix the water uniformly throughout the soil prior to commencing compaction operations .
num obliteration of existing roadway when sections of the existing roadway accesses and crossings are obliterated upon completion of the new roads or when approved alternative roads are operational any topsoil and subsoil from the area to be obliterated shall be excavated and salvaged separately .
the material excavated from the obliteration operation shall be utilized for embankment construction or disposed of as determined by the consultant .
obliterated areas shall be graded to provide positive drainage and shall be reclaimed to a neat and tidy condition comparable to that of the adjacent ground .
the work shall be carried out in accordance with subsection num reclamation and specification num seeding and to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num grading august num num num approach fills for bridge structures other than bridge culverts num preparation of existing ground prior to the placement of embankment on the existing ground where bridge approach fills are to be located and in order to allow unrestricted pile penetration all areas where piles are to be driven shall be cleared of obstructions such as pavement granular and soil cement materials compacted subgrade topsoil and subsoil boulders or rock of any nature trees stumps and any other undesirable debris .
where the subsurface of the area is known to contain boulders they shall be removed to a minimum depth of two metres below the existing ground surface .
all the materials removed shall be utilized or disposed of as determined by the consultant .
the locations where bridge piling is to be located shall be as shown on the drawings or as determined by the consultant .
num placing material in bridge approach fills construction of approach fill embankments shall be undertaken in accordance with subsections num placing material and num moisture adjustment and compaction excepting that the embankment material shall be free of stones rocks or other solid material greater than num mm .
num finishing bridge headslopes bridge headslopes shall be accurately trimmed particularly at the intersection of the toe of the headslope with the underpassing roadway or with the bank of a stream to the lines grades and crosssections as shown on the drawings or as determined by the consultant .
drainage requirements shall be constructed to the lines and grades as shown on the drawings or as determined by the consultant .
num overhaul where provision for payment of overhaul is contained in the contract overhaul will apply to suitable material under the classifications of common solid rock and channel excavations and borrow excavation from department sources when such material is deposited at locations as provided by the drawings or as designated by the consultant .
overhaul will occur when the excavated material is hauled for a distance of more than num m and placed in embankments or disposed of as specified herein .
overhaul will not apply to unsuitable material under these classifications unless the consultant specifically requires that such material be hauled more than num m. overhaul will not apply to excavation of topsoil subsoil or other unsuitable materials from department borrow and borrow haul road areas unless the consultant specifically requires that such material be moved outside the disturbed borrow area and the haul to move the material to such locations outside the disturbed borrow area is greater than num m. overhaul will not apply in situations where such materials are hauled more than num m within the limits of the disturbed borrow area .
overhaul will not apply to borrow excavation from contractor sources nor for the excavation of section num specification num grading august num num topsoil subsoil andor other unsuitable materials excavated from these borrow and borrow haul road areas .
num finishing previous clearing the contractor shall remove and dispose of any stumps debris and new tree growth within the limits of the previously cleared areas .
num finishing interim acceptance of roadway surfaces and maintenance num finishing the contractor shall as soon as practicable bring the excavations and embankments to the correct widths lines and grades .
backslopes that are num m and greater in height and with a slope steeper than num m horizontal to num m vertical shall be scarified to reduce the potential for erosion .
a typical method for scarifying such backslopes shall be walking a dozer over the entire slope operating the equipment in a direction perpendicular to the roadway .
all other backslopes shall be finished in the normal manner .
a maximum of num km of grade shall be in the rough at any one time .
however where no traffic accommodation is required through the work up to num km of grade may be in the rough .
in these situations having more than num km of grade in the rough at any one time will be subject to the prior approval of the consultant .
as soon as the excavations and embankments are completed to the correct widths lines and grades the contractor shall maintain the roadway with a blade machine .
num interim acceptance of roadway surfaces roadway surfaces which have been entirely completed constructed and finished in accordance with the drawings and specifications will be eligible for inspection and interim acceptance by the consultant under the following conditions i the roadway surface is not being covered with granular base course under this contract .
ii the section of roadway surface being considered for interim acceptance is not less than num km in length and is contiguous to a section of roadway surface previously accepted .
interim acceptance shall apply to the roadway surface only and shall not relieve the contractor of his responsibility to complete other portions of the roadway such as the sideslopes ditches and backslopes in accordance with the drawings and specifications .
acceptance of the other portions of the roadway will not be made on an interim basis and will only be considered once the entire project is completed and ready for the construction completion inspection as detailed in specification num general .
in addition interim acceptance of a roadway surface shall not relieve the contractor of his responsibility to repair any failures occurring in the roadway surface prior to the construction completion inspection which in the opinion of the consultant are workmanship related .
section num specification num grading august num num num maintenance requirements and responsibilities num uncompleted roadway surface maintenance shall be at the contractors own expense and shall continue daily or at frequent intervals depending on the effects of traffic and weather upon the uncompleted portion of the roadway .
ditches and culverts shall be kept free from obstructions so that water will flow freely at all times .
for the purposes of determining maintenance responsibilities and requirements a roadway surface which is being covered by granular base course under this contract will be considered to be an uncompleted roadway surface .
num roadway surface accepted on an interim basis maintenance of roadway surface which has been accepted on an interim basis shall be performed by the contractor at intervals as determined by the consultant .
payment for maintenance of a roadway surface which has been accepted on an interim basis will be made in accordance with section num extra work of specification num general .
num measurement and payment num general the unit of measure of all classes of excavation will be the cubic metre and the quantity paid for will be the actual number of cubic metres of material excavated as measured in its original position and as accepted and recorded by the consultant .
no payment will be made for material excavated or placed outside the limits indicated by the construction stakes unless such work has been authorized by the consultant .
material placed outside the limits indicated by the construction stakes shall be removed as directed by the consultant and this work will not be paid for .
the construction and removal of temporary equipment crossings and haul crossings and the restoration of the surrounding area and the repair of any damage to the pavement or subgrade structure as a result of hauling operations will not be paid for separately but shall be at the contractors own expense .
no separate payment will be made for the supply installation and removal of temporary fences other than those associated with borrow areas .
these costs will be considered incidental to the work .
num towing traffic the cost of towing through the work except through those portions of the work which require towing of traffic due to the contractors failure to diligently prosecute the work to completion will be paid for as extra work in accordance with the following conditions i equipment used will be paid for at the approved hourly rate times the actual hours used for towing as approved by the consultant .
section num specification num grading august num num ii attachments to the equipment such as scarifiers dozer blades and winches will not be paid for unless actually used and previously authorized by the consultant .
iii payment for approved standby time will be made only for the equipment operator no payment will be made for the standby towing equipment .
iv with prior authorization of the consultant payment will be made for a vehicle used by the equipment operator when the operator is on standby .
num slides there will be no separate payment made for material from slips slides and subsidences which is removed and disposed of or used in the work unless such occurrences were beyond the control of the contractor and not preventable by the use of due care and diligence .
payment for the removal of slides beyond the control of the contractor will be made at the applicable unit price for the class of excavation involved .
num maintenance and traffic accommodation gravel surfacing on the sections of graded highway staged construction detours and temporary connections utilized for traffic accommodation shall be performed and paid for in accordance with specification num gravel surfacing .
the cost of maintenance including the supply and application of asphalt or other dust abatement material will not be paid for separately but shall be incidental to the work .
the construction and removal of temporary wedges at surface cut areas will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the work .
removal of temporary connections will be paid for as common excavation .
num rippable rock excavation where rippable rock is encountered rippable rock excavation will be paid at the unit prices bid for common excavation borrow excavation channel excavation or common andor borrow excavation loaded to trucks as applicable plus an additional payment at the unit price bid per cubic metre for rippable rock excavation premium .
the rippable rock excavation premium will be full compensation for all additional equipment and specialized construction techniques required including any additional labour materials tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num solid rock excavation where solid rock is encountered solid rock excavation will be paid for at the unit prices bid for common excavation borrow excavation channel excavation or common andor borrow excavation loaded to trucks as applicable plus an additional payment at the unit price bid per cubic metre for solid rock excavation premium .
the solid rock excavation premium will be full compensation for all additional equipment and specialized construction techniques required including but not limited to preshearing pre section num specification num grading august num num splitting line drilling cushion blasting perimeter blasting and buffer blasting and all additional labour materials tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
overbreak which with the approval of the consultant is used to replace material that would otherwise have to be obtained from other sources will be paid for on the basis of classification of the replaced material .
any overbreak which is not used to replace other material shall be removed by the contractor at his expense .
any additional restoration work required due to overbreak shall be carried out by the contractor at his expense .
num channel excavation channel excavation will be paid for at the unit price bid for channel excavation and will be full compensation for all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num common excavation common excavation will be paid for at the unit price bid for common excavation and this payment will be full compensation for all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
the excavation and utilization or disposal of existing surfacing and subgrade materials resulting from obliteration operations will be classified and paid for as common excavation .
conditioning of the material required for its satisfactory incorporation into embankment construction and work required to complete the restoration of the obliterated areas except for the placement of subsoil and topsoil will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
the placement of subsoil and topsoil will be paid for in accordance with specification num topsoil placement .
num borrow topsoil excavation and borrow reclamation num department supplied borrow num borrow topsoil excavation topsoil excavation from borrow and borrow haul road areas within department borrow sources will be paid for at the unit price bid for borrow topsoil excavation and will be full compensation for the excavation salvage and separate stockpiling of the topsoil and subsoil materials from the borrow and borrow haul road areas including all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
no additional payment will be made for handling material in layers .
num borrow reclamation reclamation of borrow and borrow haul road areas as described in subsection num reclamation will be measured by the square metre of accepted topsoil surface .
measurement will be to the nearest square metre and will be based on horizontal measurements .
no allowances will be made for uneven or sloping ground .
all costs associated with the reclamation of borrow and borrow haul road areas with the section num specification num grading august num num exception of excavation of topsoil and subsoil materials from intermediate stockpiles and seeding will be made at the unit price bid for aborrow reclamation and will be full compensation for all labour materials equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
payment for excavation of subsoil and topsoil from intermediate stockpiles will be made at the unit price for borrow topsoil excavation and will be full compensation for excavating the material from stockpile hauling it to the reclamation locations and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
if all of the stockpiled topsoil and subsoil materials excavated during the initial borrow topsoil excavation operations are utilized during the reclamation of the borrow and borrow haul road areas the quantity paid for will be equal to the amount measured after the initial excavation .
if the stockpiled materials are not completely utilized measurement of the materials remaining in the stockpiles will be carried out and the quantity paid for will be the quanity measured during the initial excavation minus the quantity remaining in stockpile .
measurement and payment for seeding of reclaimed borrow and borrow haul road areas will be made in accordance with standard specification num seeding .
payment for borrow reclamation work will only be made once a satisfactory postdisturbance assessment has been issued by the consultant indicating that the reclaimed areas have met the requirements of the specifications and the applicable reclamation criteria .
num contractor supplied borrow all costs associated with borrow topsoil excavation and borrow reclamation within contractor supplied borrow sources will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
num borrow excavation num department supplied borrow borrow excavation will be paid for at the unit price bid for borrow excavation and will be full compensation for all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
borrow excavation used in the construction of haul roads to borrow areas as directed by the consultant will be paid for at the unit price bid for borrow excavation .
upon completion of haul where the material in the haul road is excavated and deposited as directed by the consultant the excavation of this material will be paid for at the unit price bid for borrow excavation .
when the contractor has been directed by the consultant to excavate unsuitable borrow material including stones or rocks and not place this material in the embankment this excavation will be paid for at the unit price bid for borrow excavation .
subsequent disposal of this unsuitable material including stones or rocks will not be paid for directly but will be considered as incidental to borrow excavation .
the cost of erecting and removing temporary fences associated with department supplied borrow areas will be paid for as extra work in accordance with specification num general .
section num specification num grading august num num num contractor supplied borrow borrow excavation will be paid for at the unit price bid for borrow excavation contractor supplied and will be full compensation for the supply of borrow material the reclamation of the borrow area and haul roads and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
borrow excavation used in the construction of haul roads to contractor supplied borrow areas will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
when the consultant directs the contractor to excavate and dispose of unsuitable borrow material including stones or rocks and not place this material in the embankment the excavation and the subsequent disposal of unsuitable materials will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
the cost of erecting and removing temporary fences associated with contractor supplied borrow areas will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
num common andor borrow excavation loaded to trucks num excavation and loading to trucks the unit of measure of common andor borrow excavation loaded to trucks will be the cubic metre as measured in its original position .
common andor borrow excavation loaded to trucks and construction of embankment will be paid for at the unit price bid for common andor borrow excavation loaded to trucks and will be full compensation for all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num truck haul of common andor borrow excavation when the contract contains a bid item for the payment of haul of common andor borrow excavation loaded to trucks on a per cubic metre.kilometre basis truck haul will be measured and determined in the following manner the number of cubic metre kilometres of truck haul of common andor borrow excavation to be paid for will be the product of the number of cubic metres of truck haul material as measured in its original position and the actual haul distance in kilometres or fractions thereof .
the haul distance will be the actual distance between the centres of mass of the truck haul material in its original position and after placing .
no free haul distance will be applied .
the haul distance for roadway excavation will be measured along the centreline of the highway .
the haul distance for material obtained from borrow pits will be measured along the shortest practical route as designated by the consultant .
the quantities of truck haul determined as provided herein will be paid for at the unit price bid for truck haul of common andor borrow excavation and will be full compensation for all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num grading august num num when the contract does not include a bid item for truck haul of common andor borrow excavation the cost of hauling material will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
num catch water ditches catch water ditches constructed in accordance with the typical plans will be measured for payment by length in metres .
catch water ditches will be paid for at the unit price bid for catch water ditches and will be full compensation for all equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num constructing embankment the cost of placing compacting moisture adjustment and finishing of materials in embankments shall be included in the unit prices bid for the various classes of excavation used to construct the embankment .
no separate or additional payments will be made .
num preparation of existing ground the cost of preparing the ground following the excavation of any material scarifying and compacting the exposed surface denuding and benching of the existing highway embankment slopes scarifying and benching hillsides scarifying and compacting existing road embankment to obtain bond will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
where the subgrade is excavated below design subgrade surface reconstructed in num m layers and compacted the excavation will be paid for at the applicable unit price bid for the class of material excavated .
the required excavation and disposal of unsuitable material encountered in existing roadbeds or encountered in the preparation of the existing ground surface will be paid for at the unit price bid for common excavation .
num rock materials used in embankment relatively finer material used for filling the interstices in embankments constructed of rock concrete or other solid material will be paid for at the applicable unit price bid for the class of material used .
removal and disposal of rock concrete or other solid material from the finished embankment surface will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
num compaction costs associated with compaction of materials shall be included in the unit prices bid for the various classes of excavation .
no separate or additional payment will be made .
section num specification num grading august num num num water for compaction costs associated with supplying applying and incorporating water required for moisture content adjustment of embankment materials shall be included in the unit prices bid for the various classes of excavation .
no separate or additional payment will be made .
num drying wet material num general costs associated with work necessary to dry wet material shall be included in the unit prices bid for the various classes of excavation .
no separate or additional payment will be made .
num lime for drying when the contractor elects to use lime for drying wet materials the cost of mixing storage transportation within the project limits loading unloading and spreading will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
payment for lime will be made on a cost share basis .
the contractor shall order and pay for the purchase and transportation of the pulverized quicklime directly from the supplier and shall provide the suppliers invoices to the consultant within num hours of the delivery .
the department will reimburse the contractor for num of the approved invoice cost f.o.b .
the jobsite .
num approach fills for bridge structures other than bridge culverts num preparation of existing ground the material excavated for the preparation of existing ground for bridge approach fill construction will be classified in accordance with section num classes of excavation .
the material excavated will paid for at the applicable unit prices bid for the class of material excavated .
num placing material the cost of placing compacting moisture adjustment and finishing of materials in bridge approach fills shall be included in the unit prices bid for the various classes of excavation .
no separate or additional payment will be made .
num water for compaction costs associated with supplying applying and incorporating water required for moisture content adjustment of embankment materials shall be included in the unit prices bid for the various classes of excavation .
no separate or additional payment will be made .
num drying wet material costs associated with work necessary to dry wet material shall be included in the unit prices bid for the various classes of excavation .
no separate or additional payment will be made .
section num specification num grading august num num payment for the supply and use of lime will be in accordance with subsection num lime for drying .
num overhaul when the contract contains a bid item for the payment of overhaul on a per cubic metre .
kilometre basis overhaul will be measured and determined in the following manner the number of cubic metre kilometres of overhaul to be paid for will be the product of the number of cubic metres of overhauled material as measured in its original position and the overhaul distance in kilometres .
the overhaul distance will be the distance between the centres of mass of the overhauled material in its original position and after placing less num m free haul .
the haul distance for roadway excavation will be measured along the centreline of the roadway .
the haul distance for material obtained from borrow pits or for material hauled to disposal sites will be measured along the shortest practical route as designated by the consultant .
the quantities of overhaul determined as provided above will be paid for at the unit price bid for overhaul and will be full compensation for all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
when the contract does not include a bid item for the payment of overhaul the cost of overhauling material will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
num finishing previous clearing finishing previous clearing will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
num reservation of special materials material excavated during the progress of the work which is reserved for future use by the department and stockpiled in locations designated by the department will be paid for at the applicable unit prices bid for the various classes of material excavated .
num construction completion in addition to the specific requirements included in this specification the conditions requisite for suitable and completed work will be a roadway which is smooth and compact over the entire width with firm sideslopes and regular shoulder lines clean side ditches satisfactory approaches intersections and entrances and smooth andor scarified backslopes as applicable .
all loose stones clods weeds trash etc .
shall be removed from the roadway or other work areas sideslopes ditches and backslopes .
all improperly compacted material in the roadway or other work shall be excavated brought to optimum moisture content if required and recompacted by the contractor at his expense .
on the sideslopes and backslopes and in the bottom of ditches all projecting boulders shall be section num specification num grading august num num removed or broken off at least flush with the lines and grades and the resultant cavities if any backfilled .
all borrow sites shall be reclaimed in accordance with the requirements of the specifications and the reclamation criteria specified in alberta transportation postdisturbance reclamation criteria and assessment procedures for borrow excavations for road construction may num .
any remedial work necessary to achieve these requirements shall be at the contractors expense until the issuance of the construction completion certificate .
section num specification num culverts august num table of contents num culvertsnum num generalnum num description num num materialsnum num culvert materialnum num gravel material for culverts num num constructionnum num excavation and preparation of basenum num installationnum num backfillingnum num handlaid riprapnum num removalnum num measurement and paymentnum num excavation for removal of existing culvertsnum num removal salvage and reinstallation of existing culverts num num removal and disposal of existing culverts num num excavation for culvert installationnum num supply and installation of culvertsnum num gravel material for culvertsnum num culvert installation and removal on roadways in service num num grouting of abandoned culvertsnum section num specification num culverts august num num num culverts num general num description this specification covers the installation of pipe culverts less than num num mm equivalent diameter .
abbreviations for the various types of culverts when indicated on the drawings or used in the specifications are as follows c.s.p .
corrugated steel pipe c.s.p .
arch corrugated steel pipe arch r.c.p .
reinforced concrete pipe r.g.r.c.p .
rubber gasket reinforced concrete pipe p.p .
polyethylene pipe c.a.p .
corrugated aluminum pipe c.a.p .
arch corrugated aluminum pipe arch c.m.p .
corrugated metal pipe general term for corrugated steel and aluminum pipe r.c.b .
reinforced concrete box num materials num culvert material the contractor shall supply culvert material in accordance with specification num supply of corrugated metal pipe and pipe arches specification num supply of polyethylene pipe and specification num supply of reinforced concrete culvert .
num gravel material for culverts when the contract stipulates the contractor shall produce gravel material for culvert backfill in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling for the designation and class of materials specified .
the contractor shall supply aggregate in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate .
num construction num excavation and preparation of base excavation for the culvert base shall be to a depth of not less than num m below the invert grade and shall be of sufficient width to permit assembly of the pipe and the operation of compaction equipment on either side of the pipe .
all soft yielding or unsuitable material at this level shall be removed to a depth satisfactory to the consultant .
excavated material shall be replaced with gravel or other acceptable material to provide a firm foundation of uniform density throughout the entire length of the pipe .
on completion of excavation for the culvert base and the removal and replacement of any soft yielding or unsuitable material the contractor shall compact the exposed surface to uniform density .
the contractor shall then construct the culvert bed to the established elevation using gravel material or other material acceptable to the consultant .
the culvert bed shall be section num specification num culverts august num num compacted in accordance with specification num grading .
the width of the culvert bed shall be num times the culvert diameter or span .
when the culvert installation is in rock excavation for the culvert base shall be carried out to a depth of not less than num m below the invert grade .
the width of the culvert bed shall be a minimum of num times the diameter or span of the culvert .
where gravel bedding or backfill is used impervious compacted clay cutoffs shall be constructed at both ends of the culvert as shown on drawing cbnummnum .
num installation num general the culvert shall be installed on the prepared base true to the designed lines and grades unless otherwise established by the consultant .
separate sections shall be securely joined together in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
coupler bands shall be used for metal and polyethylene pipe and unless otherwise specified rubber gasket type joints shall be prepared and made between sections of reinforced concrete culvert .
at all coupling and joint areas and at areas of concrete pipe that have external bells depressions shall be constructed in the culvert bed so that the pipe is uniformly supported along its entire length .
the contractor shall use due care when installing the culvert to avoid damaging the material .
damaged culvert materials shall be removed and replaced by the contractor at his own expense .
num installation of corrugated metal pipe and pipe arches when required elbows shall be installed to accommodate sharp changes in gradient or direction of the pipe .
pipe shall be carefully handled to prevent damage to the protective coating .
any damage to coatings shall be repaired by the contractor at his own expense in accordance with can num gnum .
num installation of reinforced concrete culvert reinforced concrete culvert shall be placed beginning at the downstream or lower end of the culvert .
the pipes shall be placed with the bell or grooved ends facing upstream .
the interior sections of the culverts shall conform to the grade and alignment as shown on the drawings or as established by the consultant .
culvert sections shall be joined using either a wedge and block or mechanical pipe pullers to bring the pipe to the homed position .
joints shall not be deflected beyond the manufacturers recommended maximum .
culvert sections shall be anchored to adjacent sections by tie bars where provided .
lifting holes and holes for engaging bars shall be filled with mortar and finished flush with the pipe surface .
num installation of polyethylene pipe the culvert bed shall be shaped to the curvature of the pipe to a depth of num mm using a template .
section num specification num culverts august num num blocking shall not be used to bring the pipe to grade .
the pipe shall be placed on the prepared base to the lines and grades as established by the consultant with the separate sections securely joined with the applicable welds and gasket joints as specified in specification num supply of polyethylene pipe .
temporary hold downs shall be used to maintain the position of the pipe during installation .
sections of pipe with a minimum length of num m shall be used on each end of each culvert .
num installation of downdrains when required downdrain pipes shall be installed as shown on the drawings at the locations as shown on the drawings or designated by the consultant .
a trench shall be excavated to the established depth and grade required for the installation of the downdrain pipe and connecting elbows and its bottom surface shall provide a uniform firm foundation throughout the length of the installation with sufficient width to permit satisfactory jointing and thorough compaction of the backfill material around the pipe .
num extension of existing culverts extensions to existing culverts will be considered as new installations .
where an existing culvert is to be extended the removal salvage and reinstallation of the existing sloped end sections may be required as shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
where the existing pipe was manufactured to imperial dimensions and the new pipe is manufactured to metric dimensions and a mismatch occurs at the joint the contractor shall caulk the joint with oakum to obtain a water resistant joint .
num backfilling num general backfill under the haunches and immediately adjacent to the culvert extending from the culvert base up to an elevation of num percent of the vertical height of the culvert shall be comprised of select gravel or soil material as directed by the consultant .
backfill immediately adjacent to the culvert above this level shall be comprised of select soil material .
all backfill material shall be free from frozen lumps and organic material .
backfill within num mm of the culvert wall shall be free from stones of diameter larger than num mm .
all backfill material shall be placed in layers not exceeding num m in depth .
each layer shall be thoroughly compacted at optimum moisture content by means of pneumatic or other mechanical tamping equipment .
backfill and compaction layers shall be brought up simultaneously and evenly on both sides of the culvert filling all corrugations and ensuring firm contact with the entire bottom surface of the pipe .
this compaction procedure shall be continued until the backfill reaches a minimum elevation of num m above the top of the pipe or greater as determined by the consultant if necessary to carry the weight of construction equipment without damage to the culvert .
backfilling of the remainder of the culvert excavation beyond the immediate region of the culvert shall be carried out in accordance with specification num grading .
compacting equipment shall be operated parallel to the longitudinal axis of the culvert until sufficient fill has been placed to proceed with construction of the embankment in the normal manner .
the remaining construction of the grade embankment over the installation may then proceed in accordance with specification num grading .
section num specification num culverts august num num num backfilling polyethylene pipe the minimum height of fill above the top of the pipe shall be num m or as directed by the consultant .
immediately after backfill is completed the contractor shall saw cut the sloped ends at a ratio of num as shown on drawing cbnummnum .
num handlaid riprap immediately following completion of culvert installation handlaid riprap shall be placed in accordance with specification num riprap .
num removal num removal salvage and reinstallation of existing culverts where removal and salvage of existing culverts or drainage structures from the roadbed ditches or other waterways is specified the contractor shall carefully excavate remove and store the material at locations suitable to the consultant .
salvaged materials shall be reinstalled in accordance with these specifications .
num removal and disposal of existing culverts where removal and disposal of existing culverts or drainage structures from the roadbed ditches or other waterways is specified the contractor shall remove and dispose of the material at locations acceptable to the consultant .
num culvert installation and removal on roadways in service where culvert installation or removal must take place on roadways that must remain in service during construction the contractor shall carry out his installation or removal by either building and maintaining a detour or by working on one half of the roadway while maintaining flagperson controlled and adequately signed traffic flow on the other half .
details of all proposed traffic accommodation methodologies shall be provided in the contractors traffic accommodation strategy .
num grouting abandoned culverts when directed by the consultant or at the locations shown on the drawings the contractor shall completely fill existing culverts starting at the upstream end with a permanent cementitious fill material with a minimum compressive strength of num mpa to prevent future collapse of the culverts .
the filling of the culverts shall be carried out using methods and materials acceptable to the consultant .
the contractor shall take precautions during filling operations to ensure that no blow outs or disruptions of the existing roadway occur .
when a replacement culvert is being installed the replacement culvert shall be in operation before grouting of the abandoned culvert begins .
section num specification num culverts august num num num measurement and payment num excavation for removal of existing culverts measurement and payment for excavation for the removal of existing culverts including the excavation of existing base or surfacing courses will be in accordance with specification num grading .
num removal salvage and reinstallation of existing culverts measurement for the removal salvage and reinstallation of existing culverts and drainage structures including sloped ends will be made in metres based on the total invert length of pipe removed and reinstalled .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per metre for culverts remove salvage and reinstall for the various types and sizes of culvert specified .
this payment will be full compensation for removing and salvaging the pipe preparing the culvert bed reinstalling the pipe backfilling and the supply and placement of handlaid riprap and all materials labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
when a culvert is identified by the consultant to be salvaged and the culvert is damaged by the contractor during the removal operations due to his negligence the contractor shall replace the damaged culvert at his own expense .
num removal and disposal of existing culverts measurement for the removal and disposal of existing culverts and drainage structures will be made in metres based on total invert length of pipe removed .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per metre for culverts remove and dispose for the various types and sizes of culvert specified .
this payment will be full compensation for removing and disposing of all the culvert pipe material and all materials labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num excavation for culvert installation measurement and payment for excavation for culvert installation will be in accordance with specification num grading .
where the contractor chooses to construct embankments before installing culverts there will be no payment for subsequent excavation of these embankment materials .
num supply and installation of culverts measurement for the supply and installation of culverts and downdrains will be made in metres based on the total invert length of pipe installed including elbows and sloped end sections .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per metre for culverts supply and install for the various types and sizes of culvert specified .
this payment will be full compensation for supplying all culvert pipe materials including couplers and appurtenances preparing the culvert bed installing the pipe backfilling the supply and placement of handlaid riprap and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num culverts august num num no separate payment will be made for the installation of oakum in joints .
payment for this work will be included in the unit price bid for supplying and installing the culverts .
num gravel material for culverts measurement of gravel material for culverts will be made in cubic metres .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per cubic metre for granular backfill culverts .
this payment will be full compensation for processing hauling and placing the gravel material and all materials labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
payment for the supply of aggregate used for gravel material for culverts will be made in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate .
acceptable material obtained from within the highway rightofway or from borrow locations will not be classified and paid for as granular backfill culverts but will be classified and paid for as common excavation or borrow excavation and overhaul in accordance with specification num grading .
num culvert installation and removal on roadways in service where culverts are installed using staged construction all costs associated with staging the work will be considered incidental and no separate or additional payment will be made .
where the construction of detours is required work associated with the construction and subsequent removal of detours will be measured and paid for at the applicable unit prices bid for the type of work incorporated .
all costs associated with maintenance of detours will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
num grouting of abandoned culverts measurement of grout will be by the cubic metre of grout material acceptably placed measured to the nearest tenth of a cubic metre .
the contractor shall provide a suitable means of measuring the quantity of grout placed .
payment will be made at the unit price bid for grouting of abandoned culverts and will be full compensation for the supply and placement of grout including all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num riprap august num table of contents num riprap num num generalnum num materialsnum num general num num random rock riprapnum num handlaid riprapnum num constructionnum num placing random rock riprapnum num placing handlaid riprapnum num measurement and paymentnum num random rock riprapnum num handlaid riprapnum section num specification num riprap august num num num riprap num general this specification covers the supply and placement of riprap .
riprap is a protective covering consisting of handlaid or randomly deposited rock sacked concrete or sacked cement stabilized material which is placed around culvert inlets and outlets and along slopes embankments and ditches .
num materials num general all materials necessary for riprap installations shall be supplied by the contractor .
materials shall be resistant to weathering and water action .
sandstone or shale materials shall not be used .
upon approval by the consultant sources of rock riprap material existing within the rightofway limits in gravel pits or at other locations under the jurisdiction of the department may be used free of cost by the contractor .
num random rock riprap random rock riprap shall consist of a graded mixture of sound durable stone or pitrun gravel .
the gradation of the mixture shall be such that num percent of the riprap consists of material having a least minimum dimension of num mm .
num handlaid riprap num general where handlaid riprap is specified the contractor will have the option of supplying handlaid rock riprap sacked concrete riprap or sacked cement stabilized riprap .
materials supplied by the contractor shall meet the following requirements .
num rock riprap handlaid rock riprap material shall consist of sound durable stones that meet the following class numm gradation requirements nominal diameter of num mm equivalent diameter mm percentage by weight of riprap greater than equivalent diameter num num num num to num num num to num num num note sizes are equivalent spherical diameter and are for guidance only .
the minimum dimensions of any single rock shall not be less than one third of its maximum dimension section num specification num riprap august num num num sacked riprap num burlap sacks sacks for sacked riprap shall be num mm x num mm num g burlap with an approximate capacity of num mnum .
the bags shall be of sufficient strength to permit them to be lifted by the top corners of the bag when filled with the applicable materials .
num sacked concrete riprap concrete shall be manufactured in accordance with specification num supply of portland cement concrete for class s concrete .
upon approval of the consultant clean well graded pitrun gravel in lieu of separated sand and gravel may be used in the manufacture of concrete .
num sacked cement stabilized riprap cement stabilized material shall be manufactured in accordance with specification num cement stabilized base course unless otherwise approved by the consultant .
num construction num placing random rock riprap random riprap gravel shall be dumped over the area to be treated until the required depth is attained .
manual handling of the material may be required .
num placing handlaid riprap num general handlaid riprap shall be placed at culvert inlets and outlets and at other locations as directed by the consultant .
riprap aprons as shown on drawing cbnummnum will only be required when specified in the special provisions or shown on the drawings .
num rock riprap stones shall be placed with their beds at right angles to the slope the larger stones being placed first in the bottom courses and graduating to the smaller stones at the top .
stones shall be laid in close contact so as to break joints and in such manner that the weight is carried by the earth and not by the adjacent stones .
the spaces between the larger stones shall be filled with spalls securely rammed into place .
the finished work shall present an even tight surface as shown on the drawings and satisfactory to the consultant .
num sacked riprap num preparation of base the base shall be formed by excavating filling and shaping to the required depth below and parallel to the finished surface of the riprap .
the entire base shall be thoroughly compacted to provide a smooth and firm foundation of uniform density .
section num specification num riprap august num num num placement each burlap sack shall be filled to num percent of its capacity with concrete or cement stabilized material securely sewn or stapled to form a straight edge closure and immediately placed in its final position on the prepared base .
the filled sack shall be placed to conform to the prepared base and adjacent sacks already in position and to form a closely molded smooth surface of uniform average depth of not less than num mm .
all joints between rows shall be staggered to pattern and all dirt and debris shall be removed from the tops of the sacks before successive courses are placed .
not more than five courses of sacks shall be placed in any tier before such time as initial set has taken place in the first course of any such tier .
following placement the sacked riprap shall be kept moist for a period of twentyfour hours by sprinkling with water placement of a moist earth covering or other means satisfactory to the consultant .
num measurement and payment num random rock riprap measurement of random rock riprap will be by the cubic metre of material acceptably incorporated into the work .
payment will be made at the unit price bid for random riprap supply and place and will be full compensation for supplying processing hauling and placing the material including all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num handlaid riprap all costs associated with the supply and placement of handlaid riprap at culvert installation locations including any required riprap aprons shall be included in the unit prices bid for the various types and sizes of culvert installations and no separate or additional payment will be made .
measurement of handlaid riprap placed at locations other than for culvert installation will be measured by the square metre .
payment will be made at the unit price bid for handlaid riprap other locations supply and place and will be full compensation for bed preparation as required the supply processing hauling and placement of rock or sacked riprap material and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num topsoil placement august num table of contents num topsoil placementnum num generalnum num materialsnum num topsoilnum num constructionnum num general num num preparation of placement areasnum num placing topsoilnum num measurement and paymentnum num excavationnum num overhaulnum num topsoil placementnum section num specification num topsoil placement august num num num topsoil placement num general topsoil placement consists of the placing and finishing of select topsoil material on the areas designated on the drawings or as directed by the consultant for the purpose of establishing vegetation for erosion control .
generally those areas containing highly erodible soils such as sand those areas containing sterile soils such as gravel and those areas containing exposed subsoil which is subjected to highly erosive action such as in the case of flow channels will be considered for a covering of topsoil .
num materials num topsoil topsoil shall consist of a natural friable surface soil of organic character suitable for agricultural purposes .
topsoil shall be free of objectionable quantities of subsoil roots stones and other deleterious substances .
topsoil shall be obtained from within the highway rightofway unless otherwise described in the special provisions or directed by the consultant .
the excavation and removal of topsoil from any source shall be under the direction of the consultant insofar as the selection of material andor the exact location of excavation is involved .
num construction num general the excavation of the topsoil shall be carried out to the lines and depths as established by the consultant .
topsoil shall be selected as to quality during excavation .
excavated material which in the opinion of the consultant is not suitable for use as topsoil shall be disposed of as directed by the consultant .
topsoil placement shall be undertaken as either a single or two phase operation .
when topsoil placement is done in a single operation the excavated topsoil shall be moved directly to its final position without intermediate stockpiling .
when done in two phases the first phase of the work shall consist of excavating select topsoil from the designated sources and hauling to stockpile sites .
generally stockpile sites shall be located within the highway rightofway .
the location of all sites shall be subject to the approval of the consultant .
the second phase shall be undertaken when the highway grade is near completion .
in this operation the topsoil shall be excavated from the stockpiles hauled and placed in its final position .
upon completion of excavation stockpile sites shall be trimmed to present a neat and tidy appearance fences removed for purposes of entry shall be replaced and debris resulting from the operation shall be removed and disposed of all in a manner satisfactory to the consultant .
section num specification num topsoil placement august num num num preparation of placement areas before placing the topsoil the areas to be covered with topsoil shall be shaped to the uniform lines prescribed .
the surface shall then be loosened to a minimum depth of num mm by means of discs spiketooth harrows or other means satisfactory to the consultant .
num placing topsoil topsoil shall be uniformly spread on the prepared areas to the minimum required depth of num mm or a greater depth as directed by the consultant .
if there is insufficient topsoil to attain a num mm depth throughout the work the consultant may direct spreading topsoil to a lesser depth or over a lesser area .
after spreading all hard lumps shall be broken down and all rocks larger than num mm in dimension roots stumps and other foreign matter shall be removed and disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the consultant .
after the topsoil has been spread it shall be satisfactorily compacted .
the area covered with topsoil shall be left in a condition suitable for seeding or planting without additional preparation of any nature .
at the completion of topsoil placement the adjacent roadway surface shall be cleaned of all debris resulting from the operation and the completed work left in a neat and tidy condition .
num measurement and payment num excavation measurement and payment for excavation from the original source will be in accordance with specification num grading for the classification of soil as described .
excavation from intermediate stockpiles where applicable will be paid for at the unit price bid per cubic metre for common excavation in accordance with specification num grading .
the quantity will be determined by crosssection measurement of the intermediate stockpiles .
num overhaul measurement and payment for overhaul will be made in accordance with specification num grading except that for measurement of overhaul distribution of topsoil will be considered to be of uniform depth over the area of topsoil placement .
when intermediate stockpiling of topsoil is done overhaul of topsoil material will be paid for from the source to the stockpile and from the stockpile to the final placement position with num m of freehaul in each operation .
num topsoil placement topsoil placement will be measured by the square metre of surface topsoiled based on horizontal measurements .
no allowances will be made for uneven or sloping ground .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per square metre regardless of depth for topsoil placement .
this payment will be full compensation for preparing the surface and placing the topsoil material .
work on areas which were not specifically designated for topsoil placement but were disposal areas or embankments constructed of surplus topsoil material will not be classified or paid for as topsoil placement but will be paid for in accordance with specification num grading .
section num specification num underground electrical conduits august num table of contents num underground electrical conduits num num generalnum num description num num materialsnum num conduitnum num fish wirenum num conduit locating pins num num select backfill materialnum num constructionnum num general num num sawcuttingnum num trench excavation num num pushed conduitnum num placing conduit and backfill num num measurement and paymentnum num underground electrical conduit trench excavationnum num underground electrical conduit pushed conduitnum num sawcuttingnum section num specification num underground electrical conduits august num num num underground electrical conduits num general num description this specification covers the supply and installation of underground electrical conduit and appurtenances .
num materials all materials shall be supplied by the contractor in accordance with drawings cbnummnum and cbnummnum and the following num conduit the contractor shall supply the conduit with all necessary couplings fittings and cement .
flexible conduit for underground electrical installation shall be heavy duty num psi medium density polyethylene made to quality assurance znum .
rigid conduit for underground electrical installation shall be either polyvinyl chloride pvc type dbnum or reinforced thermosetting resin conduit rtrc conforming to csa standards cnum no.num and cnum no .
num respectively .
num fish wire fish wire brace wire shall be num mm soft galvanized wire with a minimum weight of num kg per num m of wire .
num conduit locating pins conduit locating pins shall be num mm x num mm bent steel deformed bars or num mm x num mm spikes as required .
num select backfill material select backfill material may be the previously excavated material free of lumps and stones larger than num mm in diameter sand uncrushed rock not exceeding num mm in diameter or crushed rock not exceeding num mm in diameter .
num construction num general the conduit shall be installed by either the trench excavation or pushed conduit method in accordance with drawings cbnummnum and cbnummnum .
underground conduit shall normally be trench excavated except where underground conduit is designated to be placed under existing pavement or surfacing structure in which case the conduit shall be installed by the pushed conduit method .
the fish wire shall be placed in the conduit and wound around the conduit locating pins for future assistance in locating the ends of the conduit .
conduit required to be installed concurrently with a grading operation shall be installed upon completion of the subgrade construction .
section num specification num underground electrical conduits august num num num sawcutting sawcutting shall be in accordance with specification num cutting of pavement .
num trench excavation a trench shall be excavated to the depth and grade required and a base shall be formed to provide a firm foundation of uniform density throughout the length of the trench .
the trench shall be no wider than necessary to permit satisfactory installation of the conduit and thorough compaction of the backfill material around the conduit .
the excavation shall be carried out in such a manner as to cause the least possible damage to the adjacent embankment surface and other improvements .
excavation through roadways open for use by public traffic shall be carried out in such a manner that not more than one traffic lane is restricted at any time .
num pushed conduit installation by means of augering drilling or pushing shall be classified as pushed conduit .
pushed conduit shall be installed at a minimum depth of num m below the existing surface .
the contractor shall not be allowed to cut the existing surface without permission from the consultant .
permission to cut the existing surface will not be considered unless the contractor has made a minimum of three workmanlike attempts at each crossing and has been unable to successfully install the conduit by pushing .
the diameter of the auger or drill bit shall not exceed the diameter of the conduit by more than num mm .
num placing conduit and backfill the conduit shall be placed in the prepared trench .
select backfill material shall be used in the first num m layer of backfill and shall be left untamped .
the remaining backfill comprised of the previously excavated material or select backfill material shall be placed in layers not exceeding num m in depth and shall be thoroughly compacted for the full limits of the trench .
excess excavated material shall be deposited in embankment or uniformly distributed as directed by the consultant and any disturbed areas shall be shaped and left in a neat and tidy condition .
when excavation of trenches for installation of conduit requires the removal of concrete asphalt pavement asphalt bases andor base materials the contractor shall replace and reconstruct the disturbed portion of the surface with materials of equal quality .
the work shall be left in a condition satisfactory to the consultant and shall conform with the adjacent surface .
flexible conduit shall be placed in continuous lengths with no joints between junction or pole bases .
rigid conduits may be jointed with approved couplings cemented in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
num measurement and payment num underground electrical conduit trench excavation conduit installed by the trench excavation method will be measured by the length in metres of conduit pipe complete in place .
section num specification num underground electrical conduits august num num conduit installed by the trench excavation method will be paid for at the unit price bid per metre for underground electrical conduit supply and install trench excavation .
this payment will be full compensation for excavating and preparing the base supplying hauling and placing select backfill material supplying and installing all conduit materials backfilling compacting site restoration traffic accommodation and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work in accordance with the drawings and specifications herein .
replacement and reconstruction of disturbed portions of the subgrade will not be measured or paid for separately but shall be considered incidental to the work .
num underground electrical conduit pushed conduit pushed conduit installation will be measured by the length in metres of the augered hole .
any remaining conduit extending beyond the augered hole will be measured as underground electrical conduit trench excavation .
pushed conduit installation will be paid for at the unit price bid per metre for underground electrical conduit supply and install pushed conduit .
this payment will be full compensation for traffic accommodation excavating preparing and backfilling of the pit excavations supplying and installing all conduit materials compacting site restoration and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work in accordance with the drawings and specifications herein .
num sawcutting payment for sawcutting will be in accordance with specification num cutting of pavement .
section num specification num perforated pipe subdrains august num table of contents num perforated pipe subdrains num num generalnum num materialsnum num perforated pipe num num filter fabric num num filter material num num constructionnum num trench excavation num num pipe installationnum num filter fabric installationnum num trench backfillnum num measurement and paymentnum num trench excavation num num supply and install perforated pipe subdrainnum num filter material num num supply of aggregatenum section num specification num perforated pipe subdrains august num num num perforated pipe subdrains num general this work shall consist of trenching supplying and installing perforated pipe wrapped in filter fabric and backfilling with select filter material at locations and to the depth and grade as established by the consultant .
num materials num perforated pipe the contractor shall supply perforated pipe in accordance with specification num supply of corrugated metal pipe and pipe arches or specification num supply of polyethylene pipe .
num filter fabric the filter sock or filter fabric material for wrapping the perforated pipe shall meet the requirements of type a nonwoven in accordance with specification num geotextile .
num filter material the contractor shall supply filter material composed of hard durable mineral particles free from organic matter clay balls soft particles and other deleterious materials and meeting the gradation requirements specified in specification num aggregate production and stockpiling for designation num class num material .
the contractor shall supply aggregate materials in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate and haul aggregate materials in accordance with specification num hauling .
num construction num trench excavation trenches shall be excavated to depths and grades as established by the consultant .
the trench shall be kept as narrow as practicable and still permit jointing to be done .
the minimum width of the trench shall be the inside diameter of the pipe plus num m. the bottom of the trench shall be stable to afford a firm and uniform bearing throughout the entire length of the culvert .
where the bottom of the trench is in an impervious layer which has become wet and puddled gravel material shall be added to stabilize the bottom .
however the depth of gravel material shall be kept to a minimum to prevent possibilities of water flow under the subdrain pipe .
num pipe installation perforated pipe shall be installed to the depth and grade established by the consultant .
perforations shall be oriented in directions as indicated by the consultant in accordance with the requirements for either collecting or carrying of water .
num filter fabric installation the perforated pipe shall be wrapped with filter fabric or fitted with a filter fabric sock prior to installation .
section num specification num perforated pipe subdrains august num num num trench backfill the subdrain trench shall be backfilled with pervious filter material conforming to subsection num .
filter material shall be placed in num m layers shall be thoroughly tamped and carried to a minimum of num m above the seepage zone or to height as directed by the consultant .
the remainder of the trench shall be backfilled with impervious material and thoroughly compacted .
num measurement and payment num trench excavation measurement and payment for excavation for the subdrain trench will be made in accordance with specification num grading for the various classes of material excavated .
num supply and install perforated pipe subdrain measurement for the supply and installation of perforated pipe subdrains will be in metres measured along the pipe invert .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per metre for perforated pipe .
this payment will be full compensation for preparation of the bottom of the trench supplying and installing the pipe and filter fabric and backfilling of the trench .
num filter material payment for filter material for backfilling will be made at the unit bid per cubic metre for filter material .
this payment will be full compensation for processing hauling and placing the material as specified .
num supply of aggregate payment for the supply of aggregate will be made in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate .
section num specification num salvage of base course and pavement materials august num table of contents num salvage of base course and pavement material num num generalnum num description num num constructionnum num salvaging and stockpilingnum num use of salvaged materialnum num excavation and recompaction of subgradenum num measurement and paymentnum num excavation of base course or pavement material num num use of salvaged material from stockpile using trucksnum num use of salvaged material from stockpile using grading equipment num num overhaulnum num excavation andor reworking subgradenum section num specification num salvage of base course and pavement materials august num num num salvage of base course and pavement material num general num description this work shall consist of the salvaging and stockpiling of existing surface andor base course materials in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the drawings and locations provided or as directed by the consultant num construction num salvaging and stockpiling where directed by the consultant the existing surface andor base course material shall be carefully salvaged and stockpiled .
salvaged surface course material shall be pulverized and blended with the salvaged base course gravel .
stockpiles shall be placed at locations designated by the consultant and shall be uniform in dimension and accessible for loading .
where directed by the consultant the salvaged material shall be loaded hauled spread and compacted on the finished roadbed .
num use of salvaged material when directed by the consultant salvaged material shall be excavated from the stockpiles hauled spread and compacted on sections of completed subgrade as indicated .
num excavation and recompaction of subgrade where directed by the consultant subgrade exposed by the salvage of surface and base materials shall be excavated andor recompacted to the depth and grade established .
num measurement and payment num excavation of base course or pavement material base course or pavement material excavated and stockpiled or used on the roadway will be measured in cubic metres in its original position .
the quantity as measured will be paid for at the applicable unit price bid per cubic metre for salvage base course and pavement materials haul by trucks or salvage base course and pavement materials haul using grading equipment .
these payments will be compensation in full for excavating pulverizing blending stockpiling where required or spreading and compacting directly on the finished roadway and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
when hauling is by trucks the payment includes the costs of loading and truck hauling .
when the material is hauled using grading equipment separate payment will normally be made for overhaul .
if the contract does not contain a bid item for overhaul haul will be considered incidental to the work .
num use of salvaged material from stockpile using trucks stockpiled material truckhauled and used as shown in the contract or determined by the consultant will be measured by the cubic metre as determined in the original stockpile position .
section num specification num salvage of base course and pavement materials august num num payment will be made at the unit price bid per cubic metre for salvage base course and pavement materials haul by trucks .
this payment will be full compensation for the excavation or loading from stockpile hauling to the road spreading and compacting on the roadway and for all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num use of salvaged material from stockpile using grading equipment stockpiled material used as shown in the contract or determined by the consultant and hauled using grading equipment will be measured by the cubic metre as determined in the original stockpile position .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per cubic metre for salvage base course and pavement materials haul using grading equipment .
this payment will be full compensation for the excavation or loading from stockpile spreading and compacting on the roadway and for all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num overhaul when salvaged material is hauled using grading equipment a distance of more than num m from a source road or stockpile to a stockpile or to the completed subgrade overhaul will be calculated and paid for on the cubic metre kilometre basis in accordance with specification num grading .
num excavation andor reworking subgrade i where subgrade preparation is required on subgrade exposed by salvage operations it will be measured and paid for in accordance with the provisions of specification num subgrade preparation .
ii when unit prices for excavation under specification num grading are contained in the contract excavation andor embankment required on subgrade exposed by salvage operations will be measured and paid for in accordance with specification num grading .
iii when no unit prices for excavation under specification num grading are contained in the contract excavation andor embankment required on subgrade exposed by salvage operations will be measured and paid for in accordance with the applicable provisions of specification num subgrade preparation .
section num specification num manholes inlets and catch basins august num table of contents num manholes inlets and catch basins num num general num num description num num materialsnum num aggregatenum num concretenum num reinforcing bars and wiresnum num precast reinforced concrete num num concrete block unitsnum num mortar num num frames castings and fittingsnum num sampling and testingnum num construction num num preparation of basenum num forms num num reinforcing steel num num mixing and placing concretenum num precast reinforced concrete units num num concrete block unitsnum num ladder rungsnum num frames castings and fittingsnum num cleaning num num backfillnum num adjusting existing manholes catch basins and water valvesnum num measurement and payment num num preparation of basenum num manholes inlets and catch basins num num placing reinforcing steel num num backfillnum num adjusting existing manholes catch basins and water valvesnum section num specification num manholes inlets and catch basins august num num num manholes inlets and catch basins num general num description this work shall consist of supplying materials and constructing manholes inlets and catch basins of concrete with or without steel reinforcement as specified and of precast reinforced concrete units complete with necessary frames castings and fittings in accordance with these specifications and at the locations and in accordance with the dimensions lines elevations and design shown on the drawings .
all references to standards or specifications refer to the latest edition at the time of tender .
num materials the contractor shall supply all materials required in accordance with the applicable specifications .
num aggregate the contractor shall produce aggregate materials for backfill in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling .
the contractor shall supply aggregate in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate and haul aggregate in accordance with specification num hauling .
num concrete all materials for the manufacture of concrete shall be supplied by the contractor and shall comply with requirements specified in specification num supply of portland cement concrete .
class b airentrained portland cement concrete shall be used unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings .
num reinforcing bars and wires steel reinforcing bars shall be deformed bars in accordance with the most recent edition of csa gnum m billet steel bars for concrete reinforcement .
cold drawn wire or welded wire fabric for concrete reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of the latest edition of csa gnum .
num precast reinforced concrete precast reinforced concrete units shall be as specified in the contract and shall be supplied by the contractor .
num concrete block units concrete block for the construction of concrete block units shall be supplied by the contractor .
concrete masonry blocks used for construction of manholes inlets and catch basins shall conform to the requirements of a.s.t.m .
designation cnum .
section num specification num manholes inlets and catch basins august num num num mortar mortar shall be composed of one part portland cement and two parts fine aggregate by volume .
materials for the manufacture of mortar shall be supplied by the contractor .
num frames castings and fittings all required metal frames castings and fittings shall be supplied by the contractor .
num sampling and testing sampling and testing of castinplace concrete shall meet the requirements of specification num supply of portland cement concrete .
num construction num preparation of base foundation pits for manholes inlets and catch basins shall be excavated to elevations established by the consultant and shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the entire dimensions of the structure and foundation slab .
all soft and yielding or other unsuitable material when encountered at foundation elevation shall be removed to depth as required and replaced with acceptable gravel backfill .
the backfill shall be placed in uniform layers not exceeding num m in depth and thoroughly compacted .
the base shall be finished to provide a smooth and firm surface .
num forms forms for pouredinplace structures shall be of wood or metal straight and free from distortion and of sufficient strength to resist springing during the process of depositing and tamping the concrete .
all forms shall be thoroughly cleaned and oiled before the concrete is placed therein .
num reinforcing steel reinforcing steel shall be accurately placed and during placing of concrete firmly held in the position shown on the drawings by means of stays blocks ties hangers or other approved devices .
num mixing and placing concrete concrete for pouredinplace manholes inlets catch basins and foundation slabs shall be proportioned and mixed in accordance with requirements specified in specification num supply of portland cement concrete .
concrete shall be placed in such manner as to avoid segregation spread in horizontal layers when practicable and consolidated sufficiently to eliminate all voids .
exposed surfaces shall be thoroughly floated with a moist wooden float to produce a uniform even surface and edges rounded with an approved finishing tool having a radius of num mm .
num precast reinforced concrete units precast reinforced concrete units shall be constructed on pouredinplace foundations in accordance with the details shown on the drawings .
all structures shall have the lower section section num specification num manholes inlets and catch basins august num num from the foundation to the top of the inlet and outlet pipes built up with pouredinplace concrete .
precast units shall be used for the structure above the top of the pipe inlets or outlets .
all joints of the precast unit shall be sealed with mortar .
inlet or outlet pipe entering precast units of the structure shall be accommodated in precast holes having a diameter num mm larger than the outside diameter of the pipe .
no holes for inlet or outlet pipes shall be made in precast units at the site of the work unless otherwise directed by the consultant .
pipes placed in foundation slabs or precast units shall extend through the walls and beyond the outside surface a sufficient distance to allow for connections .
joints around pipes entering precast units shall be carefully sealed with mortar to prevent leakage .
num concrete block units concrete block units shall be constructed on pouredinplace foundations in accordance with the details shown on the drawings .
all joints of the concrete block units shall be sealed with mortar .
pipes placed in foundation slabs or concrete block units shall extend through the walls and beyond the outside surface a sufficient distance to allow for connections .
joints around pipes entering precast units shall be carefully sealed with mortar to prevent leakage .
num ladder rungs galvanized metal ladder rungs shall be installed in all pouredinplace structures having a depth greater than num m. when ladder rungs are required in structures constructed of precast units the units shall be supplied with ladder rungs installed .
num frames castings and fittings metal frames and fittings shall be set in the concrete true to line and elevation as established and as required to fit the adjacent surfaces .
castings shall be set in full mortar beds or otherwise secured as shown on the drawings .
num cleaning upon completion each manhole inlet and catch basin shall be thoroughly cleaned of any accumulations of silt debris or other foreign matter and shall be maintained free of such accumulations until final acceptance of the work .
num backfill after the concrete or mortar has set sufficiently approved granular backfill material shall be placed and thoroughly compacted in layers not exceeding num m in depth .
the backfill shall be neatly graded off flush with the top of the structure or to depth as directed by the consultant and the completed work left in a neat and tidy condition .
num adjusting existing manholes catch basins and water valves where specified the height of existing manhole catch basin and water valve frames and covers shall be adjusted to match the elevation of a new surface by means of bricks and mortar or precast risers and mortar or cast iron extension rings as directed by the consultant .
the maximum amount of adjustment allowed using bricks risers or extension rings is num mm .
section num specification num manholes inlets and catch basins august num num adjustments in excess of num mm will require alterations of the manhole catch basin or water valve barrel in conjunction with adjustment of the frame and cover as described above .
num measurement and payment num preparation of base excavation of foundation pits and preparation of the base will not be measured and paid for separately but shall be included in the prices bid for manholes inlets and catch basins .
num manholes inlets and catch basins manholes inlets and catch basins of dimensions and standard depths as shown on the drawings will be measured by the unit complete in place .
structures which exceed the standard depth shown on the drawings will be measured by the unit of standard depth complete in place plus the vertical length in excess of the standard depth as measured by the metre .
the depth of the structures will be measured from the top of the foundation slab to the top of the manhole cover or to the flow line of the inlet grating of catch basin or inlets .
payment will be made at the unit price bid each for manholes inlets and catch basins of standard depth and type as specified and at the unit price bid per metre for corresponding vertical length in excess of standard depths .
these payments will be full compensation for excavating and preparing the base supplying all required materials for manufacture of concrete and mortar supplying all specified precast units placing all materials placing backfill and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work in accordance with the drawings and specifications .
num placing reinforcing steel payment for reinforcing steel incorporated into the work will be either on a lump sum basis or will be measured by the kilogram as identified in the contract .
when measurement is by the kilogram the total weight will be determined using the theoretical weight of bars as shown in the following table bar number num num num num num num num num weight kgm num num num num num num num num payment for placing reinforcing steel will be made either at the lump sum price bid or the unit price bid per kilogram for reinforcing steel as applicable .
num backfill backfilling will not be measured or paid for separately but shall be included in the price bid for manholes inlets and catch basins .
num adjusting existing manholes catch basins and water valves payment for adjusting the elevation of manholes catch basins and water valves will be made at the unit price bid per unit for adjust manhole adjust catch basin and adjust water valve and will be considered full compensation for all materials equipment labour tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num manholes inlets and catch basins august num num payment for adjustment of the barrels for manholes catch basins and water valves will be made in accordance with section num extra work of specification num general ..
section num specification num fencing august num table of contents num fencing num num general num num fence classifications num num materialsnum num construction num num general num num clearing for fence installation num num wood posts num num metal stays and reflective tubing num num wire num num gates num num taking down and reerecting existing fencenum num removal and salvage of existing fence num num removal and disposal of existing fence num num chain link fence constructionnum num measurement and payment num num measurementnum num paymentnum section num specification num fencing august num num num fencing num general fencing consists of the supply and installation of fence gates and related appurtenances of the class or classes specified in accordance with these specifications as shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
where specified existing fence shall be removed and disposed of or removed and reinstalled to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num fence classifications fencing will be classified according to type as follows class a num barbed wires with wooden posts at num m maximum spacing dwg .
cbnummnum class b num barbed wires with wooden posts at num m maximum spacing dwg .
cbnum nummnum class c num barbed wires and num mm paige wire with wooden posts dwg .
cbnummnum class d num barbed wires and num mm paige wire with wooden posts dwg .
cbnummnum class e num barbed wires and num num mm paige wire with wooden posts dwg .
cbnummnum class f num num mm paige wire with wooden posts dwg .
cbnummnum class g num barbed wires with wooden posts at num m maximum spacing dwg .
cbnum nummnum class h chain link fence details of each classification are shown on the drawings .
the use of alternative class b fencing as shown on drawings cbnummnuma and cbnummnum will be permitted only when specified or otherwise approved by the consultant .
num materials the contractor shall supply all materials necessary for the installation of new fencing and the reinstallation of existing fencing .
materials shall be supplied in accordance with the requirements of specification num supply of fence material .
num construction num general fencing shall be installed at the locations shown on the drawings or as designated by the consultant .
fence installation shall be carried out as shown on the drawings in accordance with these specifications and as directed by the consultant .
section num specification num fencing august num num num clearing for fence installation all trees brush or other obstacles which may interfere with fence construction shall be removed prior to commencing fence installation .
the resulting debris shall be disposed of to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num wood posts the posts shall be set in holes to the required depth and tamped in a plumb and firm position to the lines and spacings shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
post holes shall be large enough to allow for proper tamping .
posts shall be set with the large end down .
backfill shall be placed in layers not exceeding num m and compacted by hand tampers machine tampers or other suitable equipment .
completed backfill shall be crowned slightly to permit drainage away from the posts .
driving of posts including methods employing drilled pilot holes will only be permitted if the results of these methods produces a satisfactory uniform undamaged plumb installation with the post firmly implanted into the soil to the specified depth .
if in the opinion of the consultant the results obtained from the driving of posts unsatisfactory then this method shall be discontinued .
sharpening of posts will not be permitted .
intermediate brace posts shall be erected in conformance with the maximum spacing requirement shown on the drawings and at any additional locations that may be designated by the consultant .
num metal stays and reflective tubing where applicable metal stays shall be installed to the lines and spacings shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
fence wire shall be placed into the prepunched slots of the metal stay and locked in place with a keeper wire inserted into the back of the metal stay .
reflective tubing shall be installed between the top wire and the second wire at each metal stay as shown on the drawings .
num wire fence wire shall be pulled tight with hand stretchers or other approved tensioning apparatus capable of adjustment .
the use of tractors or trucks for tightening the fence wire will not be permitted unless the pull is controlled by an adjustable tensioning apparatus .
num gates openings for gates shall be provided at locations shown on the drawings or as designated by the consultant .
gates shall be constructed as shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
num taking down and reerecting existing fence where specified existing fences shall be taken down the materials carefully salvaged and the fence reerected to the satisfaction of the consultant .
materials which are not suitable for reinstallation as determined by the consultant shall be disposed of at an approved location .
replacement materials necessary for the reinstallation of section num specification num fencing august num num the fence shall be supplied by the contractor .
payment for the supply of these materials will be made in accordance with section num extra work of specification num general .
existing fencing materials damaged as a result of the contractors operations shall be replaced by the contractor at his expense .
num removal and salvage of existing fence where removal and salvage of existing fencing is specified the contractor shall carefully take down the existing fence and salvage the materials .
salvaged materials shall be stockpiled at locations designated by the consultant .
materials which are not suitable for salvage as determined by the consultant shall be disposed of at an approved location .
num removal and disposal of existing fence where removal and disposal of existing fences is specified the contractor shall completely remove the fence and dispose of the materials at an approved location .
num chain link fence construction num site preparation the contractor shall carry out minor leveling or landscaping of the ground as necessary to ensure that the fence can be installed with a consistent elevation or slope and follow ground contours smoothly without any sharp changes in grade .
num post location line posts shall be set a maximum of num m apart measured parallel to the ground surface .
corner posts shall be installed where the alignment change exceeds num degrees .
where end or corner posts are more than num m apart over reasonably smooth grade the contractor shall set straining posts at equal intervals not exceeding num m on a straight continuous stretch of fence .
the contractor shall set additional straining posts at sharp changes in grade and where designated by the consultant .
num post setting post holes shall be dug or drilled to the following minimum diameters and depths that will allow at least num mm of footing below the bottom of the post fabric height m num num num num line post hole diameter mm num num num num line post depth m num num num num terminal post hole diameter mm num num num num terminal post depth m num num num num concrete footings shall be constructed by placing concrete in the post holes and embedding the posts to a minimum depth below ground of num m for line posts and num m for terminal posts .
the concrete shall be extended num mm above ground level and crowned to drain away from the post .
posts shall be braced in plumb position and true to alignment and elevation until the section num specification num fencing august num num concrete has set .
the concrete footings shall be allowed to cure for a minimum of num days before proceeding with further work .
num top rail top rails shall be supported at each line post with a line post cap so that a continuous brace is formed between terminal posts .
the rails shall be joined with sleeves to allow for expansion and contraction .
connections to terminal posts shall be made securely using rail ends and brace bands .
num terminal post bracing braces shall be installed from end and gate posts to the nearest line post at midpanel and parallel to the top rail .
braces shall be installed on both sides of corner and straining posts in a similar manner .
num bottom tension wire a tension wire shall be installed within the bottom num mm of fabric .
the wire shall be stretched taut and free of sag and be fastened securely to the end corner gate and straining posts with tension bands and turnbuckles .
num chain link fabric the fabric shall be placed on the outside of the enclosed area unless otherwise directed by the consultant .
the bottom of the fabric shall be num mm above the finished ground .
the fabric shall be stretched to tension as recommended by the manufacturer and fastened to the end corner gate and straining posts with tension bands at num mm spacing .
the fabric shall also be secured to line posts top rails and the bottom tension wire with tie wire at num mm intervals .
the tie wire shall have a minimum of num twists .
once installed and tensioned the fabric shall have a smooth uniform appearance satisfactory to the consultant and be free of sags dents and bulges .
num damaged surfaces damaged surfaces shall be cleaned with a wire brush to remove loose and cracked spelter coatings followed by the application of two coats of an approved zinc rich paint over the damaged areas .
num measurement and payment num measurement measurement for the supply and installation of new fencing and the taking down and re erecting or disposal of existing fence will be by the metre or kilometre complete in place including the length across constructed installed or reerected gates .
for fencing installed parallel to the highway length measurement will be calculated on the basis of through highway centreline chainage .
for all other installations actual length measurements will be made .
section num specification num fencing august num num num payment num supply and installation of new fence payment will be made at the unit price bid for new fence supply and install for the applicable class and will be full compensation for the supply and installation of the fence complete in place including gates and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num taking down and reerecting existing fence payment will be made at the unit price bid for taking down and reerecting existing fence for the applicable class and will be full compensation for taking down salvaging and reerecting the fence including all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
disposal of materials deemed by the consultant to be unsuitable for reinstallation if required will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
num removal and salvage of existing fence payment will be made at the unit price bid for remove and salvage of existing fence .
this payment will be full compensation for removing and stockpiling salvaged materials andor disposing of unsalvageable materials and for all equipment tools labour and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
disposal of materials deemed by the consultant to be nonsalvageable if required will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
num removal and disposal of existing fence payment will be made at the unit price bid for remove and dispose of existing fence and will be full compensation for all labour equipment tools labour and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num clearing fence line all costs associated with the removal and disposal of trees brush or other obstacles required for fence installation will be paid for in accordance with section num extra work of specification num general .
section num specification num livestock guards august num table of contents num livestock guards num num general num num description num num materialsnum num concretenum num livestock guardsnum num sampling and testingnum num construction num num preparation of basenum num forms num num reinforcing steel num num mixing and placing concretenum num connections num num backfillnum num cleaning and maintenancenum num remove and dispose of livestock guards num num remove and reinstall livestock guardsnum num install and remove temporary livestock guardsnum num measurement and payment num num supply and installation of livestock guardsnum num remove and dispose of livestock guards num num remove and reinstall livestock guardsnum num install and remove temporary livestock guardsnum section num specification num livestock guards august num num num livestock guards num general num description this work shall consist of the installation of livestock guards of the type and to the dimensions lines elevations and design shown on the drawings and in accordance with these specifications at locations as shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
num materials num concrete all materials for the manufacture of concrete shall be supplied by the contractor and shall comply with the requirements of specification num supply of portland cement concrete .
class b airentrained portland cement concrete shall be used unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings .
num livestock guards livestock guards shall be fabricated and supplied by the contractor in accordance with specification num supply of livestock guards .
all materials including anchor bolts ubolts protection angles rail type or drill stem decking treated timber and all nuts washers and incidental hardware shall be supplied by the contractor .
num sampling and testing sampling and testing of castinplace concrete shall meet the requirements of specification num supply of portland cement concrete .
num construction num preparation of base foundation pits for livestock guards shall be excavated to elevations established by the consultant and shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the entire dimensions of the structure and footing slabs .
all soft and yielding or other unsuitable materials when encountered at foundation elevation shall be removed to depth as required and replaced with acceptable granular backfill .
the backfill shall be placed in layers not exceeding num m in depth and thoroughly compacted .
the base shall be finished to provide a smooth and firm surface .
num forms forms shall be of wood or metal straight and free from distortion and of sufficient strength to resist springing during the process of placing and tamping the concrete .
all forms shall be thoroughly cleaned and oiled before placing concrete therein .
num reinforcing steel reinforcing steel shall be accurately placed and during placing of the concrete firmly held in the position shown on the drawings by means of stays blocks ties hangers or other approved devices .
section num specification num livestock guards august num num num mixing and placing concrete concrete for livestock guards shall be proportioned and mixed in accordance with the requirements of specification num supply of portland cement concrete .
concrete shall be placed in such a manner as to avoid segregation shall be spread in horizontal layers when practicable and shall be consolidated sufficiently to eliminate all voids .
exposed surfaces shall be thoroughly floated and finished to produce a uniform even surface and edges rounded with an approved finishing tool having a radius of num mm .
num connections all bolt connections shall be securely tightened .
num backfill after the concrete has attained sufficient strength forms shall be removed and approved backfill material shall be placed as required and thoroughly compacted in layers not exceeding num m in depth .
the backfill shall be graded flush with the top of the structure or to elevation as directed by the consultant and the work left in a neat and tidy condition .
num cleaning and maintenance upon completion livestock guards shall be free draining cleaned of any accumulation of soil debris or other foreign matter and maintained in this condition until final acceptance of the work .
num remove and dispose of livestock guards livestock guards as shown on the drawings andor as directed by the consultant shall be removed and disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the consultant .
all materials shall become the property of the contractor and the site shall be left in a neat and tidy condition .
num remove and reinstall livestock guards where specified existing livestock guards shall be removed the materials carefully salvaged and the livestock guards reinstalled in accordance with the drawings special provisions specifications and at a location as directed by the consultant .
materials damaged through the negligence of the contractor shall be replaced at his own expense .
num install and remove temporary livestock guards prior to the commencement of operations in areas as shown on the drawings or defined in the special provisions the contractor shall supply install and maintain temporary livestock guards in accordance with the applicable drawings .
upon completion of operations in these areas the contractor shall remove the livestock guards and restore the areas to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num measurement and payment num supply and installation of livestock guards measurement for the supply and installation of livestock guards will be made by the unit complete in place for the type and width specified .
section num specification num livestock guards august num num payment will be made at the applicable price bid per unit for standard livestock guard supply and install range type livestock guard supply and install and offhighway type livestock guard supply and install .
this payment will be full compensation for supplying the livestock guard excavating and preparing the base driving piles and constructing plank sheathing where applicable backfill and installing the livestock guard .
num remove and dispose of livestock guards payment for the removal and disposal of livestock guards will be made at the price bid per unit for remove and dispose of livestock guards .
this payment will be full compensation for removing hauling and disposing of the material at a location suitable to the consultant and restoring the site .
num remove and reinstall livestock guards payment for the removal and reinstallation of livestock guards will be made at the price bid per unit for remove and reinstall livestock guards .
this payment will be full compensation for removing the existing guards and for loading hauling unloading and reinstalling the livestock guards in accordance with the drawings special provisions and specifications and at the location as directed by the consultant .
num install and remove temporary livestock guards payment for this work will be made at the price bid per unit for install and remove temporary livestock guard .
this payment will be full compensation for supplying the temporary livestock guard installing maintaining and removing the unit and restoring the site to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num metal bin retaining wall august num table of contents num metal bin retaining wallnum num general num num descriptionnum num materialsnum num metal num num gravel backfill material num num construction num num preparation of base num num assembly num num backfill num num measurement and payment num num excavation of site num num metal bin retaining wallnum num supply of aggregate num section num specification num metal bin retaining wall august num num num metal bin retaining wall num general num description this work shall consist of the construction of metal bintype retaining walls in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the dimensions and designs shown on the drawings at locations as indicated and to lines and grades as established by the consultant .
num materials num metal the contractor shall supply all materials required for the construction of the retaining wall in accordance with specification num supply of metal bin retaining wall .
num gravel backfill material the contractor shall produce aggregate for the gravel material for backfill in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling for the designation and classification of materials specified or as approved by the consultant .
the contractor shall supply aggregate in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate and haul aggregate in accordance with specification num hauling .
num construction num preparation of base rough excavation for the site of the retaining wall shall be made to the elevation of the finished ground line at the face of the wall .
below this point trenches num m in width shall be excavated for the four sides of the bins to depths established by the consultant .
all soft and yielding or other unsuitable material when encountered at the base elevation shall be removed and replaced with acceptable backfill .
the base shall be thoroughly compacted and finished to a smooth firm surface in conformance with the lines and grades shown on the drawings or as established by the consultant .
num assembly the base plates of the columns shall be accurately established to the line and grade necessary to provide a num batter .
the retaining wall shall be erected by connecting the members with bolts to form bins conforming to the dimensions shown on the drawings .
the columns shall be checked for batter during the placing of the members and before the assembly bolts are tightened .
members shall be carefully handled during erection and any which are damaged shall be removed and replaced with new members by the contractor at his own expense .
num backfill the backfill for the interior of the bins shall be approved gravel material free from large boulders placed in layers not exceeding num m in depth and compacted by means of mechanical tampers of a type satisfactory to the consultant .
section num specification num metal bin retaining wall august num num the backfill behind the wall shall be material common to the site where the structure is being erected and shall progress with the filling of the bins at all times .
num measurement and payment num excavation of site excavation for the site of the retaining wall and backfill behind the wall will be measured and paid for in accordance with specification num grading .
num metal bin retaining wall metal bintype retaining walls will be measured by the square metre of face area for each design depth of wall complete in place .
when more than one design of retaining wall is specified the designs will be shown by letter suffixes following the pay item .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per square metre for metal retaining wall of design as specified .
this payment will be full compensation for preparation of the base supply and construction of the retaining wall placement of backfill material and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num supply of aggregate payment for the supply of aggregate will be made in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate .
section num specification num removal of miscellaneous structures august num table of contents num removal of miscellaneous structuresnum num general num num descriptionnum num materialsnum num salvagenum num construction num num breaking down and removing structuresnum num disposing of materials num num backfillingnum num measurement and payment num num general num num curb removalnum num removing concrete surfacesnum num removing miscellaneous structuresnum num removing concrete or masonry walls num section num specification num removal of miscellaneous structures august num num num removal of miscellaneous structures num general num description this work shall consist of removing concrete curbs concrete curbs and gutters concrete surfaces such as sidewalks pavement and medians manholes inlets catch basins concrete or masonry walls and other structures salvaging and disposing of the resulting material as directed and backfilling the resulting trenches holes and pits in accordance with these specifications .
num materials num salvage all materials having salvage value shall be carefully removed to avoid damage and shall be stored outside the limits of construction at locations and in a manner satisfactory to the consultant .
approved salvage material shall be used in the new work when directed by the consultant .
num construction num breaking down and removing structures the structures designated for removal complete with all attached parts and connections shall be removed in their entirety to the limits as shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
in removing concrete curbs concrete curbs and gutters and concrete surfaces where portions of the existing structures are to be left in the surface of the finished work the old structures shall be removed to an existing joint or cut to a true vertical face on a line established by the consultant .
during the removal of manholes inlets and catch basins any live sewers connected with them shall be properly reconnected and a satisfactory bypass shall be maintained during the construction operations .
concrete or masonry walls piers foundations and similar masonry structures shall be removed entirely or broken down to an elevation of at least num m below the finished subgrade surface when the structure falls within the area of the roadbed and to an elevation of at least num m below the finished ground surface when the structure exists elsewhere .
when a portion of the existing structure is to be retained care shall be taken not to damage the retained portion during the removal operations .
all operations necessary for the removal of any structures which might endanger the new construction shall be completed prior to the construction of the new work .
section num specification num removal of miscellaneous structures august num num num disposing of materials concrete stone and brick having no salvage value shall be broken into pieces such that the largest face is no greater than num mnum in area and the material incorporated into embankment construction in parallel layers .
all voids shall be completely filled with suitable common embankment material and thoroughly compacted .
no rubble material shall be placed within the top num m of the subgrade surface .
material that can not be used in embankment construction shall be disposed of at an approved location .
wooden poles posts timbers stumps and similar debris shall be disposed of by burning where burning is permitted .
num backfilling all trenches holes and pits resulting from the removal of miscellaneous structures shall be filled with approved backfill material placed in layers not exceeding num m in depth .
each layer shall be thoroughly compacted by mechanical tamping or rolling .
areas within the subgrade limits shall be compacted to one hundred percent proctor density and to a density of not less than the density of the undisturbed adjacent soil on areas outside the subgrade limits .
num measurement and payment num general if the contract does not include separate items for the removal of any of the structures listed herein the removal of such structures will be paid for in accordance with section num extra work of specification num general .
where bid items are included for the removal of the structures measurement will be made of the structure to be removed in its original position .
num curb removal removal of concrete curb and concrete curb and gutter will be measured by the length in metres of structure removed measured along the base of the curb face or along the flow line of the gutter .
measurement will be to the nearest num m. payment for this work will be made at the unit prices bid for concrete curb remove and dispose and concrete curb and gutter remove and dispose as applicable and will be full compensation for excavating breaking down removing hauling and disposing of the material backfilling and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num removing concrete surfaces removal of concrete surfaces will be measured by the square metre of concrete surface removed .
where removal of an integral curb and gutter is required in conjunction with the removal of concrete surfaces the entire structure will be considered concrete surface removal and will be measured by the surface area in square metres .
payment for this work will be made at the unit price bid for concrete surface remove and dispose and will be full compensation for excavating breaking down removing hauling and section num specification num removal of miscellaneous structures august num num disposing of the material backfilling and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num removing miscellaneous structures removal and disposal or salvaging of manholes inlets and catch basins will be measured by the individual unit removed including all attached parts and connections .
payment for this work will be made at the unit prices bid for manhole remove inlet remove and catch basin remove as applicable and will be full compensation for excavating salvaging or breaking down removing hauling and disposing of material as applicable backfilling and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num removing concrete or masonry walls removal and disposal or salvaging of concrete or masonry walls and similar structures will be measured by the cubic metre volume of structure removed measured to the nearest num mnum .
payment for this work will be made at the unit price bid for concrete and masonry remove and will be full compensation for excavating salvaging or breaking down removing hauling and disposing of the material backfilling and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num concrete andor corrugated steel storm sewer august num table of contents num concrete andor corrugated steel storm sewernum num general num num materialsnum num storm sewer pipenum num cement mortarnum num granular materials num num construction num num excavation and preparation of basenum num assembly num num backfill num num workmanship and final acceptance num num measurement and payment num num excavation for sewer installationnum num supply and install storm sewernum num bedding and backfill num section num specification num concrete andor corrugated steel storm sewer august num num num concrete andor corrugated steel storm sewer num general this work shall consist of trenching preparation of base laying of sewer pipe backfilling and constructing related items such as manholes storm drain inlets catch basins special fittings and special inlet and outlet structures .
num materials num storm sewer pipe the contractor shall supply pipe material in accordance with specification num supply of corrugated metal pipe and pipe arches or specification num supply of reinforced concrete culvert as applicable .
storm sewer material supplied shall include couplings bands bolts hoops gaskets tie bars and any other applicable hardware .
corrugated steel pipe material may where specified be of the asbestos bonded andor bituminous coated type .
num cement mortar if concrete pipe is specified the supply of cement mortar shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
this cement mortar mixture shall be composed of one part portland cement and two parts sand by volume .
the quantity of water in the mixture shall be sufficient to produce a stiff workable mortar .
the sand shall conform to the requirements of a.a.s.h.t.o .
specification mnum and latest revisions thereof or shall be an equivalent subject to approval by the consultant .
the cement shall conform to the requirements of a.a.s.h.t.o .
specification mnum num or latest revisions thereof .
num granular materials the contractor shall produce aggregate in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling for the designation and class of materials specified or as specified herein .
the contractor shall supply aggregate in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate and haul of aggregate shall be in accordance with specification num hauling .
the contractor shall produce uniformly graded material containing sufficient fines to act as a binder which shall be composed of sound hard durable particles free from injurious quantities of flaky particles soft shale organic matter frozen lumps and other foreign material .
if due to foundation conditions pitrun gravel is required for the bedding material the contractor shall supply gravel capable of passing a num mm screen and shall be so graded as to provide a stable foundation .
num construction num excavation and preparation of base in general the storm sewer shall be placed in a trench the dimensions of which shall be in accordance with the drawings .
the trench shall be excavated to a depth of not less than num mm below the base of the storm sewer .
section num specification num concrete andor corrugated steel storm sewer august num num all soft yielding or otherwise unsuitable material encountered at the bottom of the trench shall be removed to a depth as indicated by the consultant and replaced with gravel or other acceptable material to afford a firm foundation of uniform density throughout the entire length of the storm sewer .
the exposed surface of the excavation shall then be thoroughly compacted and the excavation backfilled with pitrun gravel material to within the num mm grade elevation established for the storm sewer installation .
where ledge rock boulders rocky or gravelly soil hardpan or other unyielding material is encountered the material shall be removed to provide for a minimum bedding thickness of num mm .
the excavation shall then be backfilled with sand to the elevation established for the storm sewer installation .
the bedding shall be carefully and accurately shaped by means of a template to fit the lower num percent of the overall storm sewer height so as to provide a uniform and firm contact for the bottom of the storm sewer .
if concrete pipe is specified particular care must be taken during shaping of the bedding to ensure that it is shaped to conform to the bell joint for uniform support .
there shall be no rocks or other protuberances projecting into the templateformed bed section .
unless otherwise directed by the consultant excavated trench material may be stockpiled alongside the trench provided the working space is adequate for this purpose and provided the material does not spill onto private property .
all excavated material other than that required and suitable for backfill shall be removed to a suitable disposal area as shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
excavated material piled along the trench shall not be allowed to unduly restrict cross traffic at road intersections .
material shall be cleared from road intersections and provisions made for use of the cross road by traffic as soon as possible after excavation has taken place .
pedestrian traffic to individual properties shall be maintained at all times and where required temporary timber bridges shall be provided where it is necessary to cross open trenches .
roadways driveways and drainage facilities shall not be blocked unnecessarily .
hindrance to local traffic must be kept to a minimum .
in order that excavated material may be piled along the trench roads may be temporarily closed to traffic if so approved by the consultant provided adequate detours are available .
where excavated material can not be piled along the trench in compliance with the above provisions it shall be trucked to locations where backfilling is taking place or to a temporary stockpile for return to the trench at the time of backfilling as directed by the consultant .
temporary stockpile sites or disposal areas will be located as shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
during construction operations all necessary precautions are to be taken to protect the workers the public and both public and private installations and property .
all workers compensation board regulations regarding trench shoring and safety shall be adhered to .
the amount of open trench at any one time is to be limited to num m unless otherwise directed by the consultant .
num assembly num general placing and assembling the pipe may proceed only after the excavation foundation and bedding for the pipe have been approved by the consultant .
where ground or surface water is encountered the trench is to be dewatered before pipe laying commences .
section num specification num concrete andor corrugated steel storm sewer august num num a system of batter boards or other such method shall be used to control the grade of the installation to the elevations as staked by the consultant .
when the work is left for any time the open end of the sewer must be securely closed .
when the sewer is completed it shall be thoroughly cleaned of all earth stones and any other debris .
num concrete storm sewer storm sewer pipe materials shall be handled and lifted by means of the lifting holes or slings .
assembly of the pipe shall start with the placing of the downstream end section laid with its bell or grooved end facing upstream .
each successive section shall be placed to the true alignment and shall bear firmly on the shaped bedding throughout its full length .
after preparation of each joint as described following successive sections shall be drawn tightly together using a cable and winch method or such other method as may be approved by the consultant to provide a positive uniform and tight fitting joint .
the mechanical tightening device shall be anchored a sufficient distance beyond the joint being tightened to avoid disturbance of previously tightened joints .
assembly tightening and joint construction shall be completed to the satisfaction of the consultant before backfilling may commence .
field cast wye connections shall be free of any cracks and shall be fabricated to provide a field strength equivalent to the adjoining pipes .
unless otherwise specified on the drawings a minimum of three end sections shall be anchored to adjacent sections by means of approved anchoring devices .
all lift holes shall be filled with an approved mortar finished off flush with the surface of the pipe .
num mortar joints unless otherwise specified all joints shall be filled with mortar .
the mortar used shall conform to the mixture outlined in subsection num of these specifications .
the pipe ends shall be thoroughly cleaned and wetted with water immediately before the joint is made .
stiff mortar shall then be applied to the lower half of the groove section of the pipe already laid and simultaneously to the upper half of the tongue of the sections being placed and the joint shall then be drawn up tightly .
sufficient mortar shall be used to fill the joint completely and form a bead on the outside of the pipe .
the inside of the pipe shall have the joint pointed all the way around .
the outside of the pipe shall have the joint mudded all the way around .
the mortar shall be protected from the elements with a proper covering until satisfactorily cured .
no water shall be allowed to drain through the newly laid pipe until the joints have satisfactorily cured .
no backfilling around the joint shall be undertaken until the joints have been approved by the consultant .
num rubber gasket joints where specified rubber gaskets shall be fitted between the bevelled surfaces of the tongue and groove ends of the connecting concrete pipe sections to form a flexible watertight seal .
section num specification num concrete andor corrugated steel storm sewer august num num gaskets and jointing materials shall be placed in accordance with the recommendation of the particular manufacturer in regard to the use of lubricants cements adhesives and other special installation requirements .
surfaces to receive lubricants cements and adhesives shall be dry and thoroughly cleaned of all foreign matter .
the rubber gasket shall be placed on the tongue end of the pipe section being laid and the gasket checked for proper positioning .
gaskets and jointing shall be inspected before installation of the pipe and loose or improperly affixed gaskets and jointing materials shall be removed and replaced to the satisfaction of the consultant .
both joint surfaces shall be thoroughly coated with the lubricant supplied and the tongue of the pipe section being laid shall be lined up true with the groove of the preceding section and the two sections united together to the tightest position by means of cable and winch or other approved methods .
if while making the joint the gasket becomes loose and can be seen through the exterior joint recess when the joint is pulled up to within num mm of closure the pipe shall be removed and the joint remade to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num corrugated steel storm sewer corrugated steel pipe shall be laid on the prepared base with the separate sections securely joined together by means of the coupling bands provided .
corrugated steel pipe of the round or elongated type and pipe arch culvert constructed from individual steel plates shall have the outside laps of circumferencial joints in each pipe section on the upstream end and the longitudinal lap seams at the sides of the pipe .
the pipe shall be laid true to the lines and grades as established by the consultant .
when designated elbows shall be installed at locations as established by the sharp changes in gradient or direction of the pipe .
all pipe shall be carefully handled to prevent damage to the protective coating .
unavoidable damage to coatings shall be repaired by the contractor by painting with two coats of zinc oxide or asphaltic type cement paint prior to backfilling .
num backfill num general after assembly of the pipe has been approved the backfill shall commence utilizing sand material to be compacted by means of pneumatic or other mechanical tamping equipment .
as the backfill between the sides of the pipe and the sides of the trench must carry a part of the total vertical load on the horizontal plane at the top of the pipe it is essential that it be good material carefully placed and compacted .
num sand backfill backfill under the haunches and up to the quarter points shall be carefully compacted and rammed into place in thin layers to fill all voids and ensure firm contact with the entire bottom surface .
backfill alongside and above the pipe for a minimum of num m unless otherwise shown on drawings shall also be sand material .
backfilling shall be laid down and compacted in layers not exceeding num m and shall proceed simultaneously to the same level on each side of the pipe .
sand backfill shall be compacted to num percent of standard proctor density at the optimum moisture content .
puddling of the backfill will not be permitted .
in all backfilling operations care shall be exercised and it shall be the contractors responsibility to ensure that the pipe is not damaged by vertical or lateral forces imposed during installation and by compaction of the backfill .
circular pipe with elliptical reinforcement and section num specification num concrete andor corrugated steel storm sewer august num num elliptical pipe with circular reinforcement are particularly vulnerable to damage by careless compaction of backfill and it may be necessary to install horizontal or vertical strutting until the fill over the pipe has been completed .
strutting so required shall be undertaken in an approved manner and at the contractors own expense .
sand backfill will be considered as class b bedding as shown on the drawings .
num earth backfill unless otherwise directed by the consultant native earth backfill as excavated from the trench shall be used where shown on the drawings provided it is an approved frostfree fine grained soil .
such soil backfill shall be compacted to a density as specified in the specifications .
num extra sand backfill where in the opinion of the consultant the excavated trench material is unsuitable to be used as backfill the area shown on the drawings as earth backfill shall be constructed with sand .
the extra sand backfill material shall be placed and compacted to the density specified in the specifications .
num granular backfill bedding in areas where the consultant directs excavation to be done below the normal num mm beneath the pipe grade as shown on the drawings granular backfill of the designation and class specified shall be used as bedding material for that portion of the pipe bed below the num mm grade line .
the granular backfill shall be placed and compacted to num percent of standard proctor density .
num workmanship and final acceptance in addition to compliance with the details of construction the completed structure shall show careful finished workmanship in all particulars .
if in the opinion of the consultant any of the following defects are present in the structure they shall be considered sufficient cause for rejection a variation from the designed centerline or grade b concrete pipe tongue or grooved edge which has been chipped such that num percent of the bevelled surface area is destroyed or chipped at any point to such a degree that in the opinion of the consultant a proper joint will not be achieved c concrete pipe joined by the construction of improperly formed or cracked joints d concrete pipe which shows as a result of negligent handling the exposure of reinforcing steel or any permanent cracks in the concrete of num mm or greater width or deformation induced through improper bedding backfilling or construction procedures or e steel pipe connected with improperly installed couplers andor gaskets .
structures exhibiting defects will be rejected and the contractor shall be held responsible for replacing and reinstalling the unacceptable sections .
any material damaged or destroyed by the contractor shall be replaced at the contractors own expense .
section num specification num concrete andor corrugated steel storm sewer august num num conditions requisite to the final acceptance of the work shall include in addition to the terms and conditions of the contract a sewer thoroughly cleaned of any accumulations of silt debris or other foreign matter any loose material or waste resulting from the operations disposed of and the working areas restored to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num measurement and payment num excavation for sewer installation excavation to the required depth and width as detailed on the drawings will not be paid for directly but shall be included in the applicable unit price bid for concrete storm sewer supply and install andor corrugated steel storm sewer supply and install andor leads which price shall include the necessary haul and disposition of the material .
there will be no separate payment for any shoring dewatering or any safety precautions necessary .
such payment will be considered to be included in the unit price bid for concrete storm sewer supply and install andor corrugated steel storm sewer supply and install andor leads .
payment for any necessary trucking to another area of the project or to and from temporary stockpile or disposal areas will not be made directly but shall be included in the unit prices bid for concrete storm sewer supply and install andor corrugated steel storm sewer supply and install andor leads .
num supply and install storm sewer measurement for the supply and installation of storm sewers will be in metres along the invert centreline length of the sewer .
the measurement will be continuous through manholes .
the measurement of laterals and leads shall be taken along the invert centreline of the branch line to the invert centreline of the main sewer .
the measurement will be continuous through manholes or storm drains .
in cases where the branch line originates at a manhole or storm drain the measurement will be taken from the mid point of the facility .
payment will be made at the applicable unit price bid per metre for the various sizes of concrete storm sewer supply and install andor corrugated steel storm sewer supply and install andor leads .
this payment will be full compensation for supplying and installing the sewer pipe precast elbow connections and all other precast appurtenances excavation and preparation of the trench to the required depth supplying and placing sand bedding shoring tunnelling under existing utilities construction of concrete cradles field casting of wye branches supplying and backfilling with either native or imported material compacting where necessary and the use of all equipment tools labour and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num specification num concrete andor corrugated steel storm sewer august num num num bedding and backfill num placing payment for supplying and placing of bedding and backfill for storm sewer trenches up to the original ground level will not be made directly but shall be included in the unit price bid for concrete storm sewer supply and install andor corrugated steel storm sewer supply and install andor leads .
for the purposes of this specification the original ground line shall be the surface elevation existing at the time of commencement of excavation of the storm sewer trench .
in order to provide reduced load on the storm sewer pipe it may be specified in the contract that embankment shall be constructed over a storm sewer alignment prior to the excavation of the trench .
in these cases the original ground line will be the surface of the constructed embankment .
num supply of sand material payment for supplying and placing class b bedding material as shown on the drawings will not be made directly but shall be included in the unit price bid for concrete storm sewer supply and install andor corrugated steel storm sewer supply and install andor leads .
num extra sand backfill payment for extra sand backfill will be made by the cubic metre in place .
this payment will be full compensation for processing and hauling sand material to the point of the installation .
payment for placing this material shall be included in the applicable unit price for concrete storm sewer supply and install andor corrugated steel storm sewer supply and install andor leads .
num gravel backfill bedding payment for gravel backfill used in bedding will be made in accordance with specification num granular fill .
num supply of aggregate payment for the supply of aggregate for extra sand backfill andor gravel backfill bedding will be made in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate .
section num specification num guardrail and guide posts august num table of contents num guardrail and guide postsnum num general num num materialsnum num construction num num general num num removal and salvage or disposal of existing guardrail num num measurement and payment num num supply and install guardrail or barriernum num removal salvage and reinstallation of existing guardrail or barriernum num removal and disposal of existing guardrail or barriernum num haul of guardrail materials num num supply and installation of guide posts num num supply and installation of plastic guardrail posts num section num specification num guardrail and guide posts august num num num guardrail and guide posts num general this work consists of the erection removal salvage and reinstallation or disposal of guardrail and guide posts .
num materials the contractor shall supply all new materials required for the construction of guardrail barrier and guide posts in accordance with specification num supply of wbeam guardrail and posts specification num supply of box beam guardrail and posts specification num supply of cable barrier and metal posts and specification num supply of flexible guide post traffic delineators .
when the contract specifies the removal salvage and reinstallation of guardrail only materials from the existing installations shall be used .
contractor stockpiles of used material from other sources will not be considered acceptable .
the contractor has the option of supplying plastic guardrail posts in place of wooden posts except at the following locations the transition area between a roadway guardrail system and a bridgerail system .
as part of a proprietary end treatment such as a breakaway cable terminal bct or cable attenuator terminal cat which normally use wooden posts .
in any cable barrier system .
at any other installation specifically prohibited by the consultant .
num construction num general guardrail and guide posts shall be accurately set to the required depth and alignment in a manner resulting in a smooth continuous installation as shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
the permissible tolerances for post installation are num degrees from vertical for plumb and num mm for grade .
holes shall be excavated by auger .
the diameter of the holes augered for guardrail shall be of sufficient size to allow for pneumatic tamping .
prior to digging any holes the contractor shall contact all applicable utility companies to arrange for utility location and marking .
unsuitable material at the bottom of the holes excavated for guardrail shall be replaced with granular material at the contractors expense as directed by the consultant .
the contractor shall thoroughly compact the bottom of the hole .
the guardrail posts shall rest directly and solidly on the bottom of the hole at the time of installation .
excavated material which is unsuitable for use as backfill shall be substituted with granular material by the contractor at his expense .
backfill shall be thoroughly compacted using pneumatic tampers in layers not exceeding num mm for the full depth of the excavation .
guardrail laps shall be in the direction of traffic flow .
bolts shall be tightened to a minimum torque of num n.m .
section num specification num guardrail and guide posts august num num guardrail reflectors meeting the requirements of specification num supply of wbeam guardrail and posts shall be fastened to the top of every third guardrail in a weak post installation and to the top of every sixth guardrail for a strong post installation .
reflectors shall be attached by mechanical means such as nailing or stapling .
fastening by adhesives alone will not be accepted .
the colour of the reflectors shall be either white or fluorescent yellow to match the colour of the nearest painted roadway edge line .
the contractor shall take all necessary precautions to eliminate damage to galvanizing .
minor abrasions shall be repaired by painting with two coats of zinc rich paint .
major abrasions shall be repaired by regalvanizing .
the method to be used for repair of any damage shall be approved by the consultant before such work is commenced .
the contractor at his own cost shall carry out the repair or replace components to the satisfaction of the consultant .
construction for installations at bridge approaches shall start at the bridge and shall be carried out as shown on the drawings in appendix dnum of the roadside design guide or as shown on other contract drawings .
surplus excavated material and debris shall be removed from the site and disposed of by the contractor at his expense at an approved location .
upon completion of the installation the work area shall be restored to its original condition .
at the end of the one year warranty period the permissible tolerances for all posts will be num degrees from vertical for plumb and num mm for grade .
construction of guardrail and guide posts will include several types of installations in accordance with the plans and specifications and as directed by the consultant .
drawings referenced as teb or rdg drawings are found in the latest edition of the departments roadside design guide .
installations will include but not be limited to num thrie beam modified thrie beam wbeam guardrail guardrail installations shall be in accordance with teb and rdg drawings located in the following appendixes of the roadside design guide appendix bnum alberta weak post and strong post wbeam guardrail appendix bnum thrie beam guardrail num box beam guardrail standard and median box beam installations shall be in accordance with the teb drawings located in appendix bnum weak post box beam of the roadway design guide .
num cable barrier high tension cable or rope barrier shall be installed as shown on the contract drawings and in accordance with the special provisions and the manufacturers recommended procedures .
num installation on base course projects when installing guardrail on base course projects installation of guardrail and construction of base course shall be performed in accordance with drawing teb num as directed by the consultant .
section num specification num guardrail and guide posts august num num num guide posts the contractor shall remove and dispose of existing guide posts andor install new guide posts at locations identified by the consultant .
guide posts shall be installed straight and plumbed vertical to a uniform depth in accordance with the applicable drawings found in the latest edition of the departments manual entitled alberta highway pavement marking guide .
all replaced soil around the delineator shall be firmly compacted .
the contractor shall supply any additional material required to ensure that the delineator has a suitable foundation .
a reflective sheeting strip shall be attached to the top of each guide post as described in section cnum delineators of the highway pavement marking guide num and in accordance with the requirements of specification num supply of flexible guide post traffic delineators .
num removal and salvage or disposal of existing guardrail num general the contractor shall remove the designated sections of guardrail including posts and shall fill and compact all holes left from post removal before nightfall .
the consultant will designate the material to be reused and the material for disposal .
material damaged by the contractor during removal shall be replaced with new material by the contractor at his own expense .
num remove and salvage when salvaged material is being reinstalled the contractor shall haul it when necessary and neatly pile the salvaged material near the site of the proposed installation as directed by the consultant .
at sites where existing guardrail is to be removed and new or salvaged guardrail is to be installed at the same location the contractor shall complete the installation within num working days of the site becoming available for reerection of the guardrail .
when existing posts are not salvageable as determined by the consultant the contractor shall replace the damaged posts with new posts as part of the guardrail reinstallation work .
the contractor shall assume ownership of the damaged posts and shall dispose the materials to the satisfaction of the consultant .
until guardrail is erected the contractor shall erect barricades as shown on drawing tcsb num .
other safety protection shall be provided as directed by the consultant .
num remove and dispose all materials designated for removal and disposal those damaged during removal and any materials not required for reinstallation as determined by the consultant shall become the property of the contractor and shall be disposed of in a manner and location satisfactory to the consultant .
section num specification num guardrail and guide posts august num num num measurement and payment num supply and install guardrail or barrier measurement for supplying and installing barrier or guardrail sections including end terminals and bridge connections and posts will be in metres of the length of each type of barrier or guardrail installed .
payment will be made at the applicable unit price bid for wbeam guardrail supply and install strong post wbeam guardrail supply and install box beam guardrail supply and install thrie beam guardrail supply and install modified thrie beam guardrail supply and install or cable barrier supply and install .
these payments will be full compensation for supplying and installing all guardrail and cable barrier materials including end terminals and bridge connections and posts .
num removal salvage and reinstallation of existing guardrail or barrier measurement for removal salvage and reinstallation of barrier or guardrail sections including end terminals and bridge connections and posts will be in metres of the length of each type of guardrail or barrier removed and reinstalled .
replacement posts as determined by the consultant that are necessary for the completion of guardrail reinstallations will be measured on a per post basis .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per metre for remove salvage and reinstall existing guardrail for the type of guardrail removed .
this payment will be full compensation for removing salvaging and reinstalling the guardrail including end terminals and bridge connections and posts .
the supply of new posts on guardrail reinstallations will be paid at the unit price bid for supply of guardrail posts .
the price bid will be considered full compensation for the supply and delivery of the posts and all labour materials equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the disposal of damage posts and the installation of the new posts will be considered incidental to the work associated with remove salvage and reinstall existing guardrail .
num removal and disposal of existing guardrail or barrier measurement for removal and disposal of barrier or guardrail sections including end terminals and bridge connections and posts will be in metres of the length of each type of barrier or guardrail removed .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per metre for remove and dispose of existing guardrail for the type of guardrail removed .
this payment will be full compensation for removing and disposing of the guardrail material as directed by the consultant .
num haul of guardrail materials no separate payment will be made for hauling existing guardrail designated for salvage or disposal .
haul will be considered incidental to the work .
num supply and installation of guide posts measurement will be made of the number of each type of guide post installed .
section num specification num guardrail and guide posts august num num payment will be made at the applicable unit price bid per guide post for flexible guide postdelineators round supply and install or flexible guide postdelineators semi flat supply and install .
this payment will be full compensation for supplying and installing the new posts .
no separate payment will be made for guide post removal .
the removal and disposal of existing guide posts is considered incidental to the work .
num supply and installation of plastic guardrail posts if the contractor elects to install plastic posts instead of wooden posts the department will make a premium payment of num for each plastic guardrail post supplied and installed .
this premium will be paid in addition to the unit price bid for the applicable supply and install guardrail bid item .
section num specification num seeding august num table of contents num seeding num num general num num materials num num supply of materials num num grass seed num num fertilizer num num hydromulch num num tackifier num num water num num constructionnum num traffic accommodation num num notification of commencement of work num num surface preparation num num weather conditions num num classes of seeding num num slope texturing num num application rates num num fertilizer num num harrowing num num protection num num reseeding num num measurement and payment num section num specification num seeding august num num num seeding num general this specification covers preparation of the area to be seeded the supply and application of seed and fertilizer and the finishing of seeded areas .
areas to be seeded shall include any disturbed or exposed earth surfaces within the rightof way borrow and waste areas and as determined by the consultant .
num materials num supply of materials materials for seeding including grass seed mix fertilizer mulch and water shall be supplied by the contractor .
seed and fertilizer materials shall be stored dry and protected from direct sunlight and other detrimental conditions .
materials that have been subjected to detrimental conditions as determined by the consultant will not be accepted for use on the project .
num grass seed grass seed shall meet the minimum requirements for common no .
num seed as defined by the grade tables under the canada seeds act regulations and shall be of the composition specified in the special provisions .
the seed shall be mixed by a conditioner and bulk storage facility approved by the authority responsible for canada seeds act regulations .
all seed shall be tested by a registered seed lab and each bag shall be clearly marked with the name of the supplier and the mixture composition .
prior to the use on the project the contractor shall provide the consultant with a certificate of analysis for each lot of seed supplied .
test results from the certificate of seed analysis shall specify the germination or for native seeds that are not a part of the seed tables the tetrazolium and purity for each seed species of the mix as well as the seed mix composition expressed as a percentage of each seed species by dry mass for each seed mix specified .
num fertilizer fertilizer shall be of the composition specified in the special provisions .
fertilizer shall be stored in standard containers clearly marked with the name of the manufacturer weight and specified composition .
num hydromulch mulch material shall be cellulose fibre unless otherwise specified in the special provisions .
mulch shall be clean and free of weeds and other foreign matter .
mulch shall be num biodegradable compatible with the environment and shall contain no germinationinhibiting components .
section num specification num seeding august num num num tackifier the binder must be capable of joining together the mulch particles to secure the mulch to the ground .
the binder shall not form an impervious seal that will prevent the penetration of moisture to underlying soil .
num water water supplied by the contractor shall be free of any impurities that might inhibit germination of the seed .
num construction num traffic accommodation the contractor shall address the traffic accommodation issues associated with his seeding operations in his traffic accommodation strategy .
no seeding operations or associated activities shall be started without an accepted traffic accommodation strategy .
when hydroseeding operations are remote from the contractors main work area or when otherwise directed by the consultant the contractor shall at his own expense provide a truck mounted arrowboard in accordance with section num traffic accommodation of specification num general to assist in the accommodation of traffic during hydroseeding operations .
num notification of commencement of work the contractor shall notify the consultant a minimum of num hours prior to any seeding work .
seeding operations shall not commence until all areas designated for seeding have been prepared to the satisfaction of the consultant .
seeding operations shall not commence until the consultant has reviewed the certificate of seed analysis and verified the specified seed mixture supplied .
num surface preparation grading or topsoil placement shall be completed to the satisfaction of the consultant prior to any surface preparation .
all eroded areas shall be corrected prior to surface preparation as determined by the consultant using imported material or material adjacent to the area being filled .
areas to be seeded shall be finished to a smooth and uniform surface which is loosened to a depth of not less than num mm at the time of seeding .
where necessary the surface shall be scarified and the contractor shall dispose of stones and other debris as determined by the consultant .
seeding will not be permitted on hardened crusted or rutted soil .
num weather conditions the contractor shall not proceed with the work when in the opinion of the consultant weather conditions are unsuitable .
the consultant will not allow work to proceed when wind conditions are such that material is being carried beyond the designated work areas or that the material is not being uniformly applied .
section num specification num seeding august num num num classes of seeding all seeding for whatever purpose will be classified as specified herein num drillseeding drill seeding shall include the supply of suitable equipment to perform the work the supply and placement of the specified seed mixtures and fertilizer when specified at locations specified in the special provisions or as directed by the consultant .
in areas that are inaccessible to conventional equipment the contractor may utilize broadcast seeding methods .
distribution of the seed and fertilizer if required shall be at a uniform rate and not less than the minimum specified rate of application .
the contractors equipment shall be calibrated to distribute seed and fertilizer into the soil at not less than specified minimum rates of application .
the equipment shall then cover the seed and fertilizer with a suitable covering of soil .
num broadcast seeding broadcast seeding shall include the application of the specified seed mixtures and fertilizer when specified at locations specified in the special provisions or as determined by the consultant using an acceptable cyclone seeder or approved hand methods .
any areas seeded using broadcast methods shall be immediately harrowed to provide an acceptable covering of soil for the seed and surface textured using trackwalking or some other means acceptable to the consultant .
the contractor shall provide a means of verifying the quantities of seed and fertilizer applied using cyclone or handmethods either by weight or by a system of volume measurement acceptable to the consultant .
num hydroseeding hydroseeding shall include the supply of suitable equipment and the application of a spray pumped mixture of water seed fertilizer if required hydromulch and tackifier at locations specified in the special provisions or as directed by the consultant .
hydroseeding equipment shall have a storage tank with continuous agitation to maintain seed fertilizer and hydromulch uniformly mixed until pumped from the tank .
the pump pressure shall maintain a continuous nonfluctuating stream of solution that is calibrated to distribute seed into the soil at not less than specified minimum rates of application .
generally those areas which in the opinion of the consultant are impractical to drillseed due to the terrain characteristics or access problems will be designated for hydroseeding .
num slope texturing slope texturing is the roughening of the surface by some mechanical means acceptable to the consultant or by trackwalking a dozer or similar tracked vehicle perpendicular to the slope to provide a serrated texture that will reduce erosion potential .
the work shall be performed in accordance with b.m.p .
numa of the design guidelines for erosion and sediment control except as modified herein .
the contractor shall slope texture the following conditions section num specification num seeding august num num all cut and fill slopes with slopes equal to or steeper than numhnumv with a vertical height greater than num m and all cut and fill slopes longer than num m regardless of the actual slope and for hydroseeding the slope texturing shall be performed prior to the application of seed .
for broadcast seeding the slope texturing shall be performed after the application of seed .
for drillseeding slope texturing is not required .
num application rates the following application rates are the minimum required drill seeding num num kgha broadcast seeding num kgha fall cover crop num kgha hydroseeding num num kgha hydromulch num kgha num fertilizer fertilizer applications are only permitted when using agronomicforage mixtures .
fertilizer shall not to be used when using native seed mixtures .
formulation and application rates of fertilizers will be as specified in the special provisions .
num harrowing when required the contractor shall harrow areas designated for harrowing immediately after seed and fertilizer is applied .
num protection the contractor shall take reasonable care to prevent the contamination of structures signs guardrails fences utilities and other installations by his operations .
where such contamination occurs the contractor shall remove the offending material using methods acceptable to the consultant .
the contractor shall ensure that hydroseeding does not dislodge soil or cause erosion .
the contractor shall be responsible for the protection of the work and shall at his own expense repair all areas damaged by any cause until the work has been accepted by the consultant .
num reseeding at locations that fail to show a uniform stand of grass for any reason during the calendar year following the year of initial seeding the contractor shall repair the defective locations as determined by the consultant .
a uniform stand of grass will be considered growth that shows no deterioration or bare spots greater than num square metre in size and provides a minimum of num percent ground cover as determined by the consultant .
the initial inspection of seeding will occur during the month of may of the calendar year following the year of initial seeding .
the contractor shall complete any required reseeding work section num specification num seeding august num num prior to june num of that year .
this date will be extended if in the opinion of the consultant the weather conditions prior to june num are not suitable for reseeding work .
the requirement to reseed will be considered to be a warranty requirement in accordance with sectionnum contractors warranty and final acceptance of specification num general and shall meet all the requirements for initial the seeding including seeding method seed and fertilizer mixtures application rates harrowing and slope texturing as applicable .
the contractor will not be required to reseed any area more than once during the warranty period .
the contractor shall supply all materials necessary for reseeding work and complete all reseeding work entirely at his own expense .
num measurement and payment seeding for the methods specified will be measured in hectares to the nearest num hectare based on horizontal measurements as determined by the consultant .
no allowance will be made for uneven or sloping ground overlap .
payment for drillseeding broadcast seeding and hydroseeding will be made at the unit price bid per hectare .
this payment will be considered full compensation for the supply and placement of seed fertilizer hydromulch harrowing and reseeding as applicable and includes all labour materials equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
slope texturing will be measured in horizontal square metres .
no allowances will be made for slope .
payment for slope texturing will be made at the unit price bid per square metre .
this payment will be considered full compensation for all labour materials equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
when the contract contains grading or topsoil placement work the repair of eroded areas prior to seeding will be considered incidental to the work and no separate payment will be made .
when the contract does not contain grading or topsoil placement work payment for the repair of eroded areas will be paid for as extra work in accordance with section num extra work of specification num general .
section num specification num cable ducts august num table of contents num cable ductsnum num general num num descriptionnum num materialsnum num ductsnum num spacersnum num concrete num num rope num num sealantnum num sampling and testingnum num construction num num trenchingnum num duct installation num num backfilling and compactionnum num measurement and payment num num cable duct num num final acceptancenum num acceptance num num sealingnum section num specification num cable ducts august num num num cable ducts num general num description the scope of work shall include the construction of num mm cable ducts in accordance with these specifications the drawings and special provisions at locations as provided or as directed by the consultant .
num materials num ducts ducts shall be num mm nominal inside diameter and of rigid nonmetallic p.v.c .
pipe .
couplings are to suit the pipe .
num spacers spacers shall be cast concrete or interlocking plastic designed for num mm standard duct on num mm by num mm centres .
the use of wooden or metal spacers will not be permitted .
num concrete all materials for the manufacture of concrete shall be supplied by the contractor and shall comply with requirements specified in specification num supply of portland cement concrete .
concrete shall have a minimum compressive strength of num mpa at num days .
aggregate shall have a maximum size of num mm .
cement shall be type hs sulphate resistant portland cement .
slump shall not exceed num mm .
an airentrainment agent shall be added to result in an air content between num and num percent .
num rope pull rope shall be num mm diameter nylon cord .
the rope shall be continuous through each duct with num m spare at each end .
num sealant duct seal shall be a nonthermoplastic compound used for electrical applications .
acceptable compounds are shown on the alberta transportation products list .
num sampling and testing sampling and testing shall meet the requirements of specification num supply of portland cement concrete .
num construction num trenching the trench shall be carefully excavated to the required depth to allow the duct run to be set on undisturbed soil .
where soft spots or unsuitable material are encountered the contractor shall at no extra cost undercut a minimum of num mm or as directed by the consultant replace with acceptable material and compacted to num standard proctor maximum dry density .
section num specification num cable ducts august num num num duct installation the duct shall not be placed until the trench has been checked for line and grade by the consultant .
all ducts shall be placed a minimum of num mm below subgrade .
duct runs shall be graded uniformly to their ends .
duct installation shall be by the tier method using the specified spacers .
the duct group shall be securely banded together using metal strapping .
duct couplings shall be staggered by at least num mm along the duct run .
the cutting and tapering of duct joints shall be made with tools as specified by the duct manufacturer .
all duct joints shall be made water tight .
where ducts are to be connected to existing conduits a suitable conduit to duct coupling shall be used .
all ducts shall terminate with a duct coupling that is set flush with the end of the concrete envelope .
split duct shall be wrapped with a waterproof impregnated paper or plastic sheeting and securely taped to prevent entry of any concrete .
the duct assembly shall be securely anchored to the trench bottom to prevent ducts from shifting or floating when concrete is poured .
the concrete shall be carefully placed by chute down on the sides of the duct bank so that the concrete flows under the ducts and rises up around the ducts to fill all spaces .
the concrete shall be carefully rodded with a flat bar .
pull ropes shall be installed in each duct and shall be checked to ensure they are free of kinks bends or joints .
the surplus shall be coiled num m at each end on the duct .
duct locations shall be marked by the consultant in the field prior to backfilling .
a num mm by num mm marker painted red shall extend from the duct entrance to num mm above grade .
a spike shall be driven flush in the edge of the pavement over the duct run .
num backfilling and compaction backfilling shall not be undertaken until the concrete and ducts have been checked by the consultant .
the backfill of trenching shall be with material similar to that removed except that organic material or stones larger than num mm in diameter shall be removed .
the degree of compacting shall be similar to existing or to the degree required for various pavement layers under other sections of these specifications .
the ends of each duct system shall be backfilled using an envelope of sand or other suitable backfill extending num m from the duct for a width of num mm and from the bottom of the duct system to num mm above the top duct .
num measurement and payment num cable duct payment will be made at the unit price bid per metre of encasement including num mm standard ducts .
this price shall include all labour materials and equipment necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num cable ducts august num num num final acceptance num acceptance after each section of duct run is completed and the concrete thoroughly set a test mandrel that is num mm smaller in diameter than the nominal duct size shall be drawn through each individual duct .
this test shall be carried out under the supervision of the consultant .
the contractor shall be responsible to clear or replace any ducts that do not pass the mandrel test .
acceptance of the work will be given upon certification that all ducts have been tested and proven clear of any obstructions .
num sealing at the completion of the acceptance the contractor shall seal in a tight manner the ends of all ducts by using duct seal .
section num specification num plastic culvert extensions and culvert liners august num table of contents num plastic culvert extensions and culvert liners num num general num num materialsnum num plastic pipe num num groutnum num construction num num preparation for installationnum num liner installationnum num grouting num num plastic pipe culvert extension installationnum num handlaid riprapnum num measurement and payment num num supply and install plastic linernum num supply and placement of groutnum num plastic culvert extensions num section num specification num plastic culvert extensions and culvert liners august num num num plastic culvert extensions and culvert liners num general this specification covers the installation of plastic pipes as liners inside existing culverts and extensions of these plastic pipes beyond the ends of the existing culverts .
num materials num plastic pipe the contractor shall supply plastic pipe complete with all necessary material required to join the plastic pipe sections .
plastic pipe material shall meet the requirements of specification num supply of polyvinyl chloride pipe or specification num supply of polyethylene pipe as applicable .
num grout the contractor shall supply grout suitable for low pressure pumping into the void between the plastic pipe used as a liner and the surrounding existing culvert and which has a minimum compressive strength of num kpa at num days .
cement shall be sulphate resistant .
num construction num preparation for installation the contractor shall prepare the designated existing culverts for installation of the culvert liners by flushing and scouring the existing culverts with water under pressure and by inspecting and correcting any minor protrusions within the existing culvert .
num liner installation the contractor shall excavate or clear a trench for assembly of liner pipes at the upstream end of the existing culvert .
he shall then push or pull the plastic pipe through the existing culvert with the spigot end first working down grade preventing any damage to the liner and connecting sections thereafter securely joined together .
pipes shall be joined together to form a flexible watertight seal .
joints shall not be deflected beyond the manufacturers recommended maximum .
the contractor will ensure that the liner remains at the existing culvert invert elevation during the grouting operation .
liners shall be installed in accordance with drawing cbnummnum plastic liner installation and grouting within existing culverts .
num grouting the contractor shall place grout using a low pressure pump to fill the void completely .
due care shall be taken when pressure pumping so that excessive pressure does not damage the liner .
when extension of the plastic culverts beyond the ends of the existing pipe is required the contractor shall complete grouting of the liner pipe before completing the backfill of the extension pipe and allow the consultant to observe the grouting operation and the completion of the grouting .
section num specification num plastic culvert extensions and culvert liners august num num num plastic pipe culvert extension installation extensions to existing plastic pipes or liners shall be made in accordance with specification num culverts modified as follows plastic pipe shall be placed on the prepared base with the separate sections securely joined with joints as specified in the applicable sections of specifications num and num .
the pipe shall be installed true to the lines and grades as established by the consultant .
when designated elbows shall be installed at locations as established to accommodate sharp changes in gradient or direction of the pipe .
backfilling and sloping the ends of plastic pipe shall be performed in accordance with subsection num backfilling polyethylene pipe of specification num culverts .
num handlaid riprap immediately following completion of culvert installation handlaid riprap shall be placed in accordance with specification num riprap .
num measurement and payment num supply and install plastic liner measurement for the supply and installation of plastic culvert liners will be in metres based on the length along the centreline invert of pipe installed as a liner .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per metre for culvert liner supply and install for the applicable size of culvert as indicated in the unit price schedule .
this payment will be full compensation for supplying all materials flushing of existing culverts correcting any protrusions in existing culverts any excavation required for pipe assembly installing the liner end treatment if required and the use of all equipment tools labour and incidentals necessary to complete the plastic culvert liner installation .
when in the opinion of the consultant the installation of a liner must be abandoned before completion through no fault of the contractor payment will be made for the quantity of pipe actually installed at the full applicable unit price bid .
num supply and placement of grout measurement of grout will be by the cubic metre of grout material acceptably placed measured to the nearest tenth of a cubic metre .
the contractor shall provide a suitable means of measuring the quantity of grout placed payment for grouting will be made at the unit price bid for grouting liners plastic pipe and will be full compensation for the supply and placement of grout including all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num plastic culvert extensions measurement and payment for the supply and installation of plastic culvert extensions will be made in accordance with specification num culverts .
section num specification num smooth wall steel pipe culvert extensions and culvert liners august num table of contents num smooth wall steel pipe culvert extensions and culvert linersnum num general num num materialsnum num smooth wall steel pipe num num groutnum num construction num num preparation for installationnum num liner installationnum num weldingnum num grouting num num smooth wall steel pipe culvert extension installationnum num handlaid riprapnum num measurement and payment num num supply and install smooth wall steel pipe linernum num supply and placement of groutnum num smooth wall steel pipe culvert extensions num section num specification num smooth wall steel pipe culvert extensions and culvert liners august num num num smooth wall steel pipe culvert extensions and culvert liners num general this specification covers the installation of smooth wall steel pipes as liners inside existing culverts and extensions of these smooth wall steel pipes beyond the ends of the existing culverts .
the abbreviation s.w.s.p .
will mean smooth wall steel pipe .
num materials num smooth wall steel pipe smooth wall steel pipe materials shall meet the requirements of specification num supply and install smooth wall steel pipes .
num grout the contractor shall supply grout suitable for low pressure pumping into the void between the steel pipe used as a liner and the surrounding existing culvert and which has a minimum compressive strength of num kpa at num days .
cement shall be sulphate resistant .
num construction num preparation for installation the contractor shall prepare the designated existing culverts for installation of the culvert liners by flushing and scouring the existing culverts with water under pressure and by inspecting and correcting any minor protrusions within the existing culvert .
num liner installation the contractor shall excavate or clear a trench for assembly of liner pipes at the upstream end of the existing culvert .
the contractor shall then push or pull the s.w.s.p .
pipe through the existing culvert with the spigot end first working down grade preventing any damage to the liner and connecting sections thereafter securely joined together .
joints shall be welded and the pipe shall be joined using either a wedge and block or mechanical pipe pullers to bring the pipe to the home position to form a watertight seal .
joints shall not be deflected beyond the manufacturers recommended maximum .
the contractor shall ensure that the liner remains at the existing culvert invert elevation during the grouting operation .
liners shall be installed in accordance with drawing cbnummnum plastic and s.w.s.p .
liner installation and grouting within existing culverts .
num welding welding of smooth wall steel pipe shall only be performed by journeyman welders .
all welders qualifications shall be current and shall be available for examination by the consultant .
smooth wall steel pipe sections shall be joined together with a full strength and continuous butt weld which forms a watertight seal in accordance with csa standard wnum welded steel section num specification num smooth wall steel pipe culvert extensions and culvert liners august num num construction .
welding procedures shall be prepared and stamped by a professional engineer and shall be submitted to the consultant for review prior to welding .
when the ambient air temperature is between numoc and numoc the contractor shall preheat the smooth wall steel pipe to a minimum of numoc for a distance of num mm beyond the weld in each direction and shall shelter the section being welded from the wind .
when the ambient air temperature is below numoc the contractor shall provide suitable hoarding and heating of the sections being welded .
the consultant has the right to require the contractor to modify or cease his welding operation if in the opinion of the consultant adequate shelter and heating is not being provided during cold weather welding .
at the discretion of the consultant nondestructive examinations such as radiography and ultrasonic testing may be required to verify quality and strength of the welds .
nondestructive examinations shall only be done by qualified technicians and the results shall be provided to the consultant for review .
the contractor shall arrange and provide nondestructive testing when required by the consultant .
any defects found by such testing shall be repaired at the contractors own expense .
num grouting the contractor shall place grout using a low pressure pump to fill the void completely .
when extension of the s.w.s.p .
culverts beyond the ends of the existing pipe is required the contractor shall complete grouting of the liner pipe before completing the backfill of the extension pipe and allow the consultant to observe the grouting operation and the completion of the grouting .
num smooth wall steel pipe culvert extension installation installation of s.w.s.p .
extensions shall be carried out in accordance with specification num culverts and specification num supply and install smooth wall steel pipes modified as follows the pipe shall be installed true to the lines and grades as established by the consultant .
when designated elbows shall be installed at locations as established to accommodate sharp changes in gradient or direction of the pipe .
num handlaid riprap immediately following completion of culvert installation handlaid riprap shall be placed in accordance with specification num riprap .
num measurement and payment num supply and install smooth wall steel pipe liner measurement for the supply and installation of s.w.s.p .
culvert liners will be in metres based on the length along the centreline invert of pipe installed as a liner .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per metre for culvert liner supply and install s.w.s.p .
for the applicable size as indicated in the unit price schedule .
this payment will be full compensation for supplying all materials flushing of existing culverts correcting any protrusions in existing culverts any excavation required for pipe assembly installing the liner end treatment if required and the use of all equipment tools labour and incidentals necessary to complete the s.w.s.p .
culvert liner installation .
section num specification num smooth wall steel pipe culvert extensions and culvert liners august num num when in the opinion of the consultant the installation of a liner must be abandoned before completion through no fault of the contractor payment will be made for the pipe installed at the applicable unit prices .
num supply and placement of grout measurement of grout will be by the cubic metre of grout material acceptably placed measured to the nearest tenth of a cubic metre .
the contractor shall provide a suitable means to measure the quantity of grout that has been placed .
payment for grouting will be made at the unit price bid for grouting liners s.w.s.p .
and will be full compensation for the supply and placement of grout including all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num smooth wall steel pipe culvert extensions measurement and payment for the supply and installation of s.w.s.p .
culvert extensions will be made in accordance with specification num supply and install smooth wall steel pipes .
section num specification num highway street lighting august num table of contents num highway street lightingnum num general num num abbreviations and definitions num num materialsnum num conduit num num wiringnum num luminaires and standards polesnum num sand bedding and backfillnum num concrete bases num num frangible bases breakaway couplingsnum num site lighting distribution enclosure and componentsnum num drawingsnum num sampling and testingnum num construction num num existing underground utilitiesnum num removal and salvage of existing standardsnum num removal and disposal of existing lighting fixturesnum num cutting of pavement num num excavation and backfillnum num sand bedding num num street light bases num num luminaires and standards polesnum num underground electrical conduitnum num site lighting distribution enclosure num num secondary electrical cablenum num testingnum num measurement and payment num num trench and backfillingnum num cutting of pavement num num hand expose existing underground utilities num num underground electrical conduitnum num secondary cable num num electrical wiring and materialsnum num removal and salvage of existing standardsnum num removal and disposal of existing light fixturesnum num street light bases num num davit and high mast standards num num reinstallation of salvaged standards polesnum num site lighting distribution enclosure num num galvanizing of existing standards num num drawings and manuals num num site restoration num section num specification num highway street lighting august num num num highway street lighting num general this work shall consist of the supply and installation of highway lighting and all associated electrical work in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the dimensions details and requirements shown on the drawings at locations as indicated and as established by the consultant .
the electrical installation shall be in accordance with the current edition of the canadian electrical code regulations of the electrical inspection department having jurisdiction and as determined by the consultant .
any work even if not shown or specified which is obviously necessary or reasonably implied to complete the work shall be done as if it were both shown and specified .
all electrical installation work shall be performed by qualified tradesmen experienced in such work .
the contractor shall obtain all permits and approvals and pay all related fees required for the work and submit a copy of all permits and associated documents to the consultant .
at locations where new power supply or power supply modifications are necessary application to the power company will be carried out by the consultant .
a specific service point for the power supply by others will be as shown on the drawings .
the contractor shall provide all facilities to the service point .
the power company will make the final connection .
num abbreviations and definitions wherever in these specifications the following abbreviations are used the intent and meaning shall be as follows csa canadian standards association nema national electrical manufacturers association eemac electrical and electronic manufacturers association of canada reference to regulations and standards in all cases shall mean the latest amendment or revision current at the closing date of the tender .
num materials the contractor shall supply all materials required for the installation of the highway lighting including associated electrical components .
all material supplied shall be new and built in accordance with eemac standards and shall be csa approved unless otherwise approved by the local inspection authority .
the contractor shall obtain approval of the local inspection authority and shall bear all inspection charges levied and any modification costs required for any materials not csa approved .
material shall also comply with the drawings and as required by the canadian electrical code .
where there is lack of specification in the drawings the materials shall comply with the special provisions standard specifications or as specified by the consultant .
when the work necessitates the removal salvage and reinstallation of lighting structures only materials from existing installations shall be used .
contractor stockpiles of used material from other sources will not be acceptable .
section num specification num highway street lighting august num num num conduit the contractor shall supply num mm or num mm underground electrical conduit complete with all necessary incidentals as shown on the drawings .
underground electrical conduit shall be either polyvinyl chloride pvc type dbnum or reinforced thermosetting resin conduit rtrc conforming to csa standards cnum no.num and cnum no .
num respectively .
num wiring all wiring within the poles to the luminaires shall be num cu .
rwnum xlink .
all conductors shall be copper .
the contractor shall supply secondary electrical cable as shown on the drawings .
all teck cables shall be copper and have num v cross link insulation .
teck cable shall be hl rated .
num luminaires and standards poles the contractor shall supply new luminaires complete with lamps davit or high mast standards and bases as shown on the drawings .
only new materials shall be used .
the poles shall be continuously tapered of polygonal cross sections presenting good visual appearance .
with the anchor base mounted in a horizontal plane the upright pole section shall be in a true vertical position .
all materials used shall conform to the latest edition of csa standard gnumm numw astm standard anum grade d or astm standard anum as a minimum requirement .
silicon content of the steel shall be less than num for the shafts whereas for base plates the silicon content shall be either less than num or between num to num .
all standards shall be hot dip galvanized in accordance with csa standard gnumm .
double dipping will not be permitted .
where two or more galvanized sections will be placed in close proximity the finished appearance each section shall be similar to the adjacent galvanized sections .
the consultant will determine the suitability of repair methods .
num sand bedding and backfill all bedding sand shall be supplied by the contractor and shall be free of clay rocks and organic materials .
the sand shall be a designation num class numa in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling or as approved by the consultant .
when native material excavated from a ditch or trench is unacceptable as backfill the contractor shall supply sand or other approved backfill material .
at no time shall backfill material containing ice snow organic or frozen material be used .
all backfill material will be subject to the approval of the consultant .
num concrete bases the contractor shall supply all materials for the construction of pole and cabinet bases and the bases shall be constructed of concrete in accordance with cannumanummnum .
concrete shall be type num class c in accordance with specification num supply of portland cement concrete .
section num specification num highway street lighting august num num reinforcing shall be grade num deformed bars in accordance with csa gnummnum complete with numm ties as shown on the drawings .
anchor bolts shall be supplied in accordance with the requirements of the pole or base manufacturer .
generally the top num mm of the anchor bolts shall be hot dipped galvanized unless otherwise specified .
num frangible bases breakaway couplings the contractor shall supply all required frangible bases for light standards in accordance with the drawings and the special provisions .
num site lighting distribution enclosure and components the contractor shall supply the required distribution enclosure in accordance with the drawings and as determined by the consultant .
the enclosure shall be a weatherproof nema num design complete with padlockable door hinged on one side .
the enclosure shall be of sufficient size to house panel boards disconnects breakers lighting contactors control transformers splitters controls and an externally mounted power supply meter socket as shown on the drawings .
the enclosure shall be csa approved with components installed .
the entire system in the enclosure shall be concealed in conduit or other acceptable means .
exposed wiring will not be accepted .
the contractor shall provide all wiring schematics for future reference .
panel boards shall be commercial or industrial grade complete with breaker .
rating of panel boards and number and type of breakers shall be as shown on the drawings .
breakers shall be bolt in style only to match panels .
acceptable manufacturers are westinghouse square d fpe or approved equal .
main disconnect shall be commercial or industrial grade nema num breaker enclosure suitable for service entrance .
rating and phases shall be as shown on the drawings .
acceptable manufacturers shall be westinghouse square d fpe or approved equal .
lighting contacts shall have a minimum of num volt rated contacts and num volt operating coil .
the contact shall be mounted in a nema num enclosure and have a rating and number of phases as shown on the drawings .
acceptable manufacturers shall be westinghouse allen bradley square d or approved equal .
control transformer if required shall be num va rated and mounted in nema num enclosure .
the transformer shall have voltage ratings and phases as shown on the drawings .
control circuit disconnect if required shall be rated at num amp and shall be mounted in a nema num enclosure .
voltage ratings and phases shall be as shown on the drawings .
acceptable manufacturers shall be westinghouse square d fpe or approved equal .
handoffauto switch shall be a numposition selector switch with capabilities to override photocell and shall be mounted in a nema num enclosure .
photocell shall be rated num watt num volt drift free minimum turn on level of numfoot candles .
it shall be integrally wired into distribution enclosure and shall be of vandal proof design .
section num specification num highway street lighting august num num num drawings the contractor shall submit four copies of shop drawings of electrical work including poles luminaires distribution enclosures and frangible bases to the consultant for review a minimum of numdays before the scheduled start of the work .
shop drawings shall be stamped and signed by a professional engineer registered in the province of alberta .
work shall not commence until all shop drawings have been reviewed and accepted by the consultant .
the contractor shall maintain a set of drawings on the site at all times and record any changes required by the consultant that may occur and on the set mark as built .
these drawings shall be submitted to the consultant upon completion of the project .
at the completion of the project the contractor shall provide num full copies of an operating and maintenance manual to the department .
this manual shall include the following all accepted shop drawings .
all dimensioned and annotated asbuilt drawings .
schematics for lighting control and associated equipment .
recommended preventative maintenance task procedures and servicing frequency for num .
each luminaire type used on the project num .
control cabinet components including procedures for changing components manufacturers technical data on all cables supplied to the project .
complete list of replacement parts manufacturers and distributors for all equipment supplied .
included with each manual the contractor shall supply a set of keys to cabinets and padlocks and a set of all specific tools or equipment required for access to or maintenance of the lighting system .
num sampling and testing sampling and testing of the castinplace concrete shall meet the requirements of specification num supply of portland cement concrete .
num construction num existing underground utilities the contractor shall hand expose all underground utilities in all areas of excavation .
hand exposure shall be as specified by the utility owner .
the exposure and backfilling of the utilities shall be undertaken by the contractor under the direct supervision of the companys representative .
num removal and salvage of existing standards where required as shown on the drawings the contractor shall remove salvage and store existing light standards .
existing precast bases and all other components shall be removed and disposed of in an acceptable manner .
the contractor shall backfill and compact holes left from pole removal before nightfall .
material damaged by the contractor during the removal shall be replaced with new material by the contractor at his own expense .
when standards are salvaged for reuse the existing galvanizing shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the consultant prior to installation .
section num specification num highway street lighting august num num when painted standards are designated to be salvaged and reinstalled they shall be hauled to a plant equipped to do the work stripped of all paint and rust and hot dip galvanized in accordance with csa standard gnumm .
num removal and disposal of existing lighting fixtures where required as shown on the drawings the contractor shall remove and dispose of existing light fixtures including standards bases and luminaires in a manner and location as acceptable to the consultant .
all materials shall become the property of the contractor .
the contractor shall backfill and compact the disturbed areas prior to nightfall .
num cutting of pavement when required saw cutting shall be in carried out accordance with specification num cutting of pavement .
num excavation and backfill no trenching or excavation work will be permitted over existing power communication cable pipeline or other underground utilities without the supervision of the appropriate authority .
the contractor shall call alberta first call and the respective utilities to locate and mark existing underground utilities .
damage to any utilities is the responsibility of the contractor .
trench digging machinery will be permitted except where its operation will cause damage to trees buildings or existing structures above or below ground .
at such locations alternative methods shall be used subject to the approval of the consultant .
excavation and backfill shall be executed where required for electrical installation unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
trenches shall be a minimum of num mm wide along alignments .
trenches shall be a minimum of num m to a maximum of num m below finished grade level .
the trench bottom shall be free of stones loose material and sharp objects .
in backfilled areas the trench bottom shall be kept level to facilitate layingin of the cable .
the excavation shall be performed in such a manner as to cause the least possible damage to the adjacent embankment surface and other improvements .
no deviation shall be made from the required line or grade except with written approval of the consultant .
trenches shall not be left open unattended or unprotected without written permission from the consultant .
in such cases the open trench shall be properly marked and barricaded with flashers .
in locations where flooding may occur or public hazard is created by open trench the consultant at his discretion may require that the excavation be appropriately covered .
temporary support adequate protection and maintenance of all underground and surface utilities structures drains sewers and other obstructions encountered in the progress of the work shall be provided by the contractor at his own expense .
backfill material shall be mechanically compacted in maximum lifts of num mm to a minimum of num of standard proctor density for the full depth of the excavation .
compaction tests shall be on a minimum of one density test per num m of trench for compacted vertical backfill .
additional tests may be required at the discretion of the consultant .
the cost of all testing shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
section num specification num highway street lighting august num num all disturbed areas shall be restored to the conditions existing prior to the disturbance or a condition satisfactory to the consultant .
disposal of all excess material shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
num sand bedding sand used as bedding or backfill in excavated areas beneath roadway driveways and sidewalks shall be compacted to a minimum of num of standard proctor density and provide a minimum of num mm covering on all sides of the conduit .
in all other cases unless otherwise specified by the consultant sand shall be compacted to a minimum of num of standard proctor density .
num street light bases when the type of street light base is not shown on the drawings or stated in the special provisions the contractor shall have the option of supplying and installing either castinplace concrete bases steel screwin bases or precast concrete bases .
contractor optional bases shall be designed fabricated and installed in accordance with section enum of the highway lighting guide num and shall be acceptable to the consultant .
castinplace bases shall be constructed a minimum of num days prior to installing the poles unless braces acceptable to the consultant are provided .
the contractor is advised to assess the nature of the existing soil types and conditions prior to tender .
the contractor shall have no claim against the department for difficulties in the constructability of the bases and footings due to soil types and conditions .
num luminaires and standards poles the contractor shall install all davit and high mast standards to the height specified luminaires lamps and frangible bases in accordance with the drawings and as determined by the consultant .
standards shall be installed plumb and level .
shims may be used for levelling however any gaps between standards and bases shall be appropriately filled with grout .
each luminaire shall be aligned and aimed correctly as indicated on the plans or as determined by the consultant .
the contractor shall complete all associated wiring fusing and galvanizing in accordance with csa standard gnumm for the installation of the unit .
terminations in the pole base shall be completed using insulated crimping connectors not wire nuts amp type or approved equal .
all aluminum to aluminum or aluminum to copper connections shall be made using penetrox or an approved equivalent in an approved manner .
the contractor shall furnish such aerial lift devices with qualified operators and associated traffic control as may be required for the consultant to inspect any and all luminaires on the project throughout construction activities and prior to the expiration of the contractor warranty .
section num specification num highway street lighting august num num num underground electrical conduit conduit shall be installed beneath all roadways walkways driveway crossings and other locations as shown on the drawings .
the installation shall be for the entire length of the crossing plus an additional metre on each side .
installation shall be in accordance with the drawings and as determined by the consultant .
pushed or trenched underground electrical conduit shall be installed in accordance with specification num underground electrical conduits and the applicable drawings .
num site lighting distribution enclosure the contractor shall install the required distribution enclosure in accordance with the drawings and as determined by the consultant .
the sand bedding for the enclosure shall be compacted to a minimum of num of standard proctor density .
a concrete base shall be constructed to the dimensions shown on the drawings .
all connections to the enclosure shall run through the concrete base .
the contractor shall situate the base and cabinet to ensure that the photocell operation is not effected by outside light sources .
num secondary electrical cable secondary electrical cable shall be placed in trenches in random separation with great care to ensure no kinking or damage to the sheath splices are unacceptable .
cable shall be installed with sufficient slack and snaking to ensure cable is not damaged during backfilling operations or from ground movements due to frost heave .
all cables crossing roadways shall be placed in a num or num mm conduit as specified one duct for each cable .
secondary electrical cable shall be installed as shown on the drawings or determined by the consultant .
num testing the electrical installation shall be completely tested including but not limited to megger and ground testing and certified by a qualified licensed electrician demonstrating to the satisfaction of the consultant that the equipment and system installed perform in the manner intended .
the consultant shall be notified num hours in advance of the certification testing .
num measurement and payment payment for the following items will be compensation in full for all equipment labour tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num trench and backfilling trenching and backfilling for wiring installation placed outside of conduits will be measured by the lineal metre along the centreline of the trench .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per lineal metre for trenching and backfilling .
this payment will be full compensation for trenching supply placement and compaction of any section num specification num highway street lighting august num num required sand bedding backfilling disposal of the spoil as required and replacing original sod with topsoil and grass seed .
num cutting of pavement measurement and payment for cutting of existing pavement if required will be made in accordance with specification num cutting of pavement .
num hand expose existing underground utilities all costs associated with hand exposing and backfilling existing underground utilities as required will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
num underground electrical conduit measurement and payment for conduit installation will be made in accordance with subsection num underground electrical conduit trench excavation or subsection num underground electrical conduit pushed conduit of specification num underground electrical conduits as applicable .
num secondary cable the quantity of secondary cable considered for payment will be based on the length in metres of trench excavated for the installation of underground wiring as measured along the centreline of the trench .
no additional allowance or payment will be made for the requirement for extra connecting cable at run terminations or for cable wiring installed at variance with a straight line .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per metre for secondary cable supply and install for the type specified .
this payment will be full compensation for the supply and installation of the cable .
num electrical wiring and materials except for the secondary electrical cable no separate or additional payment will be made for the supply and installation of electrical materials required for the proper installation of the luminaires and electrical operating systems .
all wiring fusing connectors insulators and any other materials required by the electrical service provider or necessary for the proper operation of the system will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
num removal and salvage of existing standards payment for the removal and salvage of existing standards will be made at the applicable price bid per unit for removal and salvage of existing standards for the type and size indicated .
this payment will be full compensation for the supply of all tools equipment and labour required to remove salvage and store the standards remove and dispose of the remainder of the installation and backfill compact and restore the excavated areas to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num removal and disposal of existing light fixtures payment for the removal and disposal of existing light fixtures will be made at the price bid per unit for removal and disposal of existing light fixtures .
this payment will be full section num specification num highway street lighting august num num compensation for the supply of all tools equipment and labour required to remove and dispose of standards luminaires concrete bases and electrical components and backfilling compacting and restoring the excavated areas to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num street light bases payment for street light bases will be made at the unit price bid for street light bases supply and install for the type specified in the unit price schedule .
the payment will be full compensation for supplying precast bases steel screwin bases all excavation for the installation disposal of spoil supply placement and compaction of the sand bedding supply and placement of concrete rebar and anchor bolts supply of concrete forms if necessary tamping leveling installation and all labour materials equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num davit and high mast standards payment for the installation of davit or high mast standards will be made at the applicable price bid per unit for street light standard supply and install for the type and height specified .
this payment will be full compensation for supplying all materials labor equipment tools and incidentals required to complete the installation testing and commissioning of the pole luminaire lamp frangible base wiring and accessories including the provision of all facilities required by the consultant for inspections of the street light standard .
when frangible bases are not required payment for the installation of davit or high mast standards will be made at the applicable price bid per unit for street light standard without frangible bases supply and install for the type and height specified .
this payment will be full compensation for supplying all materials labor equipment tools and incidentals required to complete the installation testing and commissioning of the pole luminaire lamp wiring and accessories including the provision of all facilities required by the consultant for inspections of the street light standard .
num reinstallation of salvaged standards poles payment for reinstalling poles will be made at the applicable unit price bid per pole for salvaged street light standard install for the type and height specified .
this payment will be full compensation for hauling the poles from the storage location repairing the galvanizing when necessary installing the salvaged pole supplying and installing new luminaire lamp frangible base wiring fusing and all other materials necessary to complete the installation .
when reinstalling salvaged standards without frangible bases payment for reinstalling poles will be made at the applicable unit price bid per pole for salvaged street light standard without frangible bases install for the type and height specified .
this payment will be full compensation for hauling the poles from the storage location repairing the galvanizing when necessary installing the salvaged pole supplying and installing new luminaire lamp wiring fusing and all other materials necessary to complete the installation .
num site lighting distribution enclosure payment for the distribution enclosure will be made at the price bid per unit for distribution enclosure supply and install .
this payment will be full compensation for supplying and installing all materials necessary to provide the distribution and control of the street lighting system according to the drawings and special provisions .
this shall also include supply and installation of the concrete pad and sand bedding supply and installation of specified grounding system and the complete system testing and certification .
section num specification num highway street lighting august num num num galvanizing of existing standards measurement will be made of the number of salvaged standards properly galvanized and reinstalled on the project .
payment will be made at the applicable unit price bid per pole for galvanizing salvaged standards for the type and size indicated .
this payment will be full compensation for hauling the standards to the galvanizing plant removing all paint and rust galvanizing and returning the standards to the work site .
num drawings and manuals all costs associated with production of shop drawings asbuilt drawings and the operating and maintenance manual will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
num site restoration all costs associated with the restoration of excavated or disturbed areas to a condition comparable to that which existed prior to construction or to a condition satisfactory to the consultant including any required topsoiling and seeding will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
section num specification num traffic signals august num table of contents num traffic signals num num general num num abbreviations and definitions num num materials num num general num num wire and cable num num grounding and bonding num num conduits num num junction boxes num num foundations num num signal supports num num luminaries and photocells num num pole mounted traffic control fixtures num num traffic signal controller unit and cabinet num num pedestrian actuated flashing signal control unit num num detector loops num num power supply num num construction num num wire cable and groundingbonding num num conduits and junction boxes num num foundations num num signal supports num num pole mounted traffic control fixtures num num traffic signal controller unit and cabinet num num detector loops num num power supply cabinet num num signals completion num num warranty num num measurement and payment num section num specification num traffic signals august num num num traffic signals num general this work shall consist of the supply and installation of traffic signals and all associated electrical work in accordance with these specifications the special provisions and in conformity with the dimensions details and requirements shown on the drawings at locations as indicated and as established by the consultant .
in cases of conflict with existing underground utilities the contractor shall contact the consultant for approval of revisions prior to completing the work .
the electrical installation shall be in accordance with the current edition of the canadian electrical code the electrical protection act the regulations of the electrical inspection department having jurisdiction and as determined by the consultant .
any work even if not shown or specified which is obviously necessary or reasonably implied to complete the work shall be done as if it were both shown and specified .
all electrical installation work shall be performed by qualified tradesmen experienced in such work .
cabinet bench testing cabinet wiring termination of cables testing of signals and activation of signals shall only be performed by personnel possessing the following qualifications journeyman power systems electrician or a journeyman power lineman or a journeyman electrician certificate successfully completed traffic signals level i and level ii courses offered by imsa five years experience with traffic signal installation maintenance and troubleshooting .
the contractor shall obtain all permits and approvals and pay all related fees required for the work and submit a copy of all permits and associated documents to the consultant .
after completion of the work the contractor shall provide the consultant a certificate of final inspection and approval from the electrical inspection authority .
the contractor shall be responsible for all costs associated with the testing inspection done by the electrical inspecting authority .
at locations where new power supply or power supply modifications are needed application to the power company will be carried out by the consultant .
a specific service point for the power requirements will be provided by the power company and will be as shown on the drawings .
the contractor shall provide all facilities to the service point .
the power company shall make the final connection .
num abbreviations and definitions wherever in these specifications the following abbreviations are used the intent and meaning shall be as follows aisc american institute of steel construction asa american standards association atssa american traffic safety services association cema canadian electrical manufacturers association csa the canadian standards association imsa international municipal signal association nema national electrical manufacturers association eemac electrical and electronic manufacturers association of canada section num specification num traffic signals august num num reference to regulations and standards in all cases shall mean the latest amendment or revision current at the closing date of the tender .
num materials num general the contractor shall supply all materials required for the installation of traffic signals including associated electrical components .
all material supplied shall be new and csa approved unless otherwise approved by the local inspection authority .
the contractor shall obtain approval of the local inspection authority and shall bear all inspection charges levied and any modification costs required for any materials not csa approved .
material shall also comply with the drawings and as required by the canadian electrical code .
where there is lack of specification in the drawings the materials shall comply with the special provisions standard specifications or as specified by the consultant .
when the work necessitates the removal salvage and reinstallation of existing structures only materials from the existing installations shall be used .
contractor stockpiles of used material from other sources will not be acceptable .
num wire and cable num general wire shall be stranded copper rwunum crosslink conforming to csa cnum no.num thermoset insulated wires and cables or equivalent unless otherwise specified below or shown on the drawings .
wire and cable shall meet csa standards for installation in wet environments .
num signal control cable signal control cable shall be num volt rated consisting of num awg solid copper conductors individually polyethylene insulated covered with a black polyvinyl chloride outer jacket conforming to imsa spec .
no .
num .
signal cable for exposed installations shall conform to imsa spec .
no .
num .
the contractor shall follow the drawings and standard drawing tcsf num for selecting the type and quantity of signal control cables num or num conductor cable for the work .
num loop detector wire loop detector wire shall be num volt rated num or num xhhw stranded copper conductor or equivalent with crosslinked polyethylene insulation conforming to imsa spec .
no .
num .
num loop detector leadin cable loop detector leadin cable shall be num volt rated composed of two num awg stranded tinned copper conductors individually insulated with polyethylene material twisted together and shielded with aluminum backed mylar .
the cable shall conform to imsa spec .
no .
num .
num microwave detector leadin cable microwave detector leadin cable shall be num volt rated unshielded and composed of four num awg stranded bare copper conductors .
belden numa or an equivalent cable are acceptable .
section num specification num traffic signals august num num num communication cable traffic signal communication cable shall consist of num twisted pairs of num awg stranded copper polyethylene insulated conductor with electrical shielding and a polyvinyl chloride jacket and shall conform with imsa spec .
no .
num .
num advance warning cable advance warning signal cable shall be num volt rated unshielded composed of three num awg rwnum crosslink conductor suitable for installation in wet environments .
num streetlight cable the cable feeding streetlights on combination traffic poles shall be num volt rated polyvinyl chloride jacketed comprised of two num insulated conductors with a concentric neutral .
usebnum or equivalent cable is acceptable .
num power supply power supply conductor shall be num awg rwunum crosslink .
num grounding and bonding num general grounding and bonding materials shall conform to csa cnum no.num grounding and bonding equipment .
num ground and bond conductors ground and bond conductors shall be stranded copper rwunum crosslink insulation color green and shall conform to csa cnum no.numm type rwunum crosslink .
num groundlightning electrodes groundlightning electrodes shall be copperclad steel rods nummm diameter by numm in length .
num groundlightning electrode connectors moulded type connectors shall be used on all wiretorod connections .
moulded connectors shall consist of metallic alloys and fusible powder mixtures held in place by a suitable mould and connected using an exothermic type welding process .
num conduits num general supply and installation of conduits shall be in accordance with specification num underground electrical conduits and as specified herein .
num fittings for dbnum conduits only factory bends are acceptable for type dbnum pvc conduits .
field fabrication of couplings adapters bends and fittings for dbnum conduits will not be accepted .
section num specification num traffic signals august num num num trench marker tape trench marker tape shall be num mm wide yellow plastic tape labeled caution electrical wire buried below at minimum num m intervals .
num junction boxes junction boxes shall be precast of nonferrous metal or approved plastic material and shall be of suitable sizes .
the boxes shall have a removable metal cover equipped with cap screws and threaded holes in the cover to facilitate removal of the cover after sealing .
the metal cover shall be grounded .
num foundations num general the contractor shall supply portland cement concrete required for foundations in accordance with specification num supply of portland cement concrete and as specified herein .
num precast cabinet base precast concrete base for type mnum signal control cabinet and the power supply cabinet shall be constructed in accordance with standard drawing teb num .
num precast pole base concrete for the precast pole bases shall have minimum numday strength of num mpa concrete in accordance with cannumanummnum .
concrete shall be type num class c. the contractor shall supply galvanized steel anchor bolts with nuts washers and nut covers .
precast pole bases for pedestal poles shall be constructed in accordance with standard drawing tcsfnum .
precast pole base for traffic poles with an arm span of num m or less shall be constructed in accordance with standard drawing tcsfnum .
concrete bases for advance warning signal poles or traffic poles with an arm span greater than num m shall be castinplace .
num castinplace pole base castinplace pole bases shall be constructed of concrete using type num sulphate resistant cement to give minimum compressive cylinder strength of num mpa in numdays for class c exposure with num mm nominal size coarse aggregate slump at point at time of discharge maximum num mm and minimum num mm .
air content shall be between num and num .
maximum water cement ratio shall be num by mass .
castinplace concrete pole bases for pedestal poles shall be constructed in accordance with standard drawing tcsfnum .
castinplace concrete pole bases for advance warning signal poles with an arm span up to num m and for traffic poles with an arm span up to num m shall be constructed in accordance with standard drawing tcsfnum .
section num specification num traffic signals august num num castinplace concrete pole bases for advance warning signal poles with an arm span up to num m and for traffic poles with an arm span up to num m shall be constructed in accordance with standard drawing tcsfnum .
the contractor shall submit the concrete truck tickets to the consultant to demonstrate that the correct type of concrete is used .
num galvanized steel helix pedestal pole base shop drawings for the galvanized steel helix pedestal pole bases shall be submitted by the contractor to the consultant for approval within num weeks after award of the contract .
steel helix pedestal pole bases shall be fabricated to fit a bolt circle diameter b.c.d .
of num mm and for four num mm anchor bolts .
the steel helix pole base shall be designed to support a loading which corresponds to a num m tall pedestal pole with num foursection signal head unit sidemounted at the upper section of the pole .
additional loadings are a num cm x num cm sign and a num cm x num cm sign mounted below the foursection signal heads .
num galvanized steel rotatable base rotatable bases for traffic poles and advance warning signal poles shall be hot dip galvanized in accordance with csa standard gnumm .
shop drawings for the rotatable pole base shall be submitted by the contractor to the consultant for approval within num weeks after award of the contract .
rotatable pole bases shall be fabricated to fit a b.c.d .
of num mm and for four num mm anchor bolts .
the maximum height for the rotatable pole base shall be num mm .
a centre hole with a minimum diameter of num mm shall be provided through the base .
the rotatable base shall be designed so that a maximum rotating angle of num degrees is allowed .
this can be achieved by fabricating a stopend anchor at the underside of the top plate and on the side of the main rotatable base exterior wall tubing .
a num mm diameter hole should be provided on both stop end anchors to allow the top plate to be locked in place after it is rotated .
the rotatable base shall be designed to support the loading outlined in subsection num signal supports based on the following arm mounting heights with the rotatable base attached traffic sign poles num m above top of concrete pole base traffic signal poles num m above top of concrete pole base .
loading calculation shall be based on a wind speed of num kmh and a num mm layer of ice load on one side of the structure sign surfaces .
welding for the rotatable base shall be done by a cwb certified company .
all welding shall conform to csa standard wnum and shall be performed by welders or welding operators qualified under csa standard wnum .
smaw process shall use enum or enum classification electrode .
fmaw process shall use enumxtx classification electrode .
gmaw process shall use enumsx classification electrode .
all welding shall be completed prior to galvanizing .
welding activities shall not be permitted in the field without adequate protection from public viewing .
num signal supports num general the pole support structures shall be continuously tapered of polygonal cross sections presenting good visual appearance .
with the anchor base mounted in a horizontal plane the upright pole section shall be in a true vertical position .
all materials used shall conform to the section num specification num traffic signals august num num latest edition of c.s.a standard gnumm numw astm standard anum grade d or astm standard anum as a minimum requirement .
silicon content of the steel shall be less than num for the shafts whereas for base plates the silicon content shall be either less than num or between num to num .
only new materials shall be used in its construction .
num shop drawings the contractor shall submit num copies of the shop drawings to the consultant for review prior to any fabrication .
shop drawings shall be complete and shall include all information such as material specifications weld sizes welding procedures design criteria and design loading .
shop drawings shall be stamped and signed by a professional engineer registered in the province of alberta .
review of shop drawings by the consultant will be for general arrangement only and in no case will the contractor be relieved of the responsibility for completeness or adequacy of fabrication materials and procedures for the structures .
any costs resulting from changes made necessary by errors in fabrication or due to failure to have shop drawings so accepted shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
work shall not commence until all shop drawings have been reviewed and accepted by the consultant .
the contractor shall maintain a set of the drawings on the site at all times and record any changes approved by the consultant that may occur and on the set mark asbuilt .
these drawings shall be submitted to the consultant upon completion of the project .
num structural design criteria num general the mast arm mounting height for advance warning signal poles or pedestrian corridor poles shall be num m above the base plate .
the mast arm mounting height for traffic shall be num m above base plate .
the arm reach of signal overhead sign pole mast arm shall follow the pole schedule on the drawings .
in situations where rotatable bases are needed the signal supports shall be fabricated so that shorter pole shafts will be used to achieve the same mast arm mounting heights as specified above .
num live loads the wind drag coefficient of the latest national building code of canada for either octagonal section or round section shafts and where other cross sectional shapes are employed shall be utilized in the design .
all safety factors shall be in accordance with a.i.s.c .
steel construction manual for wind and seismic stresses or a minimum of num based on the published yield strength of the material .
the structural design criteria shall be for wind velocities up to and including num kmh upon the total effective area of the signal structures and fittings .
the loading shall include ice load based on num mm ice thickness on all faces of structure members and on one face of the sign load .
num dead loads for pedestal poles num .
two foursection signal heads mounted back to back on the pole .
each signal head has a weight of num kg and section num specification num traffic signals august num num num .
any combination of signal heads or signs of which the projected area is not to exceed num square metres .
for combination cantilever signal poles num .
three traffic signal heads each with maximum projected area of one square metre and weight of num kg each on the mast arm .
the three signals on the traffic arm are to be located num m num m and num m inward from the end of the arm and num .
three numcm x numcm aluminum signs mounted at num m num m and num m inward from the end of the arm and num .
two pedestrian signals with a maximum projected area of one square metre and weight of num kg to be mounted on the pole shaft along with a side mounted traffic signal with weight of num kg and projected area of one square metre .
num .
a streetlight extension section num m in height total structure height of combination pole shall be num m and reaching num m towards the road .
num .
pole shafts for signal poles with arm span of num m or less shall be designed to support the loading of an num m arm with the abovementioned loadings .
num .
pole shafts for signal poles with arm span of num m or less shall be designed to support the loading of a num m arm with the above mentioned loadings .
for cantilever sign poles num .
one sign num m x num m in dimensions on num mm thick marine plywood cw high intensity retroreflective sheeting for the sign face weight num kg and num .
two num cm diameter amber beacons weight num kg and num .
angle irons to mount sign weight num kg .
num .
pole shafts for sign poles with arm span of numm or less shall be designed to support the loading of a num m arm with the abovementioned loadings .
num .
pole shafts for sign poles with arm span of num m or less shall be designed to support the loading of an num m arm with the above mentioned loadings .
num pole setting features anchorage the design may be such that the vertical shaft is inserted into the base plate and attached with two circumferential welds .
the signal sign pole shall meet the following requirements num .
each base plate shall have num bolt holes equally spaced around the bolt circle .
the rectangular centres of the two bolt holes shall be parallel with the neutral plane of the pole shaft .
the bolt holes shall be elongated so that it can be fitted onto pole bases with b.c.d .
of either num mm num or num mm num .
width of bolt hole slot shall be num mm num plusminus num mm num num .
the base plate shall be designed for accommodating a single nut cover .
nut covers shall be attached to the poles by means of brass cap screws or other approved methods .
num .
the pedestal pole shall be num mm across flats at the top with a num mm o.d .
x num mm long tenon .
the pole shall come with an end cap .
num .
b.c.d .
dimensions and anchor bolt sizes shall meet the requirements outlined on standard drawings tcsfnum num num num and num .
num mast arm attachment features the mast arm shall be designed to meet structural design criteria .
the steel plates flange shall have num bolt holes equally spaced .
a num mm num diameter hole in flange and pole shaft section num specification num traffic signals august num num shall be provided for electrical cable access and centered in the flange .
the num bolt holes in the flange shall be num mm num num in diameter .
the num bolts supplied shall include washers and nuts sized to meet design criteria .
num surface finish the surface finish for the traffic sign poles shall be hot dip galvanized and shall meet all the requirements outlined in csa standard gnumm .
pole refinishing materials shall be a cold galvanizing compound such as galvicon or an approved equivalent .
where two or more galvanized sections will be placed in close proximity the finished appearance each section shall be similar to the adjacent galvanized sections .
the consultant will determine the suitability of repair methods .
num workmanship and fabrication fabrication and workmanship shall be in accordance with the latest edition of csa specification snum and all workmanship shall be equal to the best practice in modern construction steel shops .
the structure inside and outside shall be clear of any obstructions which will hamper the wiring of the traffic signal after erection .
welding shall be undertaken only by a fabricator fully approved by the canadian welding bureau to the requirements of c.s.a .
standard wnum .
any circumferential welds shall develop num penetration of the material thickness .
all welds shall be cleared of all slags and spatter .
if future welding is done after cleaning the weld metal and adjacent areas shall be cleaned and all spatter removed .
num electrical connections each pole shall include provision for electrical constructions in the form of hand holes of adequate size positioned num m above the base plate and at the mast arm mounting level .
the hand holes shall be adequately reinforced with a collar with covers secured in place by a num mm num galvanized standard n.c. hex bolt with antitampering cup washer .
each pole shall be provided with num mm x num mm num x num num n.c. galvanized bolt which shall be welded to the inside of the pole directly opposite the bottom hand hole .
this stud shall be fitted with grounding lug two washers and a brass nut suitable for connecting the ground wire .
wire access on the pole section four num only num mm num with num kg num lbs couplings complete with square recessed head plugs and spaced num degrees to each other at num m above the base plate shall be provided .
recessed head plugs must have a lubricant on the threads to allow easy removal .
wire access on the mast arm section three or four num mm num diameter rubber grommets shall be provided at the following locations on the mast arm num m from the end and every num m thereafter .
num inspection and testing the contractor shall obtain an independent testing firm to carry out ultrasonic testing on welds .
weld testing reports for all poles shall be submitted to the consultant for review before the poles are shipped to the work site .
costs associated with testing shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
section num specification num traffic signals august num num should such tests show the pole structures are not in accordance with the specifications they shall be repaired or replaced by the contractor at his own expense .
the consultant reserves the right to reject any portion of the shipment of pole structures that does not comply with the drawings and specifications in particular a pole structures which do not comply with the physical dimensions or b.c.d .
specified on the contract drawings shall be rejected .
b pole structures which do not pass visual inspection at delivery shall be rejected .
c pole structures which have been damaged during delivery shall be rejected .
the contractor shall replace or repair rejected structures at his own expense .
num pole identifications each structure supplied shall be fully identified by permanent markings on the walls of the structure arm and trunk .
the permanent markings are to be stamped or welded on the structures and shall include the following information name of manufacturer year of manufacturing type of pole dimension span height of pole num luminaries and photocells luminaries shall be high pressure sodium complete with polycarbonate refractors and have integral num vac regulated output constant wattage isolead cwi high power factor ballasts .
photocell units shall be cadmium sulphide thermal delay type with built in surge and lightning protection .
the photocell shall be load rated at a minimum of num voltamp .
num pole mounted traffic control fixtures num traffic and pedestrian signal heads and accessories traffic and pedestrian signal heads optical system shall conform to the institute of transportation engineer specifications the american standards association asa specifications and the specifications contained herein .
the traffic and pedestrian signal heads shall be polycarbonate in design unless otherwise indicated .
the fixture body of the traffic and pedestrian signals shall be traffic yellow .
the doors and visors shall be dull black .
refer to standard drawings tcsfnum num num num num and num for mounting hardware requirements for traffic control fixtures on signal poles .
num general all wiring and terminal blocks shall meet the requirements of section num of the ite vehicle traffic signal heads vtcsh standard .
two secured colour coded num mm num in long num v num awg minimum jacketed wires conforming to the national electrical code rated for service at numoc are to be provided for electrical connection .
num voltage range led signal modules shall operate from a num cycle ac line power over a voltage range from section num specification num traffic signals august num num num vac rms to num vac rms .
the current draw shall be sufficient to ensure compatibility and proper triggering and operation of load current switches and conflict monitors in signal controller units the procuring agency has in use .
nominal operating voltage for all measurements shall be num volts rms .
fluctuations in line voltage over the range of numvac to numvac shall not affect luminous intensity by more than num percent .
the led circuitry shall prevent flicker at less than num hz over the voltage range .
it must be ensured that the product will not show illumination for input voltages below num volts .
num transient voltage protection the signal module onboard circuitry shall include voltage surge protection to withstand high repetition noise transients and lowrepetition highenergy transients as stated in section num of nema standard tsnum num .
num led drive circuitry the individual led light sources shall be wired so that a catastrophic failure of one led light source shall result in the loss of not more than num percent of the signal module light output .
num electronic noise the led signal and associated onboard circuitry shall meet federal communications commission fcc title num subpart b section num regulations concerning the emission of electronic noise .
num power factor pf and ac harmonics led signal modules shall provide a power factor of num or greater when operated at nominal operating voltage and numoc numof .
total harmonic distortion induced into an ac power line by an led signal module operated at nominal operating voltage with a power consumption equal to or greater than num watts at numoc numof shall not exceed num percent .
total harmonic distortion induced into an ac power line by an led signal module operated at nominal operating voltage with a power consumption less than num watts at numoc numof shall not exceed num percent .
num traffic signal head all traffic signal heads shall be num mm in diameter with standard full matte black visors tunnel visors .
the signals shall come with num mm signal backboards and all mounting hardware .
backboards doors and visors shall be flat black .
the design of the traffic signal head shall be such that the reflector assembly is hinged separately from the door assembly .
the signal head shall be secured by a minimum of num latching bolts for the door assembly .
num pedestrian signal head all pedestrian signal heads shall be of the standardized square head of num mm size or as specified and shall be designed to retain optical efficiency .
the background of all message and indication type lenses shall be an opaque grey ceramic section num specification num traffic signals august num num fired directly on the lens .
the lens shall be made of impact resistant polycarbonate .
walk and dont walk message shall be symbolized to the standards outlined in the manual of uniform traffic control devices for canada .
standard cowlcutaway style visors shall be included .
the colour shall be flat black .
num pedestrian pushbutton and sign pushbutton and pushbutton housing shall be cast using aluminum alloy .
the pushbutton shall be controlled by low voltage relay switching operating from num vac supply from the controller cabinet .
pushbuttons shall have an isolator led latch module to enable a led indicator light to come on once pressed .
each pushbutton requires a switch circuit module to operate the num volt led .
a numchannel isolatorlatch module is needed to operate up to num pushbuttons for a total of num pushbuttons per isolatorlatch module .
each pedestrian movement at the intersection requires at least one unlatch module .
an intersection with num pedestrian movements will require num unlatch modules .
num microwave detectors microwave detectors shall be controlled by a microprocessor .
they shall be designed to allow a minimum detection range of num m and to trigger the operation of a traffic controller .
the microwave detector shall only respond to motion in one direction approach or depart only selectable .
the detector shall generate a microwave beam aim to cover the same area normally covered by a loop detector system .
the microwave detector shall have an operating voltage of num vac .
num special crosswalk special crosswalk sign shall consist of a num cm x num cm sign with ranum sign message and the following colour scheme white background black border black messagesymbol .
the sign board material shall comply with the requirements of specification num supply of permanent highway signing .
two num mm amber beacons shall be mounted on the sign .
mounting hardware for the special crosswalk sign shall be provided in accordance with standard drawing tcsfnum .
num advance warning signal advance warning signal sign shall consist of a num cm x num cm sign with wbnum sign message and colour scheme .
the sign board material shall comply with the requirements of specification num supply of permanent highway signing .
two num mm amber beacons shall be mounted on the sign .
mounting hardware for the advance warning signal sign shall be provided in accordance with standard drawing tcsfnum .
num traffic signal controller unit and cabinet num general this specification is applicable for tsnum type num traffic signal control cabinet for application in alberta .
tsnum type num cabinet is also accepted as an alternative .
tsnum type num cabinets if used shall comply with the requirements of nema tsnum .
section num specification num traffic signals august num num the contractor shall demonstrate to the consultant in the contractors own signal shop the ability of the controller cabinet to provide the expected traffic operations as specified on the drawings .
num manufacturers identification the manufacturers identification shall be on all major equipment supplied with this specification including the cabinet assemblies .
the date on which the controller cabinet is manufactured shall also be marked on the inside cabinet door .
num software changes and updates all applicable software changes and updates shall be supplied and installed in the equipment at no extra cost to the department for the duration of the warranty period .
num traffic signal cabinet configurations traffic signal controller cabinets shall be configured to provide a minimum of numphase signal operations with the following minimum configuration controller unit tsnum type num type anum tsnum type num is an acceptable alternative mmu type num terminal and facilities num channel detector rack rack mounted .
shelfmounted detector shall not be used num veh num ped test switch panel police panel on main door auxiliary devices num load switches num num cct solid state flasher num flash transfer relays as per detector schedule on contract drawings cabinet type mnum num cm x num cm x num cm with corbin no .
num key num sets of keys bus interface unit num for detector rack controller and mmu sdlc interface num nema ts num exceptions num controller unit cu the controller supplied by the contractor shall be one of the controllers listed on the alberta transportation products list .
other controllers configured for dual ring operations and conforming to the applicable standards of the national electrical manufacturers association section num specification num traffic signals august num num nema ts num edition for type num configuration type anum controller units in all material respects will be allowed with the prior approval of the consultant .
num malfunction management unit mmu the mmu shall be capable of operation in a cabinet designed to ts num specification with no loss of ts num functionality .
if a tsnum type controller is used all electrical connections with the monitor shall be through approved quick disconnect ms type connectors and harnesses such that it is directly pin plug interchangeable with other conflict monitors of like manufacture and nema series .
if a tsnum type controller is used communication with the mmu shall be either as above or via a serial data bus .
mmu shall be provided complete with a programming card .
num terminal and facilities tf the tf interface shall be as defined for ts num type num controller units and the use of a biu for communication with the mmu and vehicle detectors .
ac neutral bus shall have minimum num positions .
earth ground bond bus shall have minimum num positions .
main breaker shall be num amp for the traffic signal equipment .
auxiliary breaker shall be num amp for auxiliary equipment .
as an integral part of the power assembly a ground fault equipment receptacle controller onoff switch and cabinet light switch shall be provided .
the power distribution assembly shall be integral to the entire load bay assembly and shall be located in the center of the panel .
all components of the power panel shall be protected by a front panel that isolates and protects all parts of the power assembly .
this panel shall be clearly marked as to the functions for both the power assembly and output load bay .
where any harnesses are exposed to damage or handled frequently the harness shall be covered by a protective nylon cover .
changing flash programming from red to amber flash shall be accomplished by easily moving jumpers on a separate terminal block located on the front of the load bay or by means of toggle switches from a control panel .
all wires used in the cabinet shall be of the low temperature type and be rated for num degrees c to num degrees c. a bracket shall be used to support all load switches and flashers and prevent them from vibrating out of position .
a small recessed police panel with a separate access door shall be contained within the front of the cabinet with the following switches signal autoflash signal automanual .
a maintenance panel located on the inside of the front door with the following switches signal onoff signal autoflash signal automanual .
num auxiliary devices auxiliary devices including load switches solid state flashers flash transfer relays and inductive loop detector units .
no exceptions to be noted .
num cabinet the cabinet shall be a canadian electrical manufacturer association cema type num enclosure fabricated from sheet aluminum with a thickness of num mm num inches type num hnum or section num specification num traffic signals august num num an approved equivalent .
it shall provide weather and dust protection with adequate strength to withstand reasonable vandalism protection to the control equipment .
the interior and exterior of the cabinet shall be properly cleaned and prepared for coating .
the coating shall be a high quality ultra violet ray stable polyester powder paint asa num grey applied with a minimum thickness of num mil .
the cabinet shall include two num shelves with strong supports for placement of supplied signal controller and auxiliary equipment .
the main door of the cabinet shall include a police door .
both the main door and the police door shall be supported by continuous hinge .
included in the main door shall be ventilation louvers and an air filter that fits tightly to the door cw sheet metal removable winter frost cover .
the cabinet shall be designed for base mounting on a standard m or mnum signal cabinet concrete foundation .
the cabinet shall be equipped with a separately fused electric exhaust fan assembly for summer operations .
the fan shall be thermostatically controlled and manually adjustable to turn on between numoc and numoc in increments of numoc or less .
the cabinet shall also be equipped with a separately fused num watt finned fast heat rvnumdnum or equal heater assembly for winter operations .
the heater shall be thermostatically controlled and manually adjustable to turn on between numoc and numoc in increments of numoc or less .
the thermostats for the heater and exhaust fan shall be calibrated labeled and installed on an easily accessible separate panel in the cabinet .
the cabinet shall be equipped with a switch and a fused lamp to illuminate the inside of the cabinet .
lamp shall be incandescent type .
num bus interface unit biu no exceptions to be noted .
num documentation two sets of the following documentation shall be supplied operation manual for the controller and mmu detailed controller programming chart cabinet wiring diagram mmu programming schematic any logic wiring diagrams that are applicable one set of the documentation shall be placed in the controller cabinet inside a durable print pouch which hangs in a convenient location not interfering with other equipment .
the other set of the documentation shall be supplied to the consultant directly .
num pedestrian actuated flashing signal control unit num control unit cabinet the units shall be housed in a cast aluminum weatherproof cabinet .
the cabinet shall be latched by a standard traffic control lock num sets of keys to be supplied .
it shall be supplied with mounting brackets capable of being used for mounting the cabinet on any size of conventional type of traffic pole .
section num specification num traffic signals august num num num inspection and testing approval from the electrical inspection authority must be obtained by the contractor before the unit is installed in the field for full operations .
num manufacturers identification the manufacturers identification shall be on all major equipment supplied with this specification including the control unit assemblies .
num instruction and wiring diagrams the control unit shall be supplied with complete installation instructions including a complete chart for field connections .
installation hardware and instruction including limits of operation along with service manual shall be provided .
two set of the documentation shall be supplied .
one set of the documentation shall be placed in the controller cabinet inside a durable print pouch which hangs in a convenient location not interfering with other equipment .
the other set of the documentation shall be supplied to the consultant directly .
num functional specifications the pedestrian actuated flashing signal control unit shall function as follows upon actuation of the crosswalk sign signals by a pedestrian pushbutton the pedestrian indicator lights will come on approximately num seconds adjustable in increments of one second from num num seconds after the crosswalk sign signals starts operating and will terminate num seconds adjustable in increments of one second from num num seconds before the crosswalk sign signals stop .
the timer relays shall disengage the flash conditions of the crosswalk signals and indicator lights after all of the preset time periods and rest itself automatically .
successive pushbutton actuation shall not cause extension of the timer relays .
standard drawing tcsfnum illustrates a typical wiring scheme and a functional scheme for the pedestrian actuated flashing signal control unit .
other design methods and wiring configurations are acceptable as long as the functional requirements are produced by the control unit .
num reset timers rest timers shall be capable of performing a single timed interval for a preset time when initiated by an external signal pedestrian pushbutton .
the reset timers shall function as follows a crosswalk signals flash time sets the length of crosswalk signals flash time b pedestrian indicator lights start time sets the start time for the indicator lights flashing delay start in relation to crosswalk signals c pedestrian indicator lights flash time sets the length of indicator flash time .
num wiring the units shall be wired in such a manner as to be able to accept num awg wires for the signal lamp connections num awg wires for the a.c. feed connections and num awg wires for the pedestrian pushbutton connections .
these connections shall be made at a suitable termination strip .
all num vac connections shall be fused .
section num specification num traffic signals august num num num flasher the flasher used to generate alternate power on and off cycles between the two output terminals shall be of the solidstate type .
it shall be a plug in module easily replaceable without any tools .
it shall be supplied with a radio interference suppressor and two num vac power outputs .
the output alternating rate shall be adjustable from num to num cycles per minute .
the outputs shall be capable of handling at least num amps of current draw .
num timer the timers used to time the preset time periods shall be adjustable from num to num seconds in one second intervals .
num pushbutton field circuit the field circuit to be used for the pedestrian pushbuttons shall not exceed num volts a.c. or d.c. num service entrance the unit supplied shall be approved for service entrance by the electrical inspection authority .
num detector loops num loop detector conductor inroad loop detectors shall be insulated single conductor no .
num or no.num rwnum xlpe stranded copper conductors .
num leadin cable leadin cable shall be similar to beldon num shielded audio broadcast cable consisting of two continuous unspliced num or num stranded tinned copper conductors .
exterior insulation shall be polyethylene or other material suitable for direct burial in wet ground conditions .
num loop sealant loop sealant shall be numm detector loop sealant or equivalent .
num power supply the contractor shall supply and install a power supply cabinet to house a loadcentre and an externally mounted power supply meter socket .
the enclosure shall be csa approved and consist of a cema num enclosure complete with a vandal resistant padlocked door with asa num gray enamel finish over rust resistant primer .
the loadcenter shall include a num ampere main breaker and an eight position branch circuit panel to service the traffic control cabinet street lighting on the combination traffic poles median flashers etc .
shop drawings shall be submitted for the consultants review prior to fabricating the cabinet .
section num specification num traffic signals august num num num construction num wire cable and groundingbonding num wire and cable all installations of wire and cable shall comply with the canadian electric code and the alberta electric and utility code .
cable runs must be separated by function .
traffic signal cables and any other numv wires and cables shall be grouped together into one or more conduits with a num awg bonding conductor .
if spare conduits are available low voltage detector cables should be grouped together in separate conduits .
communication cable shall be run in a conduit and junction box system that is completely separate from the system for numv wirescables .
routing of bonding conductor signal cable and streetlight cable shall be carried out in accordance with standard drawing tcsfnum and as per the conduit schedule on the drawings .
where wires and cable pass through junction boxes there shall be a minimum num mm of slack left in each junction box and also in pole handholes .
wire and cable shall be run continuous from the controller cabinet to the pole handhole no splices are permitted underground in conduit or in junction boxes .
in the case of detector loop wiring splices between the loop conductors and the leadin cable shall be made in the junction box in accordance with the installation procedures and requirements outlined in section num detector loops .
wires and cables shall be labeled at each junction box and at the traffic cabinet with tags of a permanent nature .
labeling shall identify the purposedestination of the cable using the following convention cable labeling requirements traffic signal cable pole id ts e.g .
pole a ts streetlight cable pole id sl e.g .
pole a sl microwave cable pole id mwd no .
e.g .
pole a mwdnum loop leadin cable loop no .
traffic movement e.g .
loop numeblt lt left turn rt right turn th through loop no .
denotes signal phasing num signal control cable standard colour coding for the imsa signal control cable is shown on standard drawing tcsf num .
the size and number of signal cables pulled to each traffic pole shall be as per the conduit schedule shown on the drawings .
num traffic signal poles each traffic signal and pedestrian head shall be separately wired to the base of the pole utilizing a num awg stranded signal cable and a num awg fixture bonding conductor .
all common connections shall be made accessible from the handhole at the base of the pole .
cable and wires from the mast arm hanger to cable entrances shall be bundled taped together .
where the contractor is required to drill and tap the steel poles for wire outlets rubber grommets shall be used to prevent abrasion to the signal cables .
if requested by the consultant the contractor shall drill additional cable entrances on the steel poles for future section num specification num traffic signals august num num signal head mounting locations .
the drilled holes shall be touched up with a cold galvanizing compound and plugged to minimize entrance of moisture .
num traffic cabinet field wiring shall be dressed and routed in corners of the cabinet to the various terminal boards or blocks secured by plastic locking cable ties lacing or preformed plastic spiral wrapping harness and fanned out neatly from the harness to each terminal .
individual leads shall be long enough to permit rerouting to different terminals at a later date should this be required or as specified on the drawings .
all conductors shall be stripped such that the amount of exposed conductor protruding from the terminal block does not exceed num mm .
num splices splices in both aerial and underground cable must be electrically sound and waterproof .
splices shall be located in pole handholes .
splices are not permitted in conduit runs or within signal fixtures or within a pole base if not readily accessible through a handhole .
no splices or joints of cable shall be drawn inside conduit .
num grounding num service ground the intersection service ground will be connected to the power supply cabinet and not to the traffic cabinet .
the service ground shall consist of a minimum three num mm diameter x num m long copperclad ground rods on a num awg bare copper ground conductor .
the three ground electrodes shall be spaced num m apart forming an equilateral triangle num m x num m x num m and located at least num m from either the traffic controller or the power supply cabinets .
the service ground shall be bonded to the neutral side of the main power disconnect breaker with one num awg conductor in a single circuit .
num fixture bond a num awg insulated bonding conductor shall be installed throughout all conduits containing live num ac conductors and shall connect all poles pole fixtures luminaries steel junction box lids and metal conduit to the grounded or neutral side of the ac power supply .
num lightning attenuation the contractor shall install a num mm diameter x num m long copperclad lightning electrode in the junction box adjacent to all main traffic poles i.e .
cantilever poles cantilever combination poles and signal bridges .
pedestal poles in most cases can be installed without lighting electrodes located immediately adjacent to them and connect the lightning electrode to the pole bonding stud with a num awg conductor .
num conduits and junction boxes num conduits refer to specification num underground electrical conduits for general requirements related to conduit installations .
additional requirements related to conduit work in a traffic signals project are provided herein .
section num specification num traffic signals august num num the contractor shall install the conduits in accordance with the size quantity location and installation method as specified on the conduit schedule and underground installations plan shown on the drawings .
if the installation method is not specified on the drawings approval from the consultant shall be obtained prior to conduit installation .
any deviation from the design on the drawings shall be preapproved by the consultant .
for traffic signal work all underground conduit that runs underneath a roadway surface shall typically be installed at a minimum depth of num m. where it is necessary for conduits to cross over other conduits a minimum separation of num mm shall be provided between the crossing conduits .
where it is necessary for conduits to cross over utilities a minimum separation of num mm shall be maintained .
where local authorities have different separation requirements from their underground utilities the more stringent i.e .
farther apart requirements will govern unless otherwise authorized by the consultant the owner or representative of the local authority .
where conduits are installed prior to placing roadbed granular materials the conduits shall be protected with a minimum cover of num mm of compacted materials .
all conduits shall be installed free from dents and bruises and as soon as installed shall have the ends plugged to prevent the entrance of dirt or moisture .
all conduits shall be thoroughly cleaned out before installation of conductors .
all unused conduits shall be capped .
multiple bends in opposing directions are not permitted .
conduit entrances into junction boxes designated for fibre optic cable installation shall be installed so that conduit designated for communication is capable of accommodating a minimum of num mm bend radius and a minimum of num mm clearance from the top of the cable bend to the top of the junction box .
the contractor shall demonstrate to the consultant the conditions of conduit connections by using an air compressor to blow a suitably sized styrofoam ball through the conduit system .
the contractor shall use a red pen to record the location alignment quantity size installed depth and installation method of all conduits on the drawings provided by the consultant .
any deviation from the drawings shall be clearly marked .
num junction boxes the contractor shall install junction boxes in accordance with the size and location as specified on the underground installations plan shown on the drawings .
any deviation from the design on the drawings shall be preapproved by the consultant .
field location of all junction boxes shall be approved by the consultant .
junction boxes shall be rested on a num mm layer of compacted gravel .
the cover of the junction boxes shall be level with the surrounding surface .
ground surface adjacent to a junction box should provide slope to direct surface runoff away from the junction box .
the contractor shall use a red pen to record the location quantity and size of all junction boxes on the drawings provided by the consultant .
any deviation from the drawings shall be clearly marked .
num backfilling conduits installed by trench excavation must be backfilled with a trench marker tape placed num mm below ground level or provide at least num mm separation above the installed conduit .
the consultant shall be notified prior to backfilling over any electrical conduits .
trenches shall not be excessively wet and shall not contain pools of water during backfilling .
section num specification num traffic signals august num num num foundations the locations of the traffic pole bases and cabinet bases shall be as shown on the drawings and will be subject to field confirmation by the consultant .
if obstructions or other existing conditions cause problems with the placement of the traffic pole bases or cabinet bases the consultant may direct that a different location be used .
any deviation from the design on the drawings must be preapproved by the consultant .
the contractor shall use a red pen to record the approved asbuilt location quantity and size of all pole bases on the drawings .
num precast cabinet base and pole base excavation required for the installation of the precast cabinet base and the precast pole bases shall be carried out in such a manner as to avoid any unnecessary damage to streets sidewalks landscaping and other improvements .
excavation shall not be performed until immediately before installation of the precast concrete bases .
at the end of each working period all excavations shall be barricaded or covered or both to provide safe passage for pedestrian and vehicular traffic .
the precast cabinet bases shall be installed with the top of the base mounted at num mm above the surrounding ground surface .
the controller cabinet base shall be placed on a minimum num mm layer of compacted granular material .
precast concrete pole bases shall rest directly and solidly on the bottom of the hole .
the top of the pole bases shall be up to num mm above the existing or new curb and sidewalk or up to num mm above finished grade where there is no curb or sidewalk except in sloped areas where they shall be up to num mm above finished grade or as shown on the drawings .
a num mm diameter hole shall be excavated either by auger or hydrovac for precast concrete pole bases for cantilever or cantilever combination poles .
a num mm diameter hole shall be excavated for precast pole bases for pedestal poles .
the contractor shall thoroughly compact the bottom of the hole .
unsuitable material at the bottom of the holes shall be replaced with granular material .
all surplus excavated materials shall be properly disposed of within num hours by the contractor .
excavated material from augering the foundation holes shall not be used for backfilling around a precasted concrete pole base .
lean mix concrete with a minimum num mpa num day compressive strength shall be used for backfilling .
alternatively cold mix asphalt can be used with compaction for backfilling .
allowable tolerances for precast concrete cabinet bases and pole bases are as follows tolerance limits cabinet bases horizontal location base centre num mm vertical location top of base num mm pole bases horizontal location pole base centre num mm vertical location top of pole base num mm anchor bolts horizontal location relative to centre of pole base num mm bolt circle diameter b.c.d .
num mm vertical location from top of pole base num mm section num specification num traffic signals august num num situations where more stringent tolerance limits are required will be indicated in the special provisions or on the drawings .
the more stringent tolerance limits shall be adhered to .
num castinplace pole base the contractor shall install casing for pole bases as per dimensions specified on the pole schedule shown on the drawings .
steel cage for the castinplace pole base shall be constructed in accordance with the reinforcement quantities lengths and dimensions shown on standard drawings tcsfnum num and num .
the anchor rods for the signal supports shall be physically bonded to the steel cage by either spot welds or reinforcements ties .
the anchor rod assembly shall be centred on the pole base .
the contractor shall use num mm concrete spacer blocks at the perimeter of the steel cage assembly and the sonar tube shall be erected to plumb .
if the sonar tube is not positioned to plumb it shall be extracted and the drill hole or hydrovac hole be enlarged so that the sonar tube can be positioned vertically .
the anchor rod shall be positioned so that the erected mast arm on the signal support shall be perpendicular to the approaching travel lanes unless otherwise specified on the drawings .
before the concrete is poured the steel cage and the sonar tube shall be ready and in position and the anchor rod assembly shall be secured to the steel cage and wrapped to protect the anchor bolt assembly from the concrete pour .
a num mm chamfer shall be provided by using preformed formwork around the inside ring of the sonar tube for the purpose of establishing the top level of the pole base provide a reference point for finishing the top of pole base and to form a num mm chamfer around the perimeter of the top of the finished pole base .
the length of anchor rod protruding from the top of the pole base shall be as shown on standard drawings tcsfnum num and num .
the concrete shall be placed in accordance with cannumanum .
use hot weather concrete protection procedures when air temperature is at or above numoc .
use cold weather concrete protection procedures when air temperature is at or below numoc .
concrete shall not be placed on frozen subgrade or subbase .
water shall not be added to the concrete after the concrete truck arrives at the work site .
obtain approval from the consultant before placing concrete .
steel cage for pole base shall be checked before concreting for cleanliness secure connection to anchor bolts and a minimum num mm cover between steel cage and the sonar tube casing or the drilled hole .
copies of the concrete tickets shall be submitted to the consultant after concreting as a record of the type of concrete used and the ambient conditions during concreting .
ensure pile casing and anchor bolts are not disturbed during concrete placement .
the allowable tolerances for the castinplace concrete pole bases are as follows tolerance limits pole bases horizontal location pole base centre num mm vertical location top of pole base num mm vertical plumb side of pole base num degrees anchor bolts horizontal location relative to centre of pole base num mm orientation of the anchor bolt num degrees vertical location from top of pole base num mm section num specification num traffic signals august num num the above tolerances shall be measured and checked by the consultant after the concrete is set and the concrete form tube casing is stripped from the pole base .
situations where more stringent tolerance limits are required will be indicated in the special provisions or on the drawings .
the more stringent tolerance limits shall be adhered to .
num galvanized steel helix pole base the allowable tolerances for the helix pole bases are as follows tolerance limits pole bases horizontal location pole base centre num mm vertical location top of pole base num mm anchor bolts horizontal location relative to centre of pole base num mm bolt circle diameter b.c.d .
num mm vertical location from top of pole base num mm situations where more stringent tolerance limits are required will be indicated in the special provisions or on the drawings .
the more stringent tolerance limits shall be adhered to .
num salvaged pole base precast pole base to be salvaged shall be cleaned by the contractor prior to delivery to the destination specified on the drawings or by the consultant .
num signal supports num refinishing poles any spots where the galvanizing of the signal poles is damaged due to drilling tapping reaming welding or surface damage during transportation and erection shall be refinished with an approved cold galvanizing compound .
the application of the cold galvanizing compound shall be in accordance with the following a the surface preparation and application of the compound shall be performed under the supervision or authorization of the consultant .
any unsupervised or unauthorized application shall be completely removed and redone under proper supervision at the contractors own expense .
b the surface shall be mechanically cleaned with a wire brush or grinder and chemically cleaned to remove all welding flux grease oil rust scale and other dirt .
c the surface shall be absolutely dry and the ambient temperature shall be over numoc .
d the cold galvanizing compound shall be thoroughly stirred before using until it has a completely uniform appearance .
no thinning agent shall be added unless the contractor is instructed to do so by the consultant .
e a single brush coat shall be applied .
this coat shall be as thick as possible without causing runs in the finished surface .
f the brush shall be dipped to the bottom of the can each time .
periodic stirring of the can during painting is required .
g complete drying time can be as long as num hours so the application shall be timed so that the treated surface is not subject to damage or abrasion to other work within num hours of the time of application .
section num specification num traffic signals august num num num signal sign poles the signal sign poles shall be plumbed by the contractor so that they are vertical when viewed from all directions .
the plumb will be checked by the consultant and the contractor shall make any adjustments which are necessary by installing leveling shims as required around the anchor bolts .
if requested by the consultant the contractor shall grout underneath the shimmed pole base plate with a flowable and expansive highstrength grout compound such as sika num designed for such purposes .
the contractor shall obtain approval from the consultant prior to using a selected grout compound .
the signal poles shall be oriented so that the mast arms are perpendicular to the approaching travel lanes unless otherwise specified on the drawings .
where practical the signal poles shall be positioned with the handhole in the back of the pole or if not possible on the downstream traffic side of the pole .
flange connections between all signal pole pieces shall be secured by means of bolts washers and double nuts on each bolt in accordance with the torque recommended on the support structure shop drawings .
num pole mounted traffic control fixtures the contractor shall install traffic signal heads and other traffic control fixtures including signs microwave detectors and pushbuttons on the signal support in accordance with the pole schedule shown on the drawings .
the contractor shall be required to drill and tap the steel poles as required .
all drill holes shall be further protected by a rubber grommet .
standard mounting height and location of the pole mounted traffic signals pedestrian signals and pushbuttons shall be in accordance with standard drawing tcsfnum .
standard mounting hardware arrangement for traffic and pedestrian signals on pedestal poles shall be in accordance with standard drawing tcsfnum .
standard mounting hardware arrangement for traffic and pedestrian signals on the side of the signal pole such as secondary heads shall be in accordance with standard drawing tcsf num .
standard mounting hardware arrangement for traffic signals either horizontally or vertically on the mast arm of a cantilever or combination pole shall be in accordance with standard drawing tcsfnum .
a minimum vertical clearance of num m shall be provided between the bottom of the fixtures on the mast arm and the final pavement surface .
this vertical clearance requirement is also applicable to large overhead signs such as special crosswalk sign and advance warning signal sign .
the location and position of all pole mounted fixtures including traffic signal heads and pedestrian signal heads pushbuttons signs and microwave detectors shall be checked with the consultant in the field prior to final mounting .
all conductors from mast hangers to cable entrances shall be taped together .
the contractor shall completely covered the signal heads pedestrian signal heads pushbuttons and all signs that provide conflicting messages to the current traffic operating arrangements from the time they are installed until the system is turned on for full operation .
installation of microwave detectors shall include aiming and positioning of the detector to provide the desirable detection zone as shown on the drawings or designated by the consultant .
section num specification num traffic signals august num num the following items shall be inspected by the consultant after all traffic control fixtures are mounted and secured on the support structures position and quantity of overhead signs signal heads and other traffic control fixtures shall be checked for compliance with the above ground installation plan and pole schedule shown on the drawings .
alignment of signal head and overhead signs to travel lane shall be checked with reference to the above ground installation plan shown on the drawings .
type and detailed configuration of signal head mounting hardware shall be checked for compliance with the above ground installation plan and pole schedule shown on the drawings and standard drawings tcsfnum num num num and num .
alignment of pedestrian signal heads shall be checked for visibility from pushbutton location across the street .
mark on traffic signal head lens covers shall be checked for signal lenses alignment .
type of light bulb used shall be checked for compliance with section num .
vertical clearance for traffic control fixtures mounted on the mast arm shall be checked if the num m minimum value is provided .
all exposed cables shall be checked for presence of jacket insulation all unused signal cable wires shall be checked to ensure that they are taped off or grounded .
num traffic signal controller unit and cabinet num controller timing programming the contractor is responsible for programming the controller verifying properexpected operation through testing and final turnon verification of the provided timings .
the consultant shall supply the contractor the signal timing plans in a generic format for the traffic controller .
the timings shall be provided to the contractor a minimum of num weeks prior to the expected traffic signal startup date so that the contractor can arrange for proper bench testing of the controller cabinet .
num bench testing cabinets shall be prewired at the contractors shop to simulate all field operations in accordance with the traffic signal design shown on the drawings .
the cabinet shall be configured to operate in accordance with the designs provided including timing phasing and any additional control logic .
when full compliance with the designs has been confirmed the cabinet shall be bench tested for a period of num hours to verify proper operation .
all timing plans and timeofday plans shall be tested .
prior to and after all bench testing a full mmu test shall be performed .
at the end of the bench testing process the contractor shall arrange for an inspection by the consultant .
the contractor shall demonstrate to the consultant during this inspection that the controller cabinet is wired and operating in accordance with the design illustrated on the drawings using the preliminary traffic signal timings provided by the consultant .
the following reports shall be submitted to the consultant at the time of the inspection at the contractors shop a printed report of the conflict monitor test results bench test and flash test reports a copy of the controller cabinet wiring drawing section num specification num traffic signals august num num num delivery to the field the contractor shall be fully responsible for all costs associated with the delivery of the controller cabinet and associated control equipment to the site .
all equipment shall be delivered to the site free from any scratches or dents .
equipment will be rejected if noted that it has signs of any damage at time of construction completion inspection .
num field wiring field wiring shall be terminated as shown on the cabinet wiring drawing and shall be dressed and routed in corners of the cabinet to the various terminal boards or blocks secured by lacing cable ties or preformed plastic spiral wrapping harness and fanned out neatly from the harness to each terminal .
individual leads shall be long enough to permit rerouting to different terminals at a later date should this be required or specified on the drawings .
wires and cables entering the traffic cabinet shall be labeled with tags of a permanent nature .
labeling shall identify the purpose of the cable i.e .
pole ats for traffic signal cable to pole a .
refer to subsection num wire cable and grounding bonding for cable labeling requirements .
colour coding of the traffic signal cable and conductors shall be in accordance with the requirements outlined in subsection num wire cable and grounding bonding .
the load switches and detector racks shall be labeled with a thick black permanent marker the corresponding signal phasing the component is serving .
any field modification to the wiring of the cabinet must be documented by marking up the controller cabinet wiring diagram .
a copy of the markedup drawing shall be submitted to the consultant for records as part of the record drawing package .
the following items will be tested by the consultant as part of the construction completion inspection of the controller cabinet installation check for number of conduits entering the cabinet check ground connection check signal timing values check signal phasing and detector phasing are in accordance with the phasing diagram and above ground installations plan shown on the drawings and in accordance with the wiring diagram accompanying the controller cabinet .
cleanliness labeling of cables and auxiliary components in the controller cabinet such as load switches and detector amplifiers .
num cabinet sealing the bottom of the controller cabinet contact with the concrete pedestal shall be sealed with a silicon base compound to prevent infiltration of dust and moisture .
num detector loops the contractor is responsible for roadway cutting and patching for detector loop installation at locations indicated on the underground installation plan shown on the drawings .
num wire loop assembly diamond detector loops shall be installed in accordance with the dimensions and methods section num specification num traffic signals august num num shown on standard drawing tcsfnum .
rectangular detector loops shall be installed in accordance with the dimensions and methods shown on standard drawing tcsfnum .
quad detector loops shall be installed in accordance with the dimensions and methods shown on standard drawing tcsfnum .
for total leadin length more than num m the number of windings should be increased by one .
when multiple loops are used they shall be connected in series for maximum efficiency and greater reliability .
conductor feeder pairs from loop to junction box shall be taped together every num m and twisted to provide a minimum of num turns per metre .
adjacent loops serving a similar purpose shall be wired to provide current flow in the same direction all clockwise or counterclockwise .
adjacent loops serving separate traffic phases shall be wired to provide current flow in different directions one clockwise and once counter clockwise .
num pavement slot cutting the locations of the detector loops shall be marked on the pavement as shown on the drawings .
to minimize crosstalking between detector loops the home runs of the detector conductor towards the roadside shall be located a minimum of num mm apart .
at roadside where the home run enters the loop conduit connecting to the junction box a minimum of num mm separation should be provided between home run slots .
maintain minimum num mm separation between loop conduits .
the depth of the saw cut and the saw cut width shall meet the requirements shown on standard drawings tcsfnum num and num .
saw cuts shall be straight and be overlapped at corners to ensure that the full depth is cut .
diagonal saw cut of num degrees shall be used in all num degree corners of the detector loop .
num loop installation remove all jagged edges and protrusions along the slot .
the saw cut slots shall be cleaned by flushing with water and dried by blowing with oil free compressed air .
place a small amount num to num mm of loop sealant as a base .
carefully lay loop wire in the slot avoiding any kinking or stretching of the insulation and seat each turn using a blunt tool such as a wooden paint stirrer but not a screwdriver or other such sharp object .
hold wire in place minimum num mm below the surface of the roadway with a backer rod .
push backer rod tight against conductors .
one continuous unbroken length of wire shall be used to form a loop of the number of windings required from the loop to the junction box in accordance with standard drawings tcsfnum num and num .
conduit connection at the roadside shall be installed in accordance with standard drawings tcsfnum and num .
seal both ends of the flexible conduit with electrical cable sealant compound to prevent water from entering the conduit .
section num specification num traffic signals august num num num sealing of pavement slot cuts install detector loops and seal pavement slot cuts in the same day .
immediately prior to the application of loop sealant saw cut slots must be thoroughly blown dried by using a high pressure air compressor .
apply sealant in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
apply the sealant in multiple minimum num passes to prevent loop wire insulation damage and allowed to set prior to allowing vehicles to cross the loop .
ensure that sealant completely surrounds detector loops and all hold down materials .
air bubbles which will leave voids must be removed and excess material smoothed out .
ensure that the slot is completely filled with sealant to num mm below the surface of the pavement .
any excess sealant or spillage shall be removed .
the sealant shall be covered with dry cement powder or fine sand .
num splice between loop conductor and leadin cable splices into the leadin cable at the junction box shall be twisted soldered and sealed using heat shrink connectors in accordance with standard drawing tcsfnum .
all pair splices shall be sealed separately .
coil num m of the leadin cable in the junction box .
no other splices to the leadin cable will be permitted .
the splicing arrangement shall be completed in accordance with the detector schedule shown on the drawings .
leadin cable run back to the controller cabinet shall be installed in accordance with the conduit schedule shown on the drawings .
leadin cable shall be grounded at the controller cabinet only .
at the twisted feeder cable end the ground wire of the leadin cable shall be cut off flush and not connected to the ground .
num identification shielded cables shall be identified by labeling mechanically using identification tags by loop numbers and signal phases .
labeling shall be carried out using indelible marking pen .
label the shielded cables at the junction box and at the controller cabinet .
num tests all splices shall be carefully made to ensure constant low resistance and be insulated in such a manner that under the prevailing environmental conditions the installation maintains resistance to ground of not less than num megohms .
to ensure that the loop installation is correct a continuity check on the loop wiring and a resistance check on the loop to ground using a megger or other suitable insulation tester shall be performed .
all tests shall be performed by the contractor in the presence of the consultant .
the contractor shall arrange for a field inspection by the consultant .
a minimum of two num business day notice is required to arrange for the inspection .
replace any loop or leadin cable that fails the tests .
repeat test after completion of detector loop installation .
num power supply cabinet num power supply cabinet the power supply cabinet shall be pole mounted or concrete base mounted as shown on the drawings .
when mounted on a pole the power supply cabinet shall be mounted securely using stainless steel straps .
rigid pvc conduit and fittings shall be installed on the pole using pvc conduit straps and galvanized lag screws at num m maximum centers .
when mounted on a section num specification num traffic signals august num num concrete base the bottom of the power supply cabinet that is in contact with the concrete base shall be sealed with proper weatherproof compound to prevent infiltration of dust and moisture .
the power supply cabinet shall be installed at least num m away from the traffic controller cabinet .
num grounding and bonding num service ground when a power supply cabinet is shown on the drawings the intersection service ground will be connected to the power supply cabinet and shall consist of a minimum three num mm diameter x num m long copperclad ground electrodes spaced num m apart on a num awg bare copper ground conductor and arranged in a equilateral triangle formation .
the service ground shall be bonded to the neutral side of the main power disconnect breaker with one continuous num awg conductor .
the intersection service ground electrodes shall be installed at a minimum of num m from both the traffic control cabinet and the power supply cabinet .
num bonding a num awg green bonding conductor shall be installed from the power supply service cabinet to the traffic control cabinet and to each traffic signal pole and street light pole supplied by the power supply service cabinet .
where bonding conductors are spliced in a junction box a copper split bolt connector shall be used to join the associated conductors together .
from each pole fixture a bonding conductor shall be installed to the bonding stud at the base of each pole .
lightning electrodes shall be connected to the bonding stud at the base of each pole .
num signals completion a signals completion inspection is required to demonstrate and determine that all parts of the traffic signal system function as per design prior to the signal actually being turned on for public traffic .
when the contractor has finished all necessary wiring obtained approval from the electrical inspection authority entered into the traffic controller the traffic signal timings provided by the consultant and is confident that the signal system will operate satisfactorily he shall inform the consultant and request for a signals completion inspection of the signal system .
the contractor shall submit a set of asbuilt drawings to the consultant as part of the signals completion inspection .
the asbuilt drawings shall indicate in red the location and accurate alignments of all junction boxes conduits poles detector loops and other equipment or fixtures installed as well as all changes additions deletions or any other modifications made to the original design .
a minimum of two num business days notice is required for scheduling the inspection .
in preparing for signals completion inspection the contractor shall carry his own inspection to verify that all materials and equipment are in place and secure and the traffic signal equipment and detectors are functioning .
the results of such tests shall conform to the requirements of the canadian electrical code and shall be to the satisfaction of the electrical inspection authority and the consultant .
section num specification num traffic signals august num num a if the consultant decides that the results of the signals completion inspection are unsatisfactory a subsequent signals completion inspection shall be arranged .
the signal heads shall be either bagged or turned down if the traffic signal is not ready to go into a flashing mode .
b if the test results are satisfactory to the consultant the signal system will be left in a flashing mode .
a date for signalturnon usually num to num days later will be selected jointly by the consultant and the owner for switching the traffic signal from a flashing mode to a fully operational mode .
the consultant may identify a list of deficiencies which must be rectified by the contractor prior to the signalturnon date .
c during both signals completion inspection and signalturnon the contractor shall ensure that a qualified representative of the company familiar with the equipment installed is on site until it has been demonstrated that all equipment functions as intended on the drawings and in the specifications and to the satisfaction of the consultant .
a signals completion certificate will be issued to the contractor if the traffic signal system has been operating satisfactorily for a prespecified burnin period after signalturnon .
for traffic signal installations located near an urban centre or is close to a local alberta transportation maintenance contract inspector mci office a numday burnin period is required .
for traffic signal installations located outside an urban centre or more than num km from a local alberta transportation mci office a numday burnin period is required .
num warranty notwithstanding general specification num construction completion and acceptance the warranty period will commence on the day following the successful completion of the burnin period or upon issuance of the construction completion certificate whichever date is later .
num measurement and payment payment for a complete and operating traffic control system and all the work described herein will be made at the lump sum price bid per intersection for traffic signal system supply and install .
the lump sum price will be considered full compensation for all labour materials equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
payment for supply and installation of underground conduit will be made in accordance with specification num underground electrical conduit .
all costs associated with signalturnon and the burnin period will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
section num specification num subgrade preparation august num table of contents num subgrade preparationnum num general num num descriptionnum num test methods num num constructionnum num subgrade excavationnum num granular fill num num preparing subgrade surface num num preparing subgrade surface on combined grading and surfacing projectsnum num measurement and paymentnum num subgrade excavationnum num granular fill num num preparing subgrade surface num num preparing subgrade surface on combined grading and surfacing projectsnum section num specification num subgrade preparation august num num num subgrade preparation num general num description subgrade shall be considered as the soil surface on which a subsequent layer or layers of base course gravel surfacing surface treatment pavement or other material is to be placed .
prior to the deposition of any material on the subgrade the subgrade shall be prepared to the satisfaction of the consultant in accordance with the provisions hereinafter specified .
num test methods unless otherwise specified the test methods used shall be the same as specified in subsection num test methods of specification num grading .
num construction num subgrade excavation subgrade soil or previously existing failed surfacing materials designated as undesirable by the consultant shall be excavated removed and disposed .
existing topsoil that may be disturbed by the excavation work shall be stripped and stockpiled prior to the subgrade excavation work .
all disturbed areas shall be covered with the stockpiled topsoil in accordance with specification num topsoil placement and seeded in accordance with specification num seeding .
the contractor shall assume ownership of all excavated material and dispose of the material in a manner acceptable to the consultant .
num granular fill where designated by the consultant the contractor shall place and compact granular fill on the prepared subgrade .
this work shall be carried out in accordance with the requirements of specification num granular fill and in general accordance with subsection num preparation of exisitng surface of specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps .
num preparing subgrade surface unless otherwise specified the subgrade shall be scarified to a depth of num mm .
the loosened material shall be windrowed to the side and the exposed surface shall be thoroughly compacted .
the windrowed material shall then be uniformly mixed shaped to conform to the dimensions lines grades and crosssection established by the consultant and compacted to obtain an average of num and with no test results being less than num of the maximum dry density at optimum moisture content established by the moisturedensity relation tests using standard compaction .
approved material shall be added or removed to restore true grade and crosssection as directed by the consultant .
when material varies from optimum moisture content it shall be treated in the following manner .
when a deficiency in moisture content exists the material shall be watered and thoroughly mixed until optimum moisture content is attained .
when an excess in moisture content exists section num specification num subgrade preparation august num num the material shall be worked and aerated until optimum moisture content is attained .
the use of lime or any other additive to assist in drying of material shall be at the contractors discretion .
however the maximum allowable percentage of lime or other additive per mass of dry soil shall be as shown in the special provisions or as determined by the consultant .
when working with soils that have moderate or greater swelling potential as determined by the consultant the moisture content for compaction shall be within a range of optimum to num above optimum or as designated by the consultant .
high plastic clay soils are considered to have moderate to very high swelling potential unless proven otherwise .
when working with predominately silt materials as determined by the consultant the moisture content shall be within a range of num below optimum to optimum .
any large rocks encountered during the subgrade preparation process which constitute a hazard to traffic due to size or protrusion from the finished subgrade shall be removed and disposed of as directed by the consultant .
the finished subgrade surface shall be firm and uniform true to grade and crosssection and shall be approved by the consultant before placing subsequent material thereon .
subgrade that does not conform to the requirements as to grade crosssection moisture content or density shall be reworked until such requirements are met .
where required the subgrade shall be prepared to a depth exceeding num mm on sections of the roadway as designated by the consultant .
when such work has been ordered it shall be carried out in layers each of which do not exceed num mm in depth and requirements for density and optimum moisture as specified above shall apply for each layer .
subgrade ramps of whatever nature at approaches to railway crossings bridge structures or adjacent to fixed obstructions shall be removed to the lines and grades as directed by the consultant .
when the surplus material has been removed the subgrade shall then be prepared in accordance with these specifications .
the contractor shall at his own expense repair any damages to a prepared subgrade surface as well as repair damages done to culverts by his equipment and shall remove any obstructions he may have placed which will interfere with the normal function of a drainage system .
num preparing subgrade surface on combined grading and surfacing projects where the contract specifies grading and subsequent base course andor paving work on the same project area subgrade preparation shall be performed as required between the separate phases as determined and directed by the consultant .
subgrade preparation work when so ordered by the consultant shall be performed according to the specified requirements of subsection num preparing subgrade surface .
subgrade preparation bid units included in the tender for combined projects shall not relieve the contractor of completing the initial grading construction totally to the specified profile cross section moisture content and compaction standards .
section num specification num subgrade preparation august num num num measurement and payment num subgrade excavation subgrade excavation will be measured in cubic metres based on the actual number of cubic metres excavated as measured in its original position to the nearest cubic metre .
payment will be made at the unit price bid for subgrade excavation and will be full compensation for excavating hauling and disposing of the material including all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
removal of ramps at approaches to railway crossings bridges andor adjacent to other fixed obstructions will be classified and paid for as subgrade excavation .
where required to carry out subgrade excavation topsoil excavation topsoil placement and seeding will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
payment for backfilling failed areas with gravel fill and asphalt concrete pavement will be made in accordance with the applicable specifications for the materials specified .
num granular fill granular fill placed were required will be paid for in accordance with the provisions of specification num granular fill .
num preparing subgrade surface subgrade surface preparation will be measured by the square metre for the top surface area and the top surface area of successive layers of num mm in depth prepared in accordance with the requirements of these specifications payment will be made at the unit price or prices bid for preparing subgrade surface for each applicable layer and will be full compensation for scarifying the subgrade blading mixing watering or drying shaping and compacting the material and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
when the consultant directs the contractor to prepare subgrade surface for a layer or successive layers of num mm depth below the layer or layers specified in the contract preparation of such layers will be paid for at the unit price bid for preparing subgrade surface of the nearest preceeding layer .
when the contractor elects to use lime for drying wet materials the costs of mixing storage if required transportation within the project limits loading unloading and spreading will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
the contractor shall order and pay for the purchase and transportation of the pulverized quicklime directly from the supplier and shall provide the suppliers invoices to the consultant within num hours of the delivery .
the department will reimburse the contractor for num of the approved invoice cost f.o.b .
the jobsite .
section num specification num subgrade preparation august num num num preparing subgrade surface on combined grading and surfacing projects on combined projects the contractor shall complete the grading construction to required profile crosssection moisture content and compaction standards in accordance with specification num grading .
payment for this work will be made in accordance with specification num grading .
on areas where the grading has been approved as acceptable and in the opinion of the consultant the condition of the subgrade has subsequently deteriorated the consultant may direct that additional subgrade preparation work be carried out prior to the application of base or surfacing materials .
payment for this work will be made at the unit price or prices bid for preparing subgrade surface for each applicable layer .
payment will only be made for areas and layers designated by the consultant for additional subgrade preparation .
all costs associated with minor leveling removing ruts andor blading of the subgrade surface required between the time of grading and the base or surfacing work will be considered incidental and no separate or additional payment will be made .
section num specification num aggregate production and stockpiling august num table of contents num aggregate production and stockpilingnum num generalnum num materialsnum num productionnum num general num num quality control num num stockpilingnum num aggregate production num num interim payment for producing hauling and stockpiling crushed aggregates num num surplus crushed aggregatesnum num measurement and paymentnum num general num num interim crushing hauling and stockpilingnum num surplus crushed aggregatesnum section num specification num aggregate production and stockpiling august num num num aggregate production and stockpiling num general this specification covers the general requirements for production gradation stockpiling and pit operations for specified aggregate materials .
num materials the contractor shall supply aggregate materials in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate .
num production num general aggregate produced from all sources shall comply fully with the specifications and the contractor shall recognize and satisfy himself as to the type and amount of work that may be necessary to produce the material required .
the aggregate shall meet the specified requirements as shown on table num for the material specified .
the contractor shall adjust and modify aggregates as required in order to meet specification requirements .
the crushed aggregate shall be composed of sound hard and durable particles of sand gravel and rock and shall be free from elongated particles injurious quantities of flaky particles soft shales organic matter clay lumps and other foreign matter .
all material up to and including num mm diameter in designated sources and department sources identified in the contract shall be crushed .
when producing designation num class num cement stabilized base course aggregate in the event that clay lumps are encountered the maximum allowable size of material shall be num mm .
acceptance of processed aggregates shall take place when they are in their final position and have met all the requirements of the contract .
the consultant may test at any time and reject material that does not meet specifications .
final position for a crushing and stockpiling bid item will be the stockpile .
for designation num aggregates used for wearing surfaces top lift the contractor shall produce aggregates such that material retained on the num num micron sieve shall not contain more than num detrimental matter based on the total mass of the combined aggregates in the final product .
prior to the production of any aggregate for use as a wearing surface the contractor shall submit a proposal to the consultant detailing the action to be taken in the event the specification requirement for detrimental matter can not be achieved .
production of aggregates for use as a wearing surface shall not proceed until such an action plan has been approved by the consultant .
table num specifications for aggregate august num num designation num num num num num num num num num class mm num num num num numnnum num num num numaw numbw numc num num num num numa numb num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num percent passing metric sieve cgsb num gpnumm fm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num fracture by weight num faces all num see note nnum num num num num num num num face num num num face num num num num num na na na na na na na plasticity index pi np np np np np npnum npnum npnum na na npnum npnum npnum npnum npnum npnum npnum npnum npnum npnum npnum np l.a. abrasion loss percent max .
num num num num num num num num num num num num na na na na na na na na na num flakiness index na max num na coefficient of uniformity cu na num na designations notes designation num asphalt concrete pavement designation num base course aggregate nnum .
according to specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps or num asphalt concrete pavement superpave and mix type specified .
designation num seal coat aggregate nnum .
designation num class num material is for asbc designation num gravel surfacing aggregate designation num sanding material designation num gravel fill nnum .
for crushed aggregates other than all designation num and designation num materials a tolerance of three percent in the amount passing the maximum size sieve will be permitted provided all oversize material passes the next larger standard sieve size .
designation num cement stabilized base course aggregate nnum .
designation num granular filter aggregate designation num slurry seal aggregate unless otherwise specified pitrun aggregate will be defined as unprocessed granular material with no specified gradation requirement that is extracted from an aggregate deposit section num specification num aggregate production and stockpiling august num num num quality control num general in all sources quality control testing is the responsibility of the contractor .
tests performed by the consultant will not be considered to be quality control tests .
the contractor shall use professional engineering services and a qualified testing laboratory licensed to practice in the province of alberta to assess and where necessary modify the aggregate materials being produced to ensure their end use meets all specification requirements .
num test methods the terms att and tlt refer to alberta transportation test methods .
unless otherwise specified the latest edition of the test methods shown in table numa will be used to determine material characteristics .
table numa test methods used to determine material characteristics tests standard sampling gravel and sand attnum sieve analysis attnum or num sieve analysis num num fm minus part ii pitrun contamination num num fm sieve analysis attnum part ii determining the liquid limit of soils aashto t num dry strength nonplastic aggregates attnum determining the plastic limit and plasticity index of soils aashto t num percent fracture attnum classification of soils for engineering purposes for definition of coefficient of uniformity cu astm dnum l.a. abrasion aashto t num flakiness index attnum detrimental matter in coarse aggregate tltnum note in all test methods used as reference in this specification metric sieves as specified in canadian general standards board specification numgpnumm shall be substituted for any other specified wire cloth sieves in accordance with table num b .
section num specification num aggregate production and stockpiling august num num table numb sieves in accordance with aashto designation m num astm designation e num metric sieves in accordance with cgsb spec .
numgpnumm u.s. standard series opening and designation num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm num num num mm num num num mm num num num mm num num num mm num num num mm num num num mm num num num quality control testing the contractor shall provide and maintain equipment and qualified personnel to perform all field testing necessary to determine and monitor the characteristics of the materials produced and incorporated into the work .
the contractor shall provide safe and convenient means for accurately and representatively sampling each aggregate stream being produced during all screening splitting and crushing processes .
the minimum frequencies of quality control testing are described in table numc of this specification .
copies of all quality control tests shall be submitted to the consultant within one working day of the completion of each test .
section num specification num aggregate production and stockpiling august num num table numc quality control testing of aggregates tests standard minimum frequency sieve analysis crushed aggregate des .
num and num minimum frequency not specified num des .
num class num num num and num and num attnum or attnum one per num tonnes production num determining pitrun contamination of des .
num coarse fraction of mix types hnum hnum and extra manufactured fines aggregates .
attnum part ii one per num hours of plant production .
num blend sand attnum minimum frequency not specified num extra manufactured fines attnum minimum frequency not specified num chips des .
num class numaw numbw attnum one per num hours of wash plant production uncrushed fine fractions contractor supply of aggregate attnum minimum frequency not specified num department controlled source attnum one for first num num tonnes plus one for each additional num num tonnes .
dry strength attnum des .
numone per num num tonnes plasticity index aashto t num des .
numminimum frequency not specified des .
numone per source and one per num num tonnes when attnum indicates a nonplastic high result .
other des.when requested by the consultant percent fracture attnum one per num num tonnes .
l.a. abrasion aashto t num when requested by the consultant flakiness index des .
num class numaw numbw attnum one per source detrimental matter in coarse aggregate tltnum minimum of one for first num num tonnes .
num paving aggregates coarse fraction num fm material the consultant may require an increase in the frequency of any quality control test which has a specified minimum frequency .
the contractor shall arrange and pay for any additional tests required by the consultant .
num additional tests at rate of one per num num tonnes if first test indicates deleterious material is num .
reported on line e of form mat num num quality assurance testing the consultant may inspect the aggregate production process and test and monitor the quality of the material being produced by the contractor at any time and as often as he deems necessary .
such inspection or testing shall not in any way relieve the contractor of the responsibility for producing aggregates that meet the specifications in all respects .
the consultant is under no obligation to provide the contractor with test results .
section num specification num aggregate production and stockpiling august num num num aggregate quality testing by the consultant to verify aggregate quality will be undertaken on the following sources i .
any unproven source in which there is no history as being used on a department project or ii any source for which the consultant has concerns about the aggregate quality or iii .
as identified in the special provisions .
the contractor is to assist the consultant in obtaining representative samples .
aggregate sampled for quality assurance testing shall be obtained from the stockpile containing crushed aggregate or the coarse fraction for designation num applications .
a minimum sample size of num kg shall be obtained according to the procedures outlined in attnum except that a frontend loader may be used in place of a back hoe for sampling the stockpile .
sampling should occur shortly after num num t have been stockpiled or at a time mutually agreed upon between the contractor and consultant .
the consultant is to be present during sampling .
the consultant will split the sample into three samples of approximately equal weight .
one sample will be given to the contractor one will be tested by the consultant and the third will be retained by the consultant for potential appeal testing .
all quality assurance and appeal testing for aggregate quality will be completed by firms that are prequalified by the department in the category of mix design services marshall .
quality assurance testing to verify aggregate quality will include some or all of the following tests sieve analysis detrimental matter in coarse aggregate coarse fraction num m material and l.a. abrasion .
the results of this testing will be used by the consultant to verify specification compliance for the requirements of l.a abrasion andor detrimental matter .
aggregate that does not meet specification requirements shall not be incorporated into the work .
if the consultants test results for detrimental matter content exceeds num the contractor will not be allowed to use this material for top lift production unless the proportion of coarse fraction used in the asphalt mix results in a detrimental matter content of num or less based upon the total mass of the combined aggregates .
num appeal testing for aggregate quality the contractor may appeal the results of the verification testing for aggregate quality if the test value indicates the aggregate material is not acceptable to be incorporated into the work at the anticipated aggregate proportions to be used .
the contractor shall serve notice of appeal to the consultant in writing within num hours of receipt of the test results .
the department will arrange and pay for an independent testing laboratory to perform the appeal testing .
the consultant will arrange to have the remaining split of aggregate material delivered to the appeal laboratory .
the reported appeal value will be combined with the original verification value and averaged .
the mean value will be used to determine whether the aggregate material is suitable to be incorporated into the work .
if the new mean value indicates that the aggregate material is acceptable then appeal testing costs will be the responsibility of the department .
if the new mean value indicates that the aggregate material is not acceptable then the contractor will be invoiced by the department for the testing costs at the following rates section num specification num aggregate production and stockpiling august num num l.a. abrasion num per appeal detrimental matter content num per appeal .
num stockpiling when aggregate stockpiles are specified or used as part of construction operations the following shall apply i .
when stockpiling is specified in the contract the stockpile sites shall be located as shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
ii .
if in order to expedite his construction operation the contractor constructs temporary stockpiles at sites of his own choosing he shall arrange for such sites and be responsible for them in all respects including all costs for clearing removal and salvage of overburden and other site preparation and reclamation .
the contractor shall also obtain approvals and clearances from alberta environmental protection and the archaeological survey of alberta for these sites prior to commencement of the work .
iii .
stockpiles shall not be constructed at locations or by methods that will interfere with or damage any utilities such as power lines telephone lines pipelines and underground utilities .
iv .
sites shall be cleared to the required dimensions .
topsoil and subsoil shall be separately excavated to the full depth or num mm whichever is greater and stockpiled separately .
stockpile sites shall be shaped to a uniform smooth surface and graded to ensure positive drainage .
v. stockpiles shall be constructed by first distributing material uniformly over the entire base and building upwards in successive layers not exceeding a thickness of num m. vi .
construction operations shall be controlled to prevent segregation of the various particle sizes .
vii .
crushed aggregate or gravel fill shall not be pushed or dumped over the edges or down the faces of stockpiles .
viii .
for blend sand newly processed material shall be blended into the stockpile .
ix .
completed stockpiles shall be neat and regular in form and shall be constructed to occupy the smallest feasible area taking into consideration the bearing capacity of the foundation soils and the requirements of the occupational health and safety act .
x .
if different types of material are to be stockpiled the piles shall be located and constructed so that no intermixing of material will occur .
num aggregate production num general the contractor shall produce aggregates conforming to the specifications for the designations and classes called for in the contract .
prior to any aggregate production the contractor shall submit a written proposal to the consultant detailing aggregate processing procedures intended to be used .
these proposed section num specification num aggregate production and stockpiling august num num procedures will require the approval of the consultant .
aggregates produced prior to this approval will not be accepted .
the contractor shall notify the consultant a minimum of two days in advance of the start of aggregate production to allow the visual inspection of the process and testing of the production as deemed necessary by the consultant .
any recombining of aggregates or addition of blend materials shall be performed so that a uniform mix of the various sizes is achieved .
unless otherwise specified the contractor shall ensure that manufactured fines are retained in the crushed aggregate stockpile .
there will be no separate payment made for any additional work associated with the contractors proposal in achieving the specification requirements for detrimental matter and all related costs shall be included in the unit price bid for asphalt concrete pavement for the class of material used .
num production of designation num aggregates the contractor shall split aggregates for designation num material into coarse and fine fractions prior to crushing of the coarse fraction .
the crushed coarse and the fine fractions shall be stockpiled separately .
the contractor shall select a screen size at which splitting will take place .
splitting of aggregates shall be controlled such that the coarse aggregate fraction before crushing shall contain no more than num passing the num sieve for all mix types .
in department sources all uncrushed fine fractions shall contain no more than num of material retained on the num sieve size .
further splitting of the crushed coarse aggregate into separate stockpiles may be performed at the contractors option .
no additional payment will be made for this work .
num production and addition of blend sand when the aggregate being produced is destined for further processing through a mixing plant the addition of any required blend sand shall take place at the mixing plant .
prior to the mix production blend sand shall be separately stockpiled so that a representative sample can be obtained in order to establish a mix design .
all blend sand shall be screened before being incorporated into the mix to remove clay lumps roots and other deleterious materials .
all blend sand so screened shall pass the num num sieve .
blend sand shall be dried if necessary to ensure a uniform feed .
all other aggregates requiring an addition of blend sand to meet the gradation requirements shall be adjusted at the crushing stage by means of a separate conveyor or other approved device capable of metering the blend sand at a specified uniform rate .
the blend sand shall be added prior to or onto the crusher screen deck .
section num specification num aggregate production and stockpiling august num num num production of extra manufactured fines manufactured fines are defined as that portion of the material passing the num num sieve size which is produced by the crushing process .
in the event the manufactured fines in the total combined aggregate do not meet the requirement for the specified asphalt concrete mix type extra manufactured fines shall be produced by screening the pitrun material so that the screened material contains no more than num material passing a num num sieve .
this material shall be crushed and all material produced by this crushing process shall be placed in a separate stockpile and designated as extra manufactured fines .
num interim payment for producing hauling and stockpiling crushed aggregates num general interim payments for producing hauling and stockpiling certain designations and classes of crushed aggregates will be made under the following conditions i the contractor submits a written request for interim payment to the consultant .
ii the producing and stockpiling has been completed in accordance with the specifications .
iii there are no separate payments specified for crushing and stockpiling aggregates .
iv the contractor provides the consultant with written consent of surety to the interim payment or with security in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of the total interim payment .
interim payment will not imply acceptance of the crushed aggregate by the consultant .
interim payment will not be made for reject or surplus material .
num surplus crushed aggregates num definitions for the purposes of this specification only the following definitions will apply num surplus crushed aggregates aggregates which have been produced from designated sources or department sources identified in the contract for use on this contract and which remain in stockpile after completion of the work .
these aggregates are the property of the department .
num quantity placed the quantity of any particular material incorporated into the work and accepted by the consultant .
num tender quantity the quantity shown in the unit price schedule for the particular material .
section num specification num aggregate production and stockpiling august num num num modified tender quantity for any particular material the modified tender quantity will be either i the greater of a the tender quantity or b the increased amount of material to be crushed as ordered by the consultant or c the quantity placed or ii in the case where the consultant orders a reduction in the quantity to be placed before the crushing of the material in question was completed the modified tender quantity will be the greater of a the reduced quantity as ordered or b the quantity placed .
num measurement and payment num general in all sources the production of aggregates including the processing hauling and addition of blend sand the production and addition of extra manufactured fines and any other aggregate gradation adjustments and modifications will not be paid for separately .
the cost of this work will be considered included in the unit price of the contract item for which the aggregates are being produced .
payment for the supply of aggregate materials incorporated into the work will be made in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate .
if the contract specifies only crushing and stockpiling aggregates or stockpiling of pitrun aggregates then measurement will be made in tonnes or cubic metres measured in the vehicle .
payment will be made at the applicable unit price bid for the quantity produced .
the cost of erecting and removal of temporary fences associated with sources controlled by the department will be paid for as extra work in accordance with specification num general .
the contractor shall be responsible for the cost of quality control .
the contractor shall be responsible for the cost of all consulting services retained by him .
when stockpiling is specified in the contract haul to stockpile will be measured and paid for if applicable in accordance with the requirements in specification num hauling .
when required a conversion factor of num mnum num tonne will be used .
num interim crushing hauling and stockpiling measurement for interim payments will be based on the quantity of crushed aggregate in stockpile the tender quantity for the bid item incorporating the crushed aggregate or the amount of material to be crushed as ordered by the consultant whichever is least .
interim payments for producing and stockpiling crushed aggregates will be made monthly and in accordance with the following section num specification num aggregate production and stockpiling august num num i interim payment is considered a portion of the unit price bid for the material placed on the roadway which incorporates the crushed aggregate .
the interim payment will be deducted when payment is made under the applicable bid item or when all work covered by applicable bid item has been completed .
ii interim payment will be made at the following rates or at the unit price bid for the work incorporating the crushed aggregate whichever is least for the designation and class specified designation mix type or class rate num hnum hnum snum snum num per tonne num mnum lnum snum num per tonne superpave all mix types num per tonne num all classes num per tonne num numaw and bw num per tonne num numc num per tonne num all classes num per tonne num all classes num per tonne haul all classes num per tonne.kilometre extra manufactured fines will be classified as designation num material for interim payment .
interim payment will be made for the portion of natural fines which will be incorporated into the work .
interim payment for premixing asphalt stabilized base course to stockpile will be made at the rate of num of the unit price bid for asphalt stabilized base course in addition to the payment already provided for producing and stockpiling the des num aggregate .
for chip seal coat work with payment made on a square metre basis the rate of interim payment shall also be on a square metre basis using a conversion factor of num kilograms per square metre .
if the contractor elects to haul the crushed aggregate required under this contract to an interim stockpile site the contractor shall be solely responsible for all costs associated with the interim stockpile site including but not limited to leasing access development haul roads site development pre and post disturbance assessments final cleanup and site reclamation .
num surplus crushed aggregates surplus crushed aggregates for which payment will be made are shown in table num .
these aggregates will be measured in cubic metres by the consultant by crosssectioning the piles .
payment for surplus crushed aggregates will be made at the applicable rates shown in table num or at the bid price for crushing and placing whichever is lower in accordance with the following i at rate no .
num for the quantity of surplus crushed aggregate which when added to the quantity placed will be up to but will not exceed the modified tender quantity and ii at rate no .
num for the quantity which equals the total measured surplus quantity minus the amount determined in i above up to a maximum of num of the modified tender quantity .
section num specification num aggregate production and stockpiling august num num no payment will be made for the following i quantities of surplus crushed aggregate in excess of those calculated in i and ii above .
ii material which was rejected by the consultant or which does not meet the applicable specifications .
iii the natural fines portion of a split aggregate .
iv rejected fines .
v material produced under a crush to stockpile bid item .
vi reject oversize aggregate .
table num surplus crushed aggregate designation class rate no .
num rate no .
num num all classes num numt numt superpave all mix types num numt numt num num num and num numt numt num num and num numt numt num num num mixed with asphalt numt numt num num and num numt numt num num numt numt num num and num numt numt num num numt numt num these rates are for surplus crushed aggregate which was mixed with asphalt and intended for asphalt stabilized base course .
num includes only the crushed coarse aggregate and extra manufactured fines .
section num specification num gravel surfacing august num table of contents num gravel surfacing num num general num num materials num num constructionnum num general num num placing of gravel material num num measurement and paymentnum num gravel surfacing num section num specification num gravel surfacing august num num num gravel surfacing num general gravel surfacing shall consist of the shaping of the road surface as required and the placing of crushed gravel thereon as designated by the consultant .
num materials the contractor shall produce crushed aggregate in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling .
the contractor shall supply aggregate materials in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate and haul aggregate materials in accordance with specification num hauling .
num construction num general equipment used for shaping or for spreading gravel shall operate in the direction of normal traffic flow at all times .
num placing of gravel material the road surface shall be shaped to the proper grade crown and super elevation as shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
the contractor shall advise the consultant at least num hours prior to commencement of gravel surfacing operations to allow inspection of the prepared road surface .
gravel surfacing may proceed only on sections of road which have been approved by the consultant .
the gravel shall be placed in one or more layers as designated by the consultant and the amount of gravel surfacing material to be placed in each layer will be as shown on the drawings or as designated by the consultant .
gravel shall be promptly and uniformly spread and in all cases shall be spread before darkness each day .
every precaution shall be taken by the contractor to provide for the safety of traffic in the area of operations .
after gravel surfacing is complete the contractor shall repair all damage to the shoulders or ditches resulting from his operations leaving the road neatly trimmed and true to crosssection and grade .
the contractor shall maintain the graveled surface until it is accepted by the consultant .
maintenance shall be at the contractors own expense and shall be carried out daily or at frequent intervals depending upon the effects of traffic and weather upon the graveled sections of roadway .
the consultant may accept contiguous one kilometre long sections of graveled roadway or the whole project .
section num specification num gravel surfacing august num num num measurement and payment num gravel surfacing measurement of gravel surfacing will be in cubic metres or tonnes whichever is specified .
volume measurements will be based on truck box measurement .
the capacity of the gravel hauling vehicles will be measured by the consultant .
the measurements will be to the nearest num mnum capacity and the capacity of the vehicle once measured shall not be changed without the consent of the consultant .
the gravel shall be leveled using a strikeoff method by the contractor before measurement .
no heaping or rounding of the load above the top of box level will be allowed .
truck boxes used in the haul of gravel shall be thoroughly cleaned upon unloading .
payment of gravel surfacing will be made at the unit price bid per tonne or per cubic metre whichever is specified for gravel surfacing .
this payment will be full compensation for shaping the road surface processing hauling and placing the gravel material .
there will be no separate or additional payment for placement of gravel surfacing in more than one layer .
payment for the supply of aggregate will be made in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate .
section num specification num asphalt stabilized base course august num table of contents num asphalt stabilized base course num num general num num alberta transportation test procedures num num materials num num aggregatenum num asphalt num num mix designs and job mix formula num num responsibility for mix designs num num requirements for mix designnum num approval of mix designsnum num variation from the approved job mix formulanum num sampling and testingnum num test methods num num quality control testingnum num acceptance sampling and testingnum num constructionnum num general num num asphalt mixing plant requirements num num production num num stockpilingnum num spreading and compactionnum num density controlnum num asphalt fog coat num num interim lane markingsnum num slopes and ditches num num asphalt stabilized base course for othersnum num measurement and paymentnum num asphalt stabilized base coursenum num asphalt stabilized base course for othersnum num supply of aggregatenum num fog coat num num supply of asphalt num section num specification num asphalt stabilized base course august num num num asphalt stabilized base course num general asphalt stabilized base course shall consist of an intimate mixture of crushed aggregate and cutback or emulsified asphalt produced by plantmixing at elevated temperatures and placed in layers upon a previously prepared surface compacted and finished as specified herein .
num alberta transportation test procedures test methods designated in these specifications as att or tlt refer to alberta transportation tests .
num materials num aggregate the contractor shall produce crushed aggregate in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling for the designation and class of materials specified .
the contractor shall supply aggregate materials in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate and haul aggregate materials in accordance with specification num hauling .
aggregate shall not contain lime .
num asphalt the contractor shall supply asphalt material in accordance with specification num supply of asphalt .
unless otherwise specified in the special provisions asphalt binder for asphalt stabilized base course shall be mcnum or mcnum .
the contractor shall make the choice between these two .
num mix designs and job mix formula num responsibility for mix designs preparation and submission of asphalt stabilized base course mix designs for consultant approval are the responsibility of the contractor .
all costs incurred in mix design formulation are the responsibility of the contractor .
shipping costs for samples sent to the consultant for approval are the responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor shall use professional engineering services and a qualified testing laboratory licensed to practice in the province of alberta to assess the aggregate materials proposed for use on the work and to carry out the design of the asphalt stabilized base course mixture .
num requirements for mix design the asphalt stabilized base course mix design shall follow the marshall method of mix design as outlined in the latest edition of procedure tltnum or tltnum as appropriate .
a minimum of four specimens shall be prepared at each asphalt content and the grade of asphalt used in the design shall conform to specification num supply of asphalt shall be identical to that being supplied to the project and shall be obtained from the same supplier .
section num specification num asphalt stabilized base course august num num mix designs shall meet the following characteristic requirements at the design asphalt content table num mix design characteristics hfnumm mcnum or mcnum marshall stability n num num air voids num to num num to num num approval of mix designs the contractor shall submit the mix design to the consultant for approval .
the contractors submission shall include the following information a the gradation of each aggregate to be used in the mixture b the percentage by mass of each aggregate to be used in the mixture c the mix design gradation of the combined aggregate d other characteristics of the combined aggregate specified in specification num aggregate production and stockpiling e all marshall mix design characteristics including graphs used in arriving at the final mix design the bulk specific gravity of the combined aggregates and the asphalt absorption of the combined aggregate and f the recommended design asphalt content expressed as a percentage of dry weight of the aggregate .
the consultant will require up to five working days from the time of receipt of the mix design to complete the evaluation .
the consultant may at any time require the contractor to provide representative samples of the individual aggregates in sufficient quantity that when combined at the design proportions a num kg sample is achieved .
the consultant will require up to five working days from the time of receipt of such samples to verify the mix design .
the cost of such mix design verification will be borne by the department .
where required by the consultant because of a change in the nature or source of the aggregates or where a new mix design is desired by the contractor the contractor shall provide a separate and complete mix design .
this new mix design shall be subject to the approval of the consultant .
the consultant will not accept any asphalt mix produced prior to the contractor receiving written approval of the mix design from the consultant .
the aggregate proportioning and asphalt content for the approved mix design will then be the job mix formula for the production of the asphalt stabilized base course mixture .
the contractor shall be totally responsible for the production of mixes in conformance with the contract .
section num specification num asphalt stabilized base course august num num num variation from the approved job mix formula after the job mix formula gradation and proportioning of the various aggregate sizes have been established and approved no alteration to the job mix formula will be permitted .
the maximum permissible variation between an individual cold feed sample gradation and the job mix formula gradation shall be as shown in the following table table num gradation variation maximum permissible variation percent by weight passing sieve designation individual cold feed sample num num num num num num num num num num num num num num in any case the gradation must meet the gradation requirements of specification num aggregate production and stockpiling .
if any deviation from the approved job mix formula beyond the variations given above or any alteration of aggregate proportioning is requested by the contractor in writing the consultant will evaluate the request and determine if a new mix design is required .
any deviation whatsoever from the approved job mix formula shall require the prior written approval of the consultant and the consultant will not accept any asphalt mix produced prior to this approval .
the estimated original binder content of any individual sample shall not vary by more than num from the job mix formula and the daily average by more than num from the job mix formula .
num sampling and testing num test methods unless otherwise specified the latest edition of the following test methods shown in table num will be used to determine material characteristics .
section num specification num asphalt stabilized base course august num num table num test methods test standard moisture or volatile distillates in bituminous paving mixtures aashto t num extraction attnum correction factor extracted asphalt content attnum part iii sieve analysis num num fm minus attnum density asbc control strip method attnum sampling mixes attnum sampling asphalt attnum sampling gravel and sand attnum moisture content oven method part ii emulsified asphalt mixes attnum part ii moisture content oven method part iii cutback asphalt mixes calcium oxide method attnum part iii notes num in all test methods used as reference in this specification metric sieves as specified in canadian general standards board specification numgpnumm shall be substituted for any other specified wire cloth sieves in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling .
num in all cases the latest amendment or revision current at the closing date of the tender is implied when reference is made to one of the above standards in the specification .
num quality control testing quality control testing is the responsibility of the contractor throughout every stage of the work from the crushing and production of aggregates to the final accepted product .
tests performed by the consultant will be quality assurance tests and will not be considered as quality control tests .
the contractor shall provide and maintain equipment and qualified personnel to perform all field testing necessary to determine and monitor the characteristics of the materials produced and incorporated into the work .
the minimum frequencies of quality control testing are described in table num .
the consultant may require an increase in the frequency of any quality control test .
the contractor shall arrange and pay for any additional tests required by the consultant .
copies of all quality control tests shall be submitted to the consultant within one working day of the completion of each test .
the contractor shall bear the cost of all consulting services retained by him .
section num specification num asphalt stabilized base course august num num table num asphalt stabilized base course quality control testing test standard minimum test frequency plant calibration attnum once per project or as required by the consultant moisture or volatile distillates in bituminous paving mixtures aashto tnum plant production one per daynum final placement one per daynum asphalt extraction attnum two per day sieve analysis attnum each extraction asphalt correction factor attnum part iii one per design moisture content of emulsified asphalt mixes cutback asphalt mixes attnum part ii attnum part iii plant production two per day during laydown after a rain as required by the consultant aggregate sieve analysis cold feed attnum one per day mix temperature attnum four per day plant inspection attnum four per day sampling cutback asphalts and emulsions attnum one sample per day sampling tack prime and fog materials attnum one per load emulsion breaking point attnum during laydown as required note num one test per day for the first num days of production if all mix specification criteria are met .
num not required if plant production test results for of the original cutback weight are between num for mc num and more than num for mc num .
num acceptance sampling and testing within this specification certain requirements limits and tolerances are specified regarding the quality of materials and workmanship to be supplied .
compliance with these requirements where so specified shall be measured and accepted based on the consultants quality assurance test results .
num construction num general the contractor shall mix the asphalt stabilized base course through a central mixing plant at elevated temperatures .
section num specification num asphalt stabilized base course august num num the mix shall be produced placed and compacted in a manner which results in a uniform and nonsegregated product .
the contractor shall eliminate the causes of any aggregate segregation or nonuniform asphalt distribution which may occur and shall correct any areas which are segregated or excessively rich lean or wet .
num asphalt mixing plant requirements num all plants the contractor shall calibrate the plant at each production location and shall provide the consultant with a calibration certificate and data attesting to the calibration .
the consultant may when he deems necessary verify the calibration of the plant at any time .
the contractor shall provide all equipment facilities and operating staff required to verify the calibration safely and accurately .
the cold aggregate feed shall contain separate bins for each aggregate to be introduced into the mix .
each cold feed bin shall have an adjustable gate and a variable speed feed belt .
the cold feed bins shall be calibrated by diverting and weighing the aggregate flow at various speeds of the feed belt .
the contractor shall provide vibrators or other devices to ensure a uniform flow of material .
each cold feed unit shall be equipped with a sampling device which will allow a representative sample of the aggregate material being delivered to the mixing plant to be obtained safely and without disrupting the continuous operation of the plant .
num batch plants batch plants shall be equipped with weigh scales on both the asphalt and the aggregate hoppers .
the asphalt scale accuracy shall be checked with enough test weights to simulate the size of the anticipated asphalt batch .
the aggregate scale accuracy shall be checked with test weights or by diverting a number of preweighed batches into a truck and verifying the weight on the platform scale .
each scale shall be accurate to num .
num continuous mix plants pugmill type the hot aggregate hopper shall be equipped with an adjustable gate and may also have a variable speed apron feeder .
the hot bin shall be calibrated by diverting and weighing the hot aggregate flow into a truck at various gate settings or apron feeder speeds or both .
the asphalt pump shall be of the positive displacement type and shall be mechanically or electronically interlocked with the aggregate flow .
the asphalt pump shall be calibrated by diverting asphalt into a suitable container for a time at various settings and weighing the pumped asphalt on the platform scale .
the container shall have a volume of at least num num litres .
num drum mix plants drum mix plants shall be equipped with electronic controls that automatically and continuously measure the amounts of aggregate and asphalt that are being delivered to the mixing drum .
the flow of aggregate shall be weighed by an electronic belt scale .
section num specification num asphalt stabilized base course august num num the calibration shall be performed by diverting the aggregate flow into a truck and the asphalt flow into a container of at least num num litres capacity .
the materials shall be weighed on a platform scale and the weight compared to the plant readings .
during the calibration the asphalt percent delivered shall not vary by more than num from a particular setting .
the rates of flow of aggregate and asphalt shall be displayed on the control panel .
the belt scale shall be accurate to within num of the truck weight at the anticipated production rate and also at the lesser of the following rates num th less than the anticipated production rate or num lower than the anticipated production rate .
num production asphalt binder of the designated type and grade shall be uniformly applied to the combined crushed aggregate at the rate approved in the job mix formula .
the temperature of any ingredient of the mix shall not exceed numc at the time of plant mixing .
mixing shall continue until all the asphalt is uniformly dispersed throughout the mix and all aggregate particles are coated with asphalt .
the drying and mixing process shall not reduce the cutback level to such a degree that the mix can not be properly placed .
up to the time of spreading and placing material that is to be blade laid the amount of cutback in the mix shall be maintained as shown below for each binder grade mcnum between num and num of the original cutback weight mcnum more than num of the original cutback weight mixes containing emulsified asphalt shall not be placed and compacted until the emulsion breaking point test attnum indicates the emulsion breaking point has been reached .
the moisture content at the plant discharge of mixes containing cutback asphalt shall be num or less as measured by any individual test .
num stockpiling when asphalt stabilized base course stockpiles are used as part of construction operations the general provisions for stockpiling contained in specification num aggregate production and stockpiling shall apply modified and supplemented as follows a stacking conveyors only shall be used in the construction of the stockpiles .
b the free fall distance from the conveyor to the base of the stockpile at the commencement of stockpiling operations at a given site shall not exceed num m and the conveyor shall not be raised until the free fall is less than num m. thereafter the free fall shall not exceed num m. c no equipment shall be allowed on the stockpile at any time .
d stockpiles shall be constructed so as to minimize segregation and the taking on of moisture .
the height of stockpiles shall not exceed num m. section num specification num asphalt stabilized base course august num num e the contractor shall not plantmix or stockpile asphalt stabilized base course mix during periods of rain .
work may resume when the rain ceases .
num spreading and compaction for blade laid material up to the time of spreading and placing the amount of cutback in the mix shall be maintained as shown below for each binder grade mcnum between num and num of the original cutback weight mcnum more than num of the original cutback weight .
mixes containing emulsified asphalt shall not be placed until the emulsion breaking point test attnum indicates the emulsion breaking point has been reached .
the mix shall be uniformly placed on the prepared and approved surface at the rate of application required to yield the nominal compacted thicknesses specified or designated by the consultant .
the mix shall be spread and compacted only when the ambient temperature is numc or greater and its moisture content is num or less as measured by any individual test .
vibratory compaction equipment shall not be used over cement stabilized base course unless specifically approved by the consultant in writing .
the mix shall be spread and compacted to specified grade and crosssection be stable uniform in depth gradation density and asphalt content at the values specified or designated and the finished surface shall be smooth waterproof and free of roller and tire marks .
the contractor shall at his own expense and to the satisfaction of the consultant repair or restore to specified condition any asphalt stabilized base course which fails loses specified density or becomes too wet or too dry or becomes unstable rutted distorted loose or rough prior to placing subsequent layers of material and prior to final acceptance of the work .
num density control num general control over the density to which asphalt stabilized base course is compacted will be exercised by the construction of a control strip .
a control strip is a layer of asphalt stabilized base course of specified depth constructed on a section of prepared surface .
the length of the control strip section shall be num m long or as directed by the consultant .
the control minimum number of passes is the number of passes with the minimum compaction equipment to attain a control maximum wet density for a control strip .
to determine the control minimum number of passes the consultant will take density measurements by means of nuclear equipment during the compaction operation until a maximum wet density is achieved .
the wet density so achieved is the control maximum wet density .
a new control strip with its corresponding control maximum wet density may be required at any time throughout the project as determined by the consultant .
section num specification num asphalt stabilized base course august num num num minimum compaction equipment a control strip over granular base course shall be compacted using the following equipment as a minimum i two vibratory steelwheeled rollers weighing not less than num t each and having vibratory capacities of at least num num vibrations per minute with a minimum dynamic or centrifugal force of num num kg operated in the vibratory mode at a speed not to exceed num kmh or ii one vibratory steelwheeled roller weighing not less than num t and having a vibratory capacity of at least num num vibrations per minute with a minimum dynamic or centrifugal force of num num kg operated in the vibratory mode at a speed not to exceed num kmh and one of the following a six wobblywheel pneumatictired rollers with tires inflated to a pressure of from num kpa to num kpa ballasted with at least a level load and towed at a speed not to exceed num kmh or b two selfpropelled pneumatictired rollers each ballasted to its maximum capacity weighing not less than num t having a minimum tire pressure of from num kpa to num kpa and travelling at a speed not to exceed num kmh or c a combination of num wobblywheel pneumatictired rollers and one selfpropelled pneumatictired roller all of which meet the appropriate criteria described above .
a control strip over cement stabilized base course shall be compacted using the equipment options as described in subsection num ii above as a minimum except that the vibratory steel roller is to be operated in static mode .
num method of compaction for the control strip a pass is one complete coverage of the control strip area with at least the minimum compaction equipment specified in subsection num of this specification .
as portions of the mix are being spread the contractor shall initially compact the mix either with one of the vibratory steelwheel rollers specified in subsection numi or ii or with the equipment specified in subsection numii a b or c as the case may be so that when the entire lift has been spread he shall have covered the control strip area completely at least twice with this compaction equipment .
once the contractor has completely spread the asphalt stabilized base course for the control strip the consultant will commence measurements of wet density using nuclear equipment .
compaction using all the minimum equipment specified in subsection numi or ii shall then proceed and shall continue until the control maximum wet density is attained and the control minimum number of passes is established .
when pneumatictired rollers are used for compaction they shall precede the vibratory steel wheeled roller .
num general construction using the control strip once the control minimum number of passes and the control maximum wet density have been established using a given combination of equipment the contractor shall use the same section num specification num asphalt stabilized base course august num num equipment spreading technique and minimum number of passes for the general construction operation unless otherwise approved by the consultant .
the consultant may at any time take measurements using nuclear equipment to determine if the control maximum wet density has been attained .
if the results at ten randomly selected test sites do not average at least num of the control maximum wet density then the contractor shall carry out more passes until such an average is attained or he shall construct a new control strip to establish a new control maximum wet density and a new control minimum number of passes as directed by the consultant .
the contractor shall compact areas such as entrances where all of the specified equipment can not work practically using a vibratory steelwheeled roller as specified in subsection num until num of the control maximum wet density has been achieved .
num asphalt fog coat the contractor shall apply an asphalt fog coat to the finished asphalt stabilized base course surface as soon as is practical as the work progresses and at locations and to dimensions designated by the consultant according to specification num prime tack and fog coats .
areas of asphalt stabilized base course which have been repaired or restored shall be refogged to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num interim lane markings the contractor shall provide interim lane markings on all newly constructed asphalt stabilized base course surfaces or on tacked surfaces that are to be exposed to traffic overnight .
all paint spots shall be num mm wide and num mm long shall be applied lengthwise to the road surface shall be spaced num m apart on centre in tangent sections and num m apart on curves shall employ the same paint colour as the permanent marking to come and shall be completely covered with glass beads at the time of painting .
num slopes and ditches slopes shall be neatly trimmed and loose or waste material shall be either neatly bladed against the edge of the base course or spread neatly over the sideslopes and ditches as directed by the consultant .
all rocks larger than num mm in diameter shall be removed from the side slopes and ditches and disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the consultant .
num asphalt stabilized base course for others the contractor shall make available on request additional asphalt stabilized base course for the use of the department .
the estimated quantity of additional material is shown in the unit price schedule as asphalt stabilized base course for others .
this additional material will either be picked up at the mixing plant by other forces at times that are mutually agreeable to the contractor and the consultant or stockpiled by the contractor as determined by the consultant .
num measurement and payment num asphalt stabilized base course accepted asphalt stabilized base course material will be measured in tonnes and paid for at the unit price bid per tonne for asphalt stabilized base course .
this payment will be full compensation for processing hauling and placing the mix stockpiling if appropriate interim lane section num specification num asphalt stabilized base course august num num marking and quality control .
no payment will be made for any material used to repair failures which may occur in the base courses constructed under this contract .
any expense incurred in the supply processing hauling and placing of such material shall be borne by the contractor .
the removal and disposal of rocks will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made num asphalt stabilized base course for others payment will be made at the unit price bid per tonne for asphalt stabilized base course for others .
this payment will be full compensation for processing the mix loading to trucks or stockpiling the material and quality control .
num supply of aggregate payment for the supply of aggregate will be made in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate .
num fog coat measurement and payment for fog coat will be in accordance with specification num prime tack and fog coats .
num supply of asphalt payment for the supply of asphalt for asphalt stabilized base course will be made at the unit price bid per tonne for supply of asphalt for asphalt stabilized base course .
section num specification num granular base course august num table of contents num granular base coursenum num general num num description num num definitions num num materials num num aggregatenum num waternum num asphalt num num interim lane markingsnum num acceptance sampling and testing num num test methods num num constructionnum num aggregate production num num control strip construction num num general construction num num finishing work num num interim lane markingsnum num compliance requirementsnum num end product acceptance or rejectionnum num methods of repair of rejected areas num num appeal of acceptance test results and appeal testingnum num gradation and fractures num num payment of appeal testing costsnum num measurement and paymentnum num general num num payment adjustments num section num specification num granular base course august num num num granular base course num general num description granular base course shall consist of an intimate mixture of crushed aggregate and water which is placed in layers upon a prepared surface compacted and finished as specified herein .
num definitions a control strip is dedfined as a lift of granular base course constructed using the equipment and method of compaction as prescribed herein normally on a num m section of prepared surface selected by the consultant .
the control density is defined as the maximum dry density attained on a control strip .
a pass is defined as one complete coverage of the control strip area with at least the minimum compaction equipment specified herein .
a lot is normally defined as the quantity of granular base course placed in one days production .
for projects with small quantities of granular base course generally less than num tonnes the entire quantity of granular base course will be considered as one lot .
if the consultant suspects a portion of a lot is substandard he may order extra testing to define the area and severity of the deficiency .
a new lot will be designated for this portion if this extra testing indicates the granular base course is subject to unit price adjustment or rejection .
a visually failed area is defined as an area of any subgrade or base course which fails loses specified density becomes too wet or too dry or becomes rutted distorted loose or rough .
num materials num aggregate the contractor shall produce crushed aggregate in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling for the designation and class of materials specified .
the contractor shall supply materials in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate and haul aggregate in accordance with specification num hauling .
when the contract specifies the use of designation num class num material the contractor shall have the option of supplying either designation num class num material or designation num class num material providing it meets the requirements of the specifications .
num water the contractor shall supply and haul all water required for the construction and maintenance of this work .
the water shall be free from substances which render it unfit for use .
num asphalt the contractor shall supply asphalt material for prime coat in accordance with specification num supply of asphalt .
section num specification num granular base course august num num num interim lane markings the contractor shall supply interim lane marking paint and glass beads from the list of approved products shown in the special provisions or specification amendments .
as an alternative to paint and glass beads the contractor has the option of supplying reflectorized temporary pavement markers or selfadhesive reflectorized pavement marking tape .
acceptable temporary pavement markers are shown on the alberta transportation products list .
num acceptance sampling and testing all testing will be carried out by an approved laboratory .
the consultant may at any time take samples carry out testing and inspection of materials incorporated or being incorporated into the work .
the contractor shall cooperate with the consultant or his representative for such sampling testing and inspection .
such inspection shall not relieve the contractor from any obligation to perform all the work strictly in accordance with the requirements of the contract .
sample locations for routine quality testing will be randomly selected as far as it is practical to do so .
this will not limit the consultant from testing at any additional locations deemed necessary .
results of the tests are available to the contractor for his information .
it is the responsibility of the contractor to interpret test results and alter his operation if necessary so that the product meets all required specifications .
num test methods unless otherwise specified the following standard alberta transportation test methods att shown in table num will be used to determine the material characteristics .
table num quality assurance test methods test standard frequency minimum sampling gravel and sand att num as required num sieve analysis attnum or num as required in attnum percent fracture attnum as required in attnum density control strip method attnum num control test sections random test site locations attnum each test sections moisture content oven method soil and gravel attnum as required notes num in all test methods used as reference in this specification metric sieves as specified in canadian general standards board specification numgpnumm shall be substituted for any other specified wire cloth sieves in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling .
num control strips are established as specified herein .
density test sections are randomly established every num m on all lifts .
section num specification num granular base course august num num num construction num aggregate production the contractor shall advise the consultant which material num num num he will be producing prior to commencing his crushing operations .
if the contractor decides to change materials at any time during his crushing operations he shall immediately advise the consultant and stockpile the new material separately from any previously crushed material .
in cases where the contractor elects to use more than one material he shall prior to hauling keep the consultant informed which material is being hauled on a daily basis .
no intermixing of materials will be allowed at any time .
num control strip construction the nominal lift thickness of a granular base course shall be determined by the contractor but shall not be less than num mm or exceed num mm compacted .
the total design granular base course thickness may require that more than one lift be constructed in which case a new control strip is required for each lift for a change in designation class or source of aggregate or when called for by the consultant .
control strips shall not be constructed during freezing ambient temperatures with frozen aggregate or on frozen subgrades .
aggregate for construction of a control strip shall be spread by means of a motor grader or paver .
the control strip moisture content shall be adjusted as directed by the consultant during spreading of the aggregate .
the surface of the granular base course shall be kept moist until testing is completed .
once the aggregate for the control strip lift has been completely spread the moisture and density measurements for determining the control density will commence and will continue during repeated passes of the specified compaction equipment until the maximum dry density is attained .
these measurements will be taken by the consultant using nuclear testing equipment .
num control strip minimum compaction equipment the control strip lift shall be compacted using at least the following equipment two vibratory steel rollers weighing not less than num t each and having a vibratory capacity of at least num vpm with a minimum dynamic or centrifugal force of num kg operated in the vibratory mode and at a speed not exceeding num kmh plus one of the following i six wobbly tired rollers with tires inflated to a pressure of num kpa plus or minus num kpa ballasted with at least a level load of gravel and towed at a speed not exceeding num kmh or ii two selfpropelled pneumatic rollers each ballasted to its maximum capacity weighing not less than num t each having a minimum tire pressure of num kpa plus or minus num kpa and travelling at a speed not exceeding num kmh or iii a combination of num wobbly tired rollers and num selfpropelled pneumatic roller each of which meets the appropriate criteria described above .
section num specification num granular base course august num num on projects where control strips are being established on small areas such as acceleration and deceleration lanes and culvert backfills other minimum equipment proposed by the contractor may be approved by the consultant .
num control strip compaction if portions of the lift are being spread using a motor grader the aggregate shall be compacted so that when the entire lift has been spread a minimum of num complete passes with the specified compaction equipment shall have been completed over all the control strip area .
if the aggregate has been spread by means of a motor grader and vibratory compaction causes a loss of density during base course construction vibratory compactors shall operate in the static mode supplemented with the specified pneumatic rollers .
whenever a granular base course lift is spread by a paver a vibratory compactor operating in the vibratory mode shall be utilized .
when pneumatic selfpropelled rollers or wobbly type rollers are used for compaction the pneumatic selfpropelled rollers or wobbly type rollers shall lead the steel vibratory compactor .
num general construction once the control density has been established the contractor may choose his own combination of compaction equipment .
the base course shall be uniformly placed at the same lift thickness as the corresponding control strip lift thickness .
each lift of base course shall be constructed true to grade and crosssection and the finished surface shall be smooth and free of loose material .
the contractor shall compact areas such as entrances using a vibratory steelwheeled roller as specified in subsection num to the satisfaction of the consultant or until num of the control density has been achieved .
the consultant may direct the contractor not to use the vibratory compaction mode within certain areas located near utilities or other restricted areas as determined by the consultant .
water shall not be added in such quantities that it seeps into the underlying subgrade .
materials shall be handled so that segregation of the coarser and finer fractions does not occur and the contractor shall take all necessary precautions to prevent aggregate segregation for each lift of base course .
base course shall not be spread on frozen subgrade and compaction shall be completed before freezing .
num finishing work subgrade slopes shall be neatly trimmed and loose or waste material from the side slopes shall be either neatly bladed against the edge of the base course or spread neatly over the side slope and ditches to the satisfaction of the consultant .
in addition the finished base course surfaces shall be in compliance with the tolerances specified in the specification amendment referenced in the contract .
section num specification num granular base course august num num all rocks larger than num mm in diameter shall be removed from the side slopes and ditches and disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the consultant .
prime coat shall be placed on the finished final lift of granular base course in accordance with specification num prime tack and fog coats .
num interim lane markings the contractor shall provide interim lane markings on all newly primed surfaces that are to be exposed to traffic overnight .
the contractor has the option of using paint and glass beads or reflectorized temporary pavement markers .
when paint is used all paint spots shall be num mm wide and num mm long shall be applied lengthwise to the road surface shall be spaced num m apart on centre in tangent sections and num m apart on curves shall employ the same paint colour as the permanent marking to come and shall be completely covered with glass beads at the time of painting .
when reflectorized temporary pavement markers are used they shall be placed at num m intervals on tangent sections and at num m intervals on curves and shall be removed immediately prior to being overlaid .
num compliance requirements the contractor shall at his own expense repair andor restore to specified condition any visually failed areas or areas of aggregate segregation .
each lift shall be compacted to an average of num of the applicable control density with no single test less than num of the applicable control density .
frequency of testing is outlined in att num .
as specified for control strip construction the surface of the granular base course shall be kept moist until testing is completed .
num end product acceptance or rejection for granular base course aggregate material placed in all lifts acceptance will be subject to all compliance requirements of section num and the following requirements for the lot aggregate gradation and fracture count .
price adjustments for aggregate gradation for each sieve size will be based on the variation of the lot mean gradation from the limits of the designation and class outlined in table num .
the corresponding adjustment points are shown in table numa .
when the lot mean gradation is outside the gradation limits of table num the penalty assessment will be num per tonne for each mean adjustment point outside those limits .
if the maximum deviation shown in table num a is exceeded the lot is rejected .
price adjustments for fractures will be based on the mean fracture deviation below the specification minimum shown in table num one adjustment point for each one percent below the specification minimum will occur up to a maximum of ten percent .
if the maximum deviation is exceeded the lot is rejected .
price adjustments for lot mean gradation and fractures will be based on a minimum of three tests each per lot sampled under a full testing program in accordance with att num sampling gravel and sand .
section num specification num granular base course august num num at the discretion of the consultant a partial testing program in accordance with att num may be used in determining end product acceptance subject to other compliance testing .
price adjustments will not apply in cases where the partial testing program is used .
num methods of repair of rejected areas all rejected areas shall be repaired by the contractor to the satisfaction of the consultant .
for areas rejected due to lot mean gradation andor fractures the following methods of repair are generally acceptable but are subject to the acceptance of the consultant remove and replace entire depth of rejected lift in failed area .
place a remedial lift equal to num percent of the depth of the rejected lift thickness or num mm whichever is greater .
when remedial lifts are used as a repair method the surrounding areaslanes also require additional material to create smooth transitions and acceptable elevation changes between the repaired and approved areas .
when a lower lift is repaired using a remedial lift the repair material will not be considered to take the place of any portion of subsequent lifts.i.e .
the completed structure will be the design depth plus the depth of repair lift correct aggregate requirements by adding blending and reworking appropriate materials .
all repairs shall be regular in shape and finished using good workmanship practices to provide an appearance suitable to the consultant .
any aggregate segregation shall be corrected by reblending as necessary .
all repairs shall be carried out by the contractor at his expense .
num payment for work that had been rejected but was made acceptable all repaired areas will be retested and the results of the retest will be used for determining pay adjustments .
when the method of repair is a remedial lift the remedial lift will be tested and any pay adjustment as determined will be applied to the rejected underlying lift and the additional material will not be paid for .
when the method of repair is adding blending and reworking materials the added materials will not be paid for .
only the quantity of material originally constructed will be paid for .
payment for the additional testing will be charged to the contractor in accordance with the rates as shown in subsection num payment of appeal testing costs .
num appeal of acceptance test results and appeal testing num gradation and fractures appeal testing will be done using appeal sampling method described in att num .
the contractor may appeal the results of acceptance testing of gradation or fractures for any rejected or penalized lot only once .
the consultant may request that cause be shown for the appeal .
the appeal shall be for all tests within the lot and there will be no appeal allowed for single tests within a lot .
priming or placing of additional lifts on the appealed lot will void any appeal .
section num specification num granular base course august num num the following procedures will apply for an appeal i the contractor shall serve notice of the appeal for gradation fractures or both to the consultant in writing within num hours of receipt of the test results ii the department will arrange and pay for an independent testing laboratory certified to operate in the province of alberta to perform the appeal testing .
the personnel employed or testing laboratory retained by the contractor for quality control testing on the project will not be used for appeal testing iii the consultant will sample the compacted base and provide the samples to the independent testing laboratory .
the contractor may observe the sampling process .
the number of the new tests for the appeal shall be the same as the number used to determine the lot mean and iv all test results from the old lot will be retained and averaged with the new appeal tests .
a new mean for all tests will be determined and used for acceptance and unit price adjustment .
the new mean thus determined in all cases will be binding on the contractor and the department .
num payment of appeal testing costs if the new results show that a penalty no longer applies sampling and testing costs incurred during the appeal procedures for that lot will be borne by the department .
if the new results verify that any unit price reduction or rejection remains valid for that lot the contractor will be invoiced by the department for the sampling and testing costs for the appeal procedures at the following rates gradation num fracture count num num measurement and payment num general measurement of granular base course will be in tonnes for material acceptably placed .. payment will be made at the unit price bid for granular base course for the applicable designation and class of material subject to the unit price adjustments specified herein .
this payment will be full compensation for processing hauling and placing the material on the roadway intersections entrances and approaches supplying water and adjusting the moisture content preparing the surface the supply and application of asphalt material for prime coat supplying and applying blotting sand when required maintaining the treated surface interim lane marking quality control and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
payment for the supply of aggregate materials incorporated into the work will be made in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate .
separate payment will not be made for any material required to repair failures or rejected areas which occur in the granular base course .
all costs associated with the repair of failed or section num specification num granular base course august num num rejected areas will be the responsibility of the contractor .
if the contractor chooses to supply designation num class num or designation num class num in place of designation num class num material for granular base course material payment will be made at the unit price bid for designation num class num material .
payment for the supply of asphalt for prime coat will be in accordance with specification num prime tack and fog coats .
num payment adjustments total lot adjustment points will be calculated for each lot .
a lot gradation and fracture price adjustment per tonne will be applied based on the following formula providing the lot mean does not exceed the requirements in table num a or the maximum deviation for fractures is not exceeded .
pagf pag paf x num where pagf unit price adjustment for gradation and fractures pag adjustment points for gradation paf adjustment points for fractures the lot unit price bid per tonne will be calculated as follows lot unit price per tonne contract unit price bid per tonne pagf table num a mean adjustment points for deviations from gradation limits and maximum deviations allowable lot mean requirements sieve size fm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num mean adjustment points for deviations from limits of table num num for each num deviation num for each num deviation num for each num deviation num for each num deviation maximum allowable deviation from limits of table num num num num num note num include all applicable sieves up to one size smaller than top size .
section num specification num granular fill august num table of contents num granular fillnum num general num num materials num num aggregatenum num waternum num sampling and testingnum num test methods num num constructionnum num granular fillnum num fine grading gravel course num num measurement and paymentnum section num specification num granular fill august num num num granular fill num general granular fill shall consist of pitrun gravel gravel fill sand or crushed gravel placed upon the prepared areas and in excavations at locations and to thicknesses specified .
num materials num aggregate the contractor shall produce processed aggregates in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling for the designation and class of material specified .
the contractor shall supply aggregate materials in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate and haul aggregate materials in accordance with specification num hauling .
num water when required the contractor shall supply suitable water .
num sampling and testing num test methods unless otherwise specified the latest edition of the test methods shown in table num will be used to determine material characteristics .
table num test methods used to determine material characteristics test description method no .
sampling gravel and sand attnum sieve analysis attnum or num determining the liquid limit of soils aashto t num dry strength nonplastic aggregates attnum determining the plastic limit and plasticity index of soils aashto t num density control strip method attnum moisture content open pan method attnum notes num in all test methods used as reference in this specification metric sieves as specified in canadian general standards board specification numgpnumm shall be substituted for any other specified wire cloth sieves in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling .
num construction num granular fill the granular fill shall be deposited on the prepared area or in an excavation in a uniform manner and quantity which will produce the required compacted thickness and width designated by the consultant .
any coarse material segregated during dumping operations shall be blended with fines and shaped to the required depth grade and crosssection .
section num specification num granular fill august num num the granular fill shall be watered or dried and compacted .
compaction shall continue in conjunction with light blading and water spraying where necessary to maintain crosssection and designated moisture content until the required density is reached .
num fine grading gravel course when required a light application of crushed gravel material of the designation and class specified shall be placed in a single layer on the granular fill course for fine grading purposes .
the crushed gravel shall be windrowed uniformly upon the designated area and spread to the required crosssection and depth .
the surface shall be compacted to the required density as directed by the consultant .
if necessary water shall be added to the material during compaction to maintain the required uniform moisture content .
the moisture content of any layer shall not exceed the designated moisture content prior to any subsequent operations .
num measurement and payment measurement of granular fill and graded gravel course will be made in tonnes or cubic metres whichever is specified and will be based on truck box measurements .
payment will be made at unit price bid for granular fill for the applicable designation and class of material acceptably placed .
this payment will be full compensation for supplying and adding water processing hauling and placing the granular fill material and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
payment for the supply of aggregate materials incorporated into the work will be made in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate .
section num specification num cement stabilized base course august num table of contents num cement stabilized base coursenum num general num num description num num materials num num portland cement num num aggregatesnum num waternum num asphalt num num test methods num num equipment num num general num num mixing plants generalnum num batch type mixers num num continuous type mixersnum num spreading equipmentnum num compaction equipmentnum num sampling and sampling standnum num plant calibrationnum num constructionnum num cement stabilized base course general num num cement additionnum num mixing cement stabilized base coursenum num placing cement stabilized mixture num num compacting the cement stabilized mixture num num time limitsnum num joint construction num num curing seal num num temporary crossingsnum num opening to traffic num num tack coat num num application of asphalt stabilized base coursenum num measurement and paymentnum num cement stabilized base course num num supply of portland cement num num supply of aggregatenum num curing and tack coats num num temporary crossingsnum section num specification num cement stabilized base course august num num num cement stabilized base course num general num description cement stabilized base course shall consist of a uniform mixture of sand or crushed aggregate portland cement and water combined as hereinafter specified placed compacted and finished on the prepared surfaces .
cement stabilized base course material as defined herein shall be mixed through a central mixing plant in accordance with the requirements of the specifications .
num materials num portland cement the contractor shall supply portland cement in accordance with specification num supply of portland cement .
unless otherwise directed or approved by the consultant normal type num portland cement shall be used .
num aggregates the contractor shall produce aggregate in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling for the designation and class of material specified .
the contractor shall supply aggregate in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate and haul aggregate in accordance with specification num hauling .
num water the contractor shall supply all water required in the construction of cement stabilized base course .
water shall conform to the requirements of the latest version of csa standard can numanum concrete materials and methods of concrete construction .
water used in portland cement concrete construction shall be subject to the prior approval of the consultant .
num asphalt the contractor shall supply all required asphalt materials in accordance with specification num supply of asphalt .
num test methods unless otherwise specified the following standard test methods will be used to determine material characteristics .
when requested by the contractor the most recent edition of the following test methods will be used for verification purposes the results of which shall govern section num specification num cement stabilized base course august num num test description method no .
i sampling stone slag gravel sand and stone block for use as highway materials aashto designation t num ii sieve analysis of fine and coarse aggregates num and aashto designation t num a amount of material finer than num mm sieve in aggregate num aashto designation t num iii determining the liquid limit of soils num aashto designation t num iv determining the plastic limit and plasticity index of soils aashto designation t num v classification of soils for engineering purposes for definition of coefficient of uniformity cu astm designation d num vi determination of cement content in cementtreated aggregate by the method of titration num aashto designation t num vii cement content of soilcement mixture hardened aashto designation t num viii determination of moisture in soils by means of a calcium carbide gas pressure moisture tester aashto designation t num ix laboratory determination of moisture content of soil astm designation d num x moisture density relations of soilcement mixtures num hereinafter referred to in section num as the standard proctor test aashto designation t num xi compressive strength of molded soilcement cylinders astm designation d num xii making and curing soilcement compression and flexure test specimens in the laboratory astm designation d num xiii capping cylindrical concrete specimens aashto designation t num xiv density of soils inplace by block chunk or core aashto designation t num xv density of soil inplace by the rubber balloon method aashto designation t num xvi density of soil inplace by the sand cone method aashto designation t num xvii density of soil and soilaggregate inplace by nuclear method shallow depth aashto designation t num xviii sampling bituminous materials aashto designation t num notes num in all test methods used as reference in this specification metric sieves as specified in canadian general standards board specification numgpnumm shall be substituted for any other specified wire cloth sieves in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling .
num equipment num general the contractor shall provide sufficient equipment to produce and place cement stabilized mixture at a rate of not less than num t per hour .
num mixing plants general mixing plants shall be of approved batch or continuous mix type capable of producing a uniform mixture .
all mixers shall be equipped with adjustable metering devices of a type which will introduce the cement and water into the mixer in the designated proportions .
the cement metering devices and feeder shall be interlocked and synchronized to maintain a constant ratio of cement to the sand or gravel material and the water metering control shall be adjustable to maintain the designated moisture content .
the mixing unit shall be capable of adjustment either by reduction in volume of material or other means to correct occurrence of dead areas in the mixer in which material does not move or is not sufficiently agitated to produce the necessary uniform dispersal of the ingredients of the mixture as may be required by changes in the mixing properties of the material being mixed .
section num specification num cement stabilized base course august num num num batch type mixers if a batch type mixer is used the material shall be proportioned by batch weights .
num continuous type mixers if a continuous type of mixer is used the materials shall be proportioned by volume .
the sand or gravel materials shall be drawn from the storage bin or bins by an approved continuous feeder through adjustable calibrated gates or by an approved fixed gate continuous feeder with adjustable speed control which will supply the correct amount of sand or gravel materials in proportion to the cement and water .
the plant shall be equipped with facilities satisfactory to the consultant for sampling materials and calibrating gate openings or rate of feed by weighing check samples .
num spreading equipment spreading equipment shall be readily adjustable to various depths and widths and shall be constructed and operated to produce a layer of material of uniform thickness true to grade and crosssection and of uniform consistency .
num compaction equipment compaction equipment shall be capable of producing the specified degree of compaction and surface finish within the time limits specified .
num sampling and sampling stand samples of the various components of the mixture and the mixture itself will be taken as often as considered necessary by the consultant for the purpose of verifying quality control adherence to specification or other test purposes .
the contractor shall cooperate with the consultant andor his representatives in obtaining the samples required including the provision by the contractor of suitable sampling devices .
the contractor shall provide access to all parts of the plant as required by the consultant .
the contractor shall at his own expense provide install and maintain a suitable sampling stand for the purpose of sampling from loaded trucks .
the stand shall be of solid construction safe firmly anchored and of a convenient height to enable easy acquisition of samples from haul vehicles .
the stand shall have a minimum platform area of num m in length and num m in width shall be equipped with stairs and be completely enclosed with guard and hand rails .
the stand shall be placed in an approved location .
num plant calibration prior to production of any material the plant shall be calibrated to produce a mix containing the proper proportion of all components of the mixture .
calibration of the plant shall be performed at each new plant setting and at any other time as directed by the consultant .
all plants shall contain devices capable of diverting each component of the mixture into separate receptacles or trucks for the purpose of weighing check samples .
num construction num cement stabilized base course general cement stabilized base course shall not be mixed or placed when the atmospheric temperature is at or below numc or when conditions indicate that the temperature may fall below numc within num section num specification num cement stabilized base course august num num hours unless adequate means satisfactory to the consultant are employed for the protection of the work .
in no case shall cement stabilized base course be placed on frozen subgrade .
all cement stabilized base course shall be effectively protected from frost action and any material which has become damaged by the frost action shall be replaced by the contractor at his own expense .
num cement addition the measurement of cement content for addition to the sand or gravel shall be by weight whether proportioned by batch weight or by volume .
cement to be mixed with the sand or gravel material shall be uniformly distributed throughout the material during the mixing operation .
num mixing cement stabilized base course blending of the sand or gravel material shall be performed prior to the mixing operations to meet the requirements as specified herein .
sand or gravel cement and water shall be mixed such that an homogeneous mixture uniform in gradation cement content moisture content and appearance is attained .
the proportions of water and cement to be added to the mixture will be designated by the consultant and the rates of addition shall be under strict control at all times .
cement content of the mixture shall not vary by more than plus or minus num by weight from the designated cement content .
the moisture content shall not vary by more than plus or minus num by weight and shall be such that the designated moisture content is achieved at the compaction stage .
in the event the moisture content of the gravel or sand is above the optimum moisture content designated for the mixture the material shall be dried by aerating or piling and allowing to drain or by dewatering with pumps or other such methods prior to plant mixing such that the optimum moisture of the cement stabilized mixture is realized .
num placing cement stabilized mixture immediately prior to placing of the cement stabilized mixture the surface of the prepared subgrade shall be moistened and kept moist until covered by the mixture .
care shall be exercised to prevent softening of the subgrade by the addition of excess amounts of water .
ponding of water will not be permitted .
materials shall be transported by means of approved vehicles equipped with protective covers if required and deposited and spread by approved spreading equipment .
dumping of mixture in piles or windrows upon the subgrade and subsequent spreading by motor graders or other equipment will not be permitted unless approved by the consultant for irregular restrictive areas .
the mix shall be spread and compacted to conform to grade and crosssection be uniform in gradation density moisture and cement content at the values designated and the finished surface shall be smooth and tight .
section num specification num cement stabilized base course august num num the spreading operation will not be permitted in widths of less than num m excepting as permitted by the consultant for irregular restrictive areas .
where the final compacted thickness of the cement stabilized base is num mm or less sufficient material is to be placed in one operation to obtain this thickness .
where the thickness designated is greater than num mm the spreading operation shall be carried out in two layers of equal thickness unless otherwise directed by the consultant .
unless otherwise permitted placing and spreading of base course materials shall be performed in contiguous sections .
unless otherwise directed by the consultant the mixed materials shall be spread for part width of the subgrade under construction .
care shall be taken to prevent damage to the exposed edge or edges by the compacting equipment where part width construction is undertaken .
care shall also be taken to prevent damage to the exposed edge or edges by the compacting equipment andor traffic and weather .
where the consultant directs that the mixed materials shall be spread for the full width of the subgrade under construction either one spreader or several spreaders may be operated in a staggered position across the subgrade .
where more than one spreader is used to distribute the mixed material in adjacent spreads or where one spreader is used alternately on two adjacent spreads joint construction as hereinafter specified will not be required when less than thirty minutes elapses between the time of spreading the mix in adjacent spreads at any location .
when more than thirty minutes elapses between the placing of adjacent or successive spreads joint construction as hereinafter specified will be required .
after a part width section has been completed the longitudinal joint against which additional mixed material is to be placed shall be trimmed to a neat line parallel to the roadbed alignment and with a vertical edge .
material cut away from the edge or material previously placed to protect the edge shall be spread uniformly over the adjacent subgrade or otherwise disposed of as directed the consultant .
contamination of the cement stabilized mixture with subgrade materials will not be permitted .
the spreading operations shall be performed in a manner to prevent excessive drying or loss of moisture and shall reserve sufficient time to permit complete compaction within the time limits specified or as required by the consultant .
num compacting the cement stabilized mixture immediately upon completion of the spreading of each lift the material shall be thoroughly compacted in a manner to avoid the formation of irregularities and the finished base shall be true to the required grade and crosssection and be of uniform thickness .
the intensity of rolling shall be such that the specified density is obtained to a uniform degree throughout the depth of the mixture and within the time limits .
a minimum density of ninety seven percent of the standard proctor maximum dry density shall be attained throughout .
the surface of the uncompacted partially compacted or completely compacted cement stabilized base shall be kept moist at all times until an asphaltic fog coat seal is applied .
care shall be taken to ensure that excessive water is not applied which subsequently damages the mix or subgrade .
the water is to be applied as a fine spray such that segregation of the cement from the sand or gravel material does not occur .
section num specification num cement stabilized base course august num num during the course of compaction care shall be taken to prevent or eliminate all compaction planes in a manner satisfactory to the consultant .
following compaction before setting of the mixture high spots on the cement stabilized base shall be removed by means of cutting blades or other equipment in a manner to cause as little disturbance as possible to the compacted material .
the excess material shall be removed to the shoulder or adjacent subgrade as directed by the consultant .
loose material shall not be left on the cement stabilized base surface .
filling low spots with cement stabilized material following compaction will not be permitted .
the contractor shall take all precautions necessary to protect the base course from damage by public traffic or construction equipment .
num time limits unless otherwise specified not more than two hours shall elapse between the time cement is added to the sand or gravel material and the time of completion of the final compaction .
in no case shall the time interval exceed the initial hydration period for the cement as determined by the consultant .
if the base course operation is being performed in two layers the two hour time limit will be measured from the time water and cement are added to the sand or gravel of the first layer to the time of completion of final compaction of the uppermost lift .
if the contractor can not meet this time limit he will be required to wait the normal five days curing period before applying the next layer .
num joint construction all joints shall be vertical and uniform in alignment .
longitudinal joints shall be formed or cut in a vertical plane to the subgrade surface shall expose a face of thoroughly compacted material and new material shall be spread and compacted against this face when constructing the adjacent lane or base section .
unless otherwise directed by the consultant transverse construction joints shall be made by trimming the end of the compacted material to a straight line normal to the centreline of the roadbed and with a vertical edge in well compacted material .
no mixture shall be placed until the construction joint has been prepared in a manner satisfactory to the consultant .
num curing seal a curing fog coat seal of liquid asphalt shall be applied immediately following the final compaction and trimming of the cement stabilized base course .
if the base is being constructed in two layers the application of a curing seal between layers will not be necessary if the second layer is to be placed within the two hour time limit as described in subsection num .
if the second layer is to be constructed after the five day cure period of the first layer curing seal will be required on both layers after their respective final compaction .
this fog coat shall be constructed according to specification num prime tack and fog coats .
num temporary crossings temporary crossings across the cement stabilized base shall be constructed only at locations approved by the consultant .
the material placed over the cement stabilized base shall be free section num specification num cement stabilized base course august num num from rocks or particles which may cause damage to the surface .
the material shall be placed to a width of not less than num m for single lane or num m wide for double lane traffic .
the depth of the material shall not be less than num m. the crossing fill shall extend beyond the width of the cement stabilized base by at least num m on either side .
where such crossings are required to accommodate the general public the contractor shall maintain suitable signs barricades and the necessary flagpersons to direct traffic and to prevent damage to the adjacent cement stabilized base .
such crossings will not be permitted prior to the application of the asphaltic fog coat seal unless authorized by the consultant .
num opening to traffic in general completed sections of cement stabilized base course shall be allowed to cure for a minimum of five days before opening to normal traffic and provided the cement stabilized base has hardened sufficiently to prevent marring or distorting of the surface by equipment or traffic .
if the temperature drops below numc during the five day curing period the curing period may be extended if so directed by the consultant .
light local traffic and the contractors construction equipment only shall be permitted on the cement stabilized base during the curing period provided damage to the work is prevented and other accommodation of the local traffic is not possible .
where partial widths are constructed traffic and the contractors hauling equipment shall be accommodated on the untreated portion of the subgrade .
such traffic which must travel over the cement stabilized base during the curing shall have speeds restricted sufficiently to prevent surface damage .
the contractor shall reconstruct any portion damaged by traffic at his own expense .
if required by the consultant the curing seal shall be protected from traffic by spreading a layer of fine sand over the completed cement stabilized base course .
num tack coat prior to the application of the surface course a tack coat shall be applied to the finished cement stabilized base course surface at the locations and to the dimensions designated by the consultant and according to specification num prime tack and fog coats .
num application of asphalt stabilized base course the time interval between the finishing and compacting of the cement stabilized base course and the placing of the asphalt stabilized base course or asphalt concrete pavement as specified shall be not less than ten days .
all cement stabilized base course placed during the construction season shall be covered with asphalt stabilized base course or asphalt concrete pavement as specified prior to seasonal shutdown .
num measurement and payment num cement stabilized base course measurement of cement stabilized base course will be in tonnes .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per tonne for cement stabilized base course .
this payment will be full compensation for supplying water moistening the subgrade surface producing hauling and placing the cement stabilized base course material supply and application of curing seal and tack coats protecting the surface accommodation of traffic and section num specification num cement stabilized base course august num num all other operations and incidentals necessary to complete the work including producing hauling and placing of fines for protection of curing seal coat .
payment will not be made for any material used to repair failures which may occur in the base course due to the contractors faulty workmanship .
any expense incurred in the production hauling and placement of such material shall be borne by the contractor .
num supply of portland cement payment for the supply of portland cement will be made at the unit price bid per tonne for portland cement .
num supply of aggregate aggregate materials incorporated into the work will be paid for in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate .
num curing and tack coats no separate payment will be made for the supply and application of asphalt materials for curing seal coat and fog coat .
all costs will be considered incidental to the work .
num temporary crossings costs for producing hauling placing and subsequent removal and disposal of material for temporary crossings will not be paid for separately but will be considered to be incidental to the work .
section num specification num asphalt surface treatment august num table of contents num asphalt surface treatment num num general num num descriptionnum num materialsnum num aggregate num num asphaltnum num construction methods num num preparing subgrade surface num num general num num road mixing methods num num miscellaneous construction requirementsnum num general num num measurement and payment num num application of asphalt surface treatmentnum num crushed aggregatenum num supply of aggregate num num supply of asphaltnum section num specification num asphalt surface treatment august num num num asphalt surface treatment num general num description asphalt surface treatment shall consist of scarifying and salvaging existing asphalt bound aggregate andor gravel surfacing adding and blending additional crushed aggregate when required adding liquid asphalt mixing and compacting the asphalt bound aggregate on the roadway in accordance with the specifications contained herein .
num materials num aggregate the contractor shall produce crushed aggregate in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling for the designation and class specified .
the contractor shall supply aggregate materials in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate and haul aggregate materials in accordance with specification num hauling .
num asphalt the contractor shall supply asphalt materials in accordance with specification num supply of asphalt .
asphalt binder shall not be fluxed or cut back with oil or any other fluxing agent .
asphalt used for asphalt surface treatment shall be scnum scnum andor scnum unless otherwise specified .
num construction methods num preparing subgrade surface where specified by the consultant the subgrade surface shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of specification num subgrade preparation prior to application of the asphalt surface treatment .
num general unless otherwise specified asphalt surface treatment materials shall be mixed and processed on the subgrade surface of the roadbed .
application of asphaltic binder shall be performed only when the air temperature in the shade is numc or higher and when the weather conditions are otherwise acceptable to the consultant .
application temperature of the asphaltic binder will be as specified by the consultant .
placement of asphalt surface treatment materials on a frozen subgrade will not be permitted .
num road mixing methods when the roadbed to be treated already has surfacing gravel with or without asphalt this material shall be scarified with approved equipment only to the depth of the existing surfacing aggregate windrowed uniformly upon the subgrade additional aggregate added as directed by section num specification num asphalt surface treatment august num num the consultant and mixed and dried by blading back and forth .
when the material has been dried to a moisture content of num or lower it shall be spread by blades and asphalt shall be uniformly applied by an approved type of pressure distributor at a rate of from num litres to num litres per cubic metre as directed by the consultant .
lesser quantities of asphalt may be required when aggregates being used have been treated previously .
care shall be taken to avoid rich or lean areas at the ends of each distributor run .
mixing shall start immediately and shall continue until uniform colour is obtained and the cutback has been released by thorough aeration of the material .
mixing shall be accomplished by approved types of pulvimixers motor graders gravel mixers or other approved equipment only and shall be continued until the resulting mixture is entirely uniform in asphalt content .
mixing shall be carried out between passes of the distributor as well as subsequent to the completion of addition of asphalt .
mixing equipment used shall be controlled and operated on each pass to pick up andor mix all the material to be treated and to avoid cutting into the subgrade or picking up unmixed material on successive passes of the mixer .
the mixture shall then be brought to a single windrow and from there bladed out to required crosssection and uniform depth .
the surface shall then be rolled with pneumatictired rollers or such other equipment as approved by the consultant in conjunction with light blading where necessary to maintain the required crosssection and grade .
rolling shall be continued until all aggregate is firmly embedded and the asphalt surface treatment layer is impervious to moisture penetration .
in lieu of mixing the asphaltic binder as specified above the contractor may employ such other procedures as approved by the consultant .
spreading equipment shall be constructed and operated to produce a layer of material of uniform thickness and width .
the type of spreading equipment used shall be approved by the consultant .
where the asphalt surface treatment has been aerated or mixed in a blanket type layer on the subgrade it shall be windrowed to a uniform windrow prior to spreading and compaction .
where spreading of the asphalt surface treatment mixture is carried out by motor grader the material shall be thoroughly compacted by equipment hereinbefore specified immediately upon completion of each portion of the spreading operation .
rolling shall be performed in such a manner as to avoid the formation of irregularities .
num miscellaneous construction requirements num general where traffic must travel over the roadway surface during the curing period the contractor shall restrict traffic speeds sufficiently to prevent surface damage .
prior to the final acceptance the contractor shall reconstruct to the satisfaction of the consultant and at no additional cost to the department any portion of the asphalt surface treatment damaged by traffic .
section num specification num asphalt surface treatment august num num num measurement and payment num application of asphalt surface treatment payment for asphalt surface treatment will be made at the unit price bid per square metre for asphalt surface treatment .
this payment will be full compensation for applying asphalt binder mixing spreading compacting maintaining traffic and all labour tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num crushed aggregate when crushed aggregate is required to complete the work payment for crushed aggregate will be made at the unit price bid per tonne or per cubic metre whichever is specified in the tender for crushed aggregate .
this payment will be full compensation for processing hauling and placing the material .
num supply of aggregate aggregate materials incorporated into the work will be paid for in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate .
num supply of asphalt payment for the supply of asphalt binder will be made at the unit price bid per tonne for supply of asphalt for surface treatment .
section num specification num cold milling asphalt pavement august num table of contents num cold milling asphalt pavementnum num general num num descriptionnum num reclaimed asphalt pavement rap num num sampling and testingnum num general num num methods of testing num num quality control testing num num acceptance sampling and testing num num construction num num cold milling equipment num num cold milling asphalt pavement num num stockpiling reclaimed asphalt pavement num num department ownershipnum num contractor ownershipnum num gradation of reclaimed asphalt pavementnum num haulingnum num measurement and payment num num cold milling asphalt pavement num num granular stockpile base layer num section num specification num cold milling asphalt pavement august num num num cold milling asphalt pavement num general num description cold milling asphalt pavement is the process of removing existing pavement from the roadway to the lines and dimensions shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
num reclaimed asphalt pavement rap the material produced as a result of cold milling will be defined as reclaimed asphalt pavement rap .
ownership of the rap will be specified in the special provisions and shall be one of or a combination of the following a department ownership of the rap the department will retain ownership of the rap material and the contractor shall haul it to a designated location .
b contractor ownership of the rap the contractor shall assume ownership of the rap material and shall haul it from the roadway to his own storage site or otherwise dispose of it .
num sampling and testing num general sampling and testing will only be required if rap is to be used for the production of asphalt concrete pavement or stockpiled for the department .
the consultant shall have access to the work at all times for taking samples .
the contractor shall provide at his own expense sampling stands sampling devices and other facilities which the consultant may require to safely obtain representative samples of the item being produced .
num methods of testing unless otherwise specified the latest edition of the following standard alberta transportation test methods att shown in table num will be used to determine material characteristics of the rap .
section num specification num cold milling asphalt pavement august num num table num test methods test description test method num .
sampling mixes num .
sieve analysis rap num .
extraction num .
sieve analysis num num fm minus att num att num att num att num notes num in all test methods used as reference in this specification metric sieves as specified in canadian general standards board specification numgpnumm shall be substituted for any other specified wire cloth sieves in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling .
num in all cases the latest amendment or revision current at the closing date of the tender is implied when reference is made to one of the above standards in the specification .
num quality control testing quality control testing is the responsibility of the contractor .
tests performed by the consultant will not be considered to be quality control tests .
the contractor shall provide and pay for equipment and qualified personnel to perform all quality control testing necessary to determine and monitor the characteristics of the rap and to ensure that it meets specification requirements .
test methods sampling and minimum frequency of testing are described in subsection num methods of testing and table num quality control testing requirements .
results of all quality control tests shall be submitted to the consultant on a daily basis .
table num quality control testing requirements test standard minimum frequency sampling mixes att num one per num tonnes rap sieve analysis att num one per num tonnes rap asphalt content extraction att num one per num tonnes extraction sieve analysis att num one per extraction test num acceptance sampling and testing within this specification certain requirements limits and tolerances are specified regarding the quality of materials and workmanship to be supplied .
compliance with these requirements where so specified shall be measured and accepted based on the consultants quality assurance test results .
section num specification num cold milling asphalt pavement august num num num construction num cold milling equipment the contractor shall use equipment with automatic grade and slope controls capable of cold milling existing asphalt pavement to an accurate depth of cut profile and cross slope and shall be capable of loading the milled material directly into trucks .
the cutting head of the cold milling machine shall be a minimum width of num metres .
num cold milling asphalt pavement cold milling asphalt pavement shall be performed in a manner which prevents the tearing and breaking of underlying and adjacent pavement and the contamination of the rap with granular subgrade or deleterious materials .
all rap shall be loaded directly to trucks from the milling machine and hauled to stockpile or disposed of .
the milled roadway surface shall be swept clean prior to opening to traffic .
at locations including but not limited to urban areas and bridge decks the contractor shall sweep the surface in a manner which minimizes dust .
the contractor shall at his own expense promptly repair any localized areas of distress in the milled surface that may present a hazard to traffic .
at the point of daily termination of cold milling operations changes in roadway surface profile or crosssection shall be limited to num mm and longitudinal transitions shall be a maximum of num mm vertically per metre .
in the event of rain or other inclement weather the contractor shall suspend cold milling operations .
the contractor shall make necessary allowances for drainage of water that may pond in areas where the milled sections have not been paved .
num stockpiling reclaimed asphalt pavement num department ownership when stockpiling of rap for department ownership is specified it shall be carried out in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling and the following i a granular stockpile base layer shall be constructed upon the prepared stockpile site to a compacted thickness of at least num mm using granular material containing num percent passing the num num sieve and no more than num passing the num sieve .
the stockpile base layer shall be of such dimensions as to accommodate the maximum quantity of rap which will exist in the stockpile .
ii no equipment shall operate on the stockpile at anytime .
num contractor ownership when it is specified that the contractor shall assume ownership of the rap and he elects to use this material in the production of asphalt concrete pavement stockpiling of the rap shall be performed in a manner which prevents contamination and consolidation of the rap material being used .
section num specification num cold milling asphalt pavement august num num all costs associated with the construction of a stockpile base will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
num gradation of reclaimed asphalt pavement reclaimed asphalt pavement to be used in the production of asphalt concrete pavement shall meet the gradation requirements specified in table num .
table num gradation specifications for reclaimed asphalt pavement num num num num num num num percent passing metric sieve cgsb numgpnumm fm num num num num num hauling haul of rap shall be carried out in accordance with specification num hauling .
num measurement and payment num cold milling asphalt pavement measurement of cold milling asphalt pavement will be made in square metres of roadway milled or tonnes or cubic metres truck box measurement whichever is specified of rap produced .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per square metre tonne or cubic metre whichever is specified for cold milling asphalt pavement .
this payment will be full compensation for cold milling the asphalt pavement sweeping the milled surface loading the rap into trucks stockpiling or disposing of the rap and quality control testing as required .
num granular stockpile base layer when rap is stockpiled for department ownership separate payment will be made for the granular stockpile base layer .
measurement of the granular stockpile base layer will be in tonnes or cubic metres truck box measurement whichever is specified .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per tonne or cubic metre whichever is specified for granular stockpile base layer .
this payment will be full compensation for excavating processing hauling placing and compacting the material .
section num specification num surfacing bridge decks august num table of contents num surfacing bridge decksnum num general num num materialsnum num construction num num measurement and payment num section num specification num surfacing bridge decks august num num num surfacing bridge decks num general the work shall consist of surfacing bridge decks with asphalt concrete removing existing asphalt pavements or removing and replacing asphalt pavement on bridge decks andor bridge approaches as shown on the drawings in accordance with the special provisions or as designated by the consultant .
num materials asphalt concrete mix as produced under specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps will be accepted under this specification .
the requirements under section num materials in specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps shall apply .
num construction detouring of traffic will not be allowed unless permission is granted by the department in writing .
the requirements in specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps shall apply in all respects for construction of asphalt concrete pavement under this specification except that vibratory compaction will not be permitted .
compaction requirements shall be achieved by static rolling only .
where an existing pavement is required to be removed from bridge decks andor approaches the work shall be carried out in a manner and using equipment acceptable to and approved by the department prior to the commencement of the work .
cold milling of acp on bridge decks will not be permitted .
the consultant may direct the removal by cold milling of asphalt concrete pavement on bridge approaches beyond the tiein requirements listed in specification num for transverse pavement joints .
in this case if a unit price for this work is not contained in the contract the work shall be performed on an extra work basis in accordance with specification num general .
the contractor shall take ownership of all debris and dispose of it in a manner suitable to the consultant .
damage to bridge components and appurtenances due to the contractors operations shall be repaired by the contractor at his own expense .
the exposed concrete bridge deck shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt and debris to the satisfaction of the consultant .
the cleaned bridge deck shall be tack coated with two applications of an ssnum emulsified asphalt .
the ssnum emulsion material as delivered by the supplier shall be diluted by adding an equal amount of water and the first of the two applications shall be applied at a rate of num kg per square metre .
the second application shall not proceed until the first has cured or as approved by the consultant and shall be applied at the rate of num kg per square metre .
section num specification num surfacing bridge decks august num num cutback type asphalts will not normally be used but the consultant may permit their use for tacking bridge decks if delays will be incurred due to low ambient temperatures that do not permit the use of emulsions .
if cutback asphalt is used for the tack coat the first coat shall be applied at the rate of num kg per square metre .
the second application shall not proceed until the first has cured or as directed by the consultant and shall be applied at the rate of num kg per square metre .
normally the depth of surfacing will be a nominal num mm .
the consultant may adjust this depth as necessary to match up to existing gutters joints etc .
to ensure a satisfactory riding surface is achieved .
the contractor shall take all necessary precautions to ensure that deck joints and drains are left clear and open upon completion of his paving operation .
the finished pavement surface shall be free of depressions capable of retaining water .
where improvements are to be made to bridge approaches the consultant will detail the work required .
the department may restrict loading on bridge decks .
num measurement and payment removal and disposal of existing asphalt concrete pavement from bridge decks will be measured in square metres and payment will be made at the unit price bid for removal of asphalt concrete pavement from bridge decks .
removal and disposal of existing asphalt concrete pavement and other subgrade excavation material from bridge approaches will be measured in cubic metres and payment will be made at the unit price bid for subgrade excavation .
surfacing bridge decks will be measured in tonnes of mix and payment will be made at the unit price bid for asphalt concrete pavementeps for the applicable mix type section num specification num prime tack and fog coats august num table of contents num prime tack and fog coats num num general num num descriptionnum num definitions num num materialsnum num construction num num measurement and payment num num fog coat num num prime coatnum num tack coat num section num specification num prime tack and fog coats august num num num prime tack and fog coats num general num description the work shall consist of placing an asphalt material on a prepared surface at locations shown on the drawings or designated by the consultant .
num definitions prime coat an application of a liquid asphalt to an absorbent surface to waterproof and promote bonding between the surface being primed and the next course .
tack coat an application of a liquid asphalt to ensure a bond between the surface being paved and the next course .
fog coat an application of a liquid asphalt to seal small cracks and surface voids and as a curing seal for cement stabilized base course .
num materials the contractor shall supply the asphalt material in accordance with specification num supply of asphalt .
the types and grades of liquid asphalts for prime coat tack coat curing fog coat for cement stabilized base course and fog coat shall be as follows prime coat the contractors choice of sepnum sepnum or ssnum for application through august num each season .
the contractors choice of mcnum sepnum sepnum or ssnum for application after august num each season .
sand used for the blotting of excess asphalt due to prime shall be supplied by the contractor .
tack coat and curing fog coat for cement stabilized base course ssnum or msnum for application throughout the construction season .
as well the contractor has the option of using rcnum or rcnum for application after august num each season .
fog coat ssnum for application through august num each season .
the contractors choice of mcnum or ss num for application after august num each season .
the estimated range in application rates for fog coat to a pavement surface is from num to num kilograms per square metre of undiluted ssnum or num to num kilograms per square metre of mc section num specification num prime tack and fog coats august num num num .
the actual application rate is to be chosen by the contractor in consultation with the consultant at the beginning of the project to ensure that complete and uniform coverage is achieved without streaking .
num construction except for cement stabilized bases where it is preferred that the fog coat seal be applied while the surface is still moist asphalt material for tack coat and fog coat shall be applied only when the surface to be treated is dry when the weather is not foggy or rainy and when the surface temperature is above zero degrees celsius for application of cutback asphalts and num degrees celsius for emulsions or as otherwise approved by the consultant .
if ssnum is used for fog coat the material as delivered by the supplier shall be diluted by adding an amount of water to be determined by the contractor .
the asphalt material shall be applied by means of a selfpowered pressure distributor equipped with the following control devices .
num tachometer .
num pressure gauge .
num adjustable length spray bar .
num positive displacement asphalt pump with separate power unit .
num heating coils and burner capable of applying even heat to the asphalt material .
num thermometer well and accurate thermometer .
before applying asphalt material the contractor shall ensure that the distributor meets the following adjustments and requirements num the distributor vehicle will maintain a constant height of the spray bar as the tank is unloaded .
num all spray bar nozzles are of the same manufacture type and size .
num clogged nozzles have been removed and cleaned with solvent .
num all nozzles have been set in the spray bar so that the nozzle slots make the same angle num to num with the longitudinal axis of the spray bar .
num the spray bar has been adjusted to the correct height to ensure uniform application without streaking .
num the spray bar has a positive shutoff to prevent dripping .
num the distributor is capable of maintaining a uniform speed .
the distributor may be checked for calibration by the consultant before being used on the work .
before applying the asphalt material loose dirt or other objectionable material shall be removed from the prepared surface by brooming or by other methods acceptable to the consultant .
where base courses become ravelled the loose material shall be moistened and recompacted to achieve a tight uniform surface .
the asphalt shall be uniformly applied without streaking .
joints and seams shall not be excessively overlapped .
structures wheel guards guardrail and other roadway appurtenances shall not be spattered by the asphalt material .
the contractor shall remove at his own expense any spattering caused by his operation .
section num specification num prime tack and fog coats august num num areas missed by the distributor or inaccessible to the distributor shall be treated using a hand spray or pouring pot .
traffic shall not to be permitted to travel on tack or fog coat until it has cured .
traffic shall not to be permitted to travel on prime coat until num hours after application or until it has cured .
after this period of time excess asphalt material remaining on the surface shall be blotted by sand before traffic is permitted to travel on the surface .
the blotter sand can be any clean sand .
where traffic must be accommodated the contractor shall apply the prime tack or fog coat covering up to only onehalf of the roadway surface at a time .
other portions across the roadway shall not be sprayed until previous applications have properly cured and in the case of prime coat all puddles and excess free asphalt has been blotted .
in all situations prime coat and tack coat shall be maintained by the contractor at his own expense including the cost of the required liquid asphalt .
any area of prime coat or tack coat that has become fouled shall be repaired before asphalt stabilized base course or asphalt concrete pavement is placed .
num measurement and payment num fog coat num separate payment when the contract contains separate bid items for the supply of asphalt and application of fog coat measurement for the supply of asphalt will be by the tonne and measurement for the application of fog coat will be by the square metre .
measurement for the supply of asphalt will be carried out in accordance with section num measurement and payment of specification num supply of asphalt .
payment for the supply of asphalt will be made at the unit price bid for supply of asphalt for fog coat and will be full compensation for the supply of asphalt material to the project storing of the material sampling and quality control .
payment for the application of fog coat will be made at the unit price bid for fog coat application and will be full compensation for surface cleaning and preparation as required the application of fog coat and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num combined payment when the contract does not contain a separate bid item for the supply of asphalt for fog coat measurement for the supply and application of fog coat will be by the square metre .
payment will be made at the unit price bid for supply and application of fog coat and will be full compensation for the supply of asphalt material to the project storing of the material sampling and quality control surface cleaning and preparation as required fog coat application and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num prime tack and fog coats august num num num prime coat all costs associated with the supply application and maintenance of prime coat shall be included in the unit price bid per tonne for granular base course no separate or additional payment will be made .
the supply and application of blotting sand where required will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
num tack coat all costs associated with the supply application and maintenance of tack coat shall be included in the unit price bid per tonne for asphalt concrete pavementeps no separate or additional payment will be made .
section num specification num slurry seal august num table of contents num slurry seal num num general num num materialsnum num aggregate num num additives num num asphaltnum num water num num testingnum num materials testing num num mix design and trial batch num num responsibility for mix designnum num requirements for mix designnum num approval of mix design and trial batchnum num construction num num seasonal and weather limitations num num equipmentnum num surface preparationnum num mixing num num application num num compactionnum num fog coat application num num protectionnum num measurement and payment num num supply of aggregate num num fog coat num section num specification num slurry seal august num num num slurry seal num general a slurry seal is a designed mixture of crushed aggregate additives as needed emulsified asphalt and water applied to a prepared pavement as a surface treatment at locations and conforming to the lines and dimensions specified .
num materials num aggregate the contractor shall produce crushed aggregate in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling for the designation and class of material specified .
the contractor shall supply aggregate materials in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate and haul aggregate materials in accordance with specification num hauling .
num additives additives when required shall be supplied by the contractor .
the contractor shall arrange delivery store and handle additives .
acceptable additives will be portland cement and other materials approved by the consultant .
num asphalt the contractor shall supply asphalt material in accordance with specification num supply of asphalt .
the asphalt binder used for slurry seal shall be either a qskh or an ssnumh emulsified asphalt .
the contractor shall choose between the two .
the same asphalt chosen for the slurry seal binder shall be used for tack and fog coat applications .
num water the contractor shall supply suitable water .
num testing num materials testing quality control and quality control testing are the responsibility of the contractor throughout every stage of the work from production of aggregates to the final accepted product .
tests performed by the consultant will be quality assurance tests and will not be considered as quality control tests .
quality assurance testing will be done by the consultant to determine compliance with the specifications .
the standard test methods to be used for determining material characteristics are section num specification num slurry seal august num num table num test methods test description method alberta transportation designation num .
sampling slurry seal asphalt mixes attnum num .
asphalt extraction attnum num .
sieve analysis attnum testing of materials supplied will be done in accordance with the appropriate sections of specification num aggregate production and stockpiling and specification num supply of asphalt by contractor .
num mix design and trial batch num responsibility for mix design preparation and submission of mix designs for consultant approval are the responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor shall use licensed professional engineering services and a qualified recognized testing laboratory to assess the aggregate material proposed for use and to carry out the design of the slurry mixture .
num requirements for mix design the mix design shall follow astm dnum standard practice for design testing and construction of slurry seal .
the wet track abrasion test loss shall not exceed num gmnum .
the residual asphalt content shall be between num and num .
the mix design shall also contain the following information a gradation of aggregate to be used b the design proportions of each component including additives c other characteristics of the aggregate specified in specification num aggregate production and stockpiling d all test results used in producing the mix design .
num approval of mix design and trial batch the consultant will require up to num working days from the time of receipt of the mix design for evaluation of the material characteristics .
this mix design will be used for the trial batch .
the contractor shall mix a trial batch using the mix design submitted and place it in an area of least traffic .
if the mix does not produce an acceptable product additional trial batches shall be prepared and placed using modified mix designs which must be submitted for approval or modified machine calibrations or both until an acceptable product is produced .
section num specification num slurry seal august num num if the trial batch is acceptable the mix design used for that batch will become the approved mix design .
the contractor shall cover unaccepted trial batches with a second application of slurry seal .
num construction num seasonal and weather limitations the placement of slurry seal shall be limited to the period from may num to september num .
slurry seal shall not be placed when in the opinion of the consultant damage to the finished product may occur for any reason .
the slurry seal shall not be applied when a the atmospheric temperature at the construction area is less than num degrees celsius or b the weather is misty or rainy or c precipitation is a threat for the construction area within twelve hours as forecast by environment canada for the vicinity or d an atmospheric temperature at the construction area of less than num degrees celsius is predicted by environment canada within twentyfour hours .
num equipment num slurry seal machine slurry seal shall be mixed in continuous flow travelling pugmill mixers capable of delivering predetermined proportions of emulsion water and aggregate .
each mixer shall be equipped with feeders that provide accurate metering devices or methods of introducing predetermined amounts of additives when the aggregate is fed .
calibrated controls for aggregate and asphalt emulsion capable of proportioning accurately shall be provided .
the spreader box shall be capable of spreading a mat up to num m wide and shall have flexible squeegee strikeoff strips on each side maintaining contact with the surface to be sealed .
the flexible strikeoff strips shall make close contact with the surface and shall be adjustable to the various slopes of the surface to be sealed .
the box shall contain baffles or other suitable means to help in lateral distribution of slurry and to provide uniform application .
num compaction equipment the slurry seal shall be rolled with a vibratory double drum steel roller weighing at least num tonnes .
num surface preparation the contractor shall remove all surface painted markings in areas where slurry seal is to be applied .
the method and equipment used by the contractor shall be such that no structural damage is caused to the existing pavement .
repair of existing surfaces including crack filling prior to sealing will be identified by the consultant and the required repairs shall be carried out by the contractor .
section num specification num slurry seal august num num the pavement surface to be slurry sealed shall be swept and all dirt dust and other objectionable matter removed .
tack coat shall be applied in accordance with specification num prime tack and fog coats .
num mixing the contractor shall thoroughly mix the slurry seal in a slurry seal machine .
if a mineral filler is used it shall be blended into the mixture .
a minimum amount of additional water may be added to obtain a fluid homogeneous mixture .
num application after the tack coat has cured sufficiently the surface to be sealed shall be wetted immediately before application of the slurry seal .
the surface shall be damp but no standing free water will be permitted .
slurry seal shall be deposited in a continuous flow from the pugmill mixer into a controlled spreader box .
the spreader unit shall proceed at a rate of not more than num metres per minute .
slurry seal shall be applied in the direction of the longitudinal axis of the area to be sealed unless otherwise directed by the consultant .
the application shall be uniform and homogenous with no uncovered areas ridges or loose aggregate .
hand squeegees shall be used to spread slurry seal in areas not accessible to the mixer .
the contractor shall protect manholes valve boxes and bridge expansion joints from application of slurry seal during spreading operations .
spillage shall be removed with hand tools before initial set of the mix .
if the slurry seal is to be applied in two layers compaction and fog coating of the first layer is not required and the first layer shall be allowed to cure before application of the second layer .
num compaction compaction by rolling shall commence as soon after application as possible and when pickup of the slurry material by the roller is at a minimum .
a fog spray of water shall be applied to the roller drums as necessary to prevent pickup .
the compacted surface shall be free of ridges oversize rocks and bond failures .
num fog coat application after compaction and prior to painting of applicable surface markings the contractor shall apply a fog coat seal to the entire slurry seal surface in accordance with specification num prime tack and fog coats .
num protection the completed slurry seal shall be kept free of all traffic until it has cured sufficiently to prevent pickup of aggregate particles .
section num specification num slurry seal august num num num measurement and payment slurry seal will be measured in square metres .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per square metre for slurry seal .
this payment will be full compensation for designing the mix supplying and processing the aggregate supplying the asphalt binder water and additives surface preparation except for the removal of painted lines processing hauling and placing the mixture supplying and applying fog coat and quality control .
payment for preparing trial batches of slurry for evaluating the proper proportions of the various ingredients will not be made directly but will be included in the unit price bid for slurry seal .
if the trial batch is acceptable as applied it will be measured and paid for at the unit price .
if it is unacceptable and covered by a second application no payment will be made for the trial batch applied .
if the contract stipulates a double layer application each layer will be measured and paid for at the unit price bid for slurry seal .
if a second layer of slurry is required as a result of failure of the first layer no payment will be made for the failed layer .
payment for removal of painted lines and markings will be made at the lump sum price bid for removal of painted markings .
num supply of aggregate contrary to specification num supply of aggregate separate payment for the supply of aggregate will not be made .
num fog coat contrary to specification num prime tack and fog coats separate payment for the application of fog coat will not be made .
section num specification num double seal coat august num table of contents num double seal coatnum num general num num materialsnum num aggregate num num asphaltnum num line painting materials num num testingnum num quality control testing num num testing by the consultant num num equipment num num onsite communication systemnum num traffic accommodation and signingnum num traffic accommodation strategynum num preconstruction advertising num num traffic convoynum num construction num num general num num surface preparations num num application of asphalt bindernum num application of aggregatenum num rollingnum num initial brooming num num repair of improperly covered areas num num final broomingnum num traffic accommodation and signing num num interim lane markings num num protection of highway appurtenancesnum num painted roadway lines and pavement messages num num requirements for acceptance num num completion of line paintingnum num measurement and payment num num line and pavement message painting num num supply of aggregate num section num specification num double seal coat august num num num double seal coat num general double seal coat shall consist of a wearing course composed of two applications of processed aggregate held in place by an asphalt binder spread and rolled on a prepared surface to the lines and dimensions shown on the drawings or as designated by the consultant .
num materials num aggregate the contractor shall produce crushed aggregate in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling for the designation and class of material specified .
the contractor shall supply aggregate materials in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate and haul aggregate in accordance with specification num hauling .
num asphalt the contractor shall supply a high float type emulsion binder in accordance with specification num supply of asphalt .
num line painting materials the contractor shall supply all required line painting materials in accordance with specification num supply of line painting materials .
num testing num quality control testing quality control and quality control testing are the responsibility of the contractor throughout every stage of the work from the crushing and production of aggregates to the final accepted product .
the contractor shall provide and pay for equipment and qualified personnel to perform all field testing necessary to determine and monitor the characteristics of the materials produced and incorporated into the work and the final product produced .
num testing by the consultant the consultant may from time to time take samples and carry out testing and inspection of materials incorporated or being incorporated into the work .
tests performed by the consultant will not be considered to be quality control tests .
the contractor shall cooperate with the consultant for such sampling testing and inspection .
such testing and inspection shall not relieve the contractor from any obligation to perform all the work strictly in accordance with the requirements of the contract .
the contractor shall provide at his own expense stands sampling devices and other facilities as the consultant may require to safely obtain representative samples of the item being produced .
num equipment the following equipment shall be used section num specification num double seal coat august num num i a selfpowered pressure asphalt distributor meeting the requirements as listed in specification num prime tack and fog coats .
ii a selfpropelled aggregate spreader capable of spreading the aggregate uniformly at the applicable rate in one application over the full width of the asphalt applied .
the spreader shall be capable of controlling and adjusting the width and rate of spread .
the spreader shall be equipped with the necessary devices to enable it to be attached securely to the aggregate haul truck while in the process of dumping the aggregates into the spreader .
iii selfpropelled pneumatic tire rollers .
wobble wheel type rollers shall not be used .
the rollers shall be capable of reversing direction without causing backlash or damage to the seal coat .
iv a sufficient number of power sweepers to adequately broom loose aggregate from all sections of seal coated roadway .
all power sweepers shall be equipped with a minimum of one yellow rotating warning light .
v the contractor shall supply pilot vehicles for convoying traffic .
the pilot vehicles shall have sufficient accompanying personnel to provide convoy services on a num hour per day availability .
the standard number of pilot vehicles to be provided shall be two for two lane highways or as specified in the special provisions .
additional vehicles may be required as determined by the consultant at the time of construction .
all pilot vehicles shall be equipped as follows a two way radio for communication .
an overhead revolving beacon with an amber lens a minimum of num mm high and num mm wide .
the beacon shall be mounted on the top of the vehicle fully visible to traffic approaching from both the front and rear .
a sequential arrowboard meeting the requirements described in specification num general .
the arrowboard shall be controlled from a console located in the vehicle cab .
the arrowboard display shall be visible to traffic approaching the rear of the trucks .
additional pilot vehicles beyond the standard number specified may be exempt from including a sequential arrowboard with the approval of the consultant .
the contractor shall cease seal coat application if any equipment integral to either the compaction sweeping or traffic accommodation operations is not available or is not in good working order as determined by the consultant .
num onsite communication system the contractor shall provide an onsite communications system for workers that are remote from the active seal coat zone .
workers are considered remote from the active work zone where they are not in a position to readily walk to an appointed location to use a communications device .
the following work activities are considered to be remote from the active work zone flagging operations section num specification num double seal coat august num num traffic convoy operations placing of davidson roadway markers sweeping operations outside of the active work zone rolling operations outside the active work zone the contractor shall also provide communications devices for any other remote activity as directed by the consultant .
num traffic accommodation and signing num traffic accommodation strategy the contractors traffic accommodation strategy tas shall address all phases of construction including subsequent brooming and line painting activities .
the tas shall be developed based upon the requirements of drawing tcsbnuma or tcsbnumb as appropriate .
in addition to the minimum requirements the contractors traffic accommodation strategy shall include the following a strategy for the protection of workers when placing davidson temporary road pavement markers .
a strategy for the accommodation of traffic when seal coating bridge decks .
a strategy for the accommodation of traffic through all major intersections and approaches .
no seal coat application work shall commence until the contractors traffic accommodation strategy has been reviewed and accepted by the consultant .
during periods of heavy traffic volume as determined by the consultant the contractor shall shut down construction operations that may impede the safe flow of public traffic .
num preconstruction advertising the contractor shall advertise the seal construction a minimum of num days in advance of the commencement of work on each respective highway section .
preconstruction advertising for seal coat work at stand alone bridge deck locations is not required .
the mechanism for advertising the seal coat work shall be standard business advertising signs with minimum dimensions of num m high and num m wide .
signs shall be comprised of a metal frame with adjustable legs .
the signs shall have minimum of num lines with num letters per line .
letters shall be a minimum of num cm wide and num cm high .
wording of the signs shall be as follows with the applicable lengths and dates entered seal coat construction next xxx km month day day expect delays the signs shall be placed on the outside sideslope in a level position a minimum of num m above the edge of pavement .
placement of the sign on the shoulder or in the ditch will not be permitted .
the contractor shall ensure the signs are anchored down to prevent tipping over .
alternative types of signs may be used upon approval by the consultant .
section num specification num double seal coat august num num the contractor shall revise the dates on the preconstruction advertising signs as required based on any changes to the construction schedule .
signs shall be installed at locations designated by the consultant .
depending on the scheduling the contractor may be required to install advertising signs at multiple sites simultaneously .
num traffic convoy traffic convoy by pilot vehicles not exceeding num km per hour shall be used on all seal coat projects .
traffic convoy shall be initiated at the commencement of seal coat application .
traffic convoy may be required for subsequent brooming activities depending upon site specific traffic conditions such as length of work zone available site distances traffic volumes etc .
notwithstanding the previous traffic convoy will be required whenever the length of subsequent brooming activities within the driving lanes is greater than num kilometres .
on all highways traffic convoy shall continue until second brooming of the seal coat is complete and the speed restriction has been increased to num km per hour or as otherwise directed by the consultant .
num pilot vehicles for twolane highways the number of pilot vehicles required for seal coating operations on two lane highways shall be as follows distance between flag stations km num num num num num num num num num num num standard number of pilot vehicles num num num num construction num general double seal coat construction shall be performed prior to september num and during daylight hours only .
the method of application of the double seal coat including application rates for the asphalt binder and the processed aggregate shall be determined by the contractor .
the contractor shall also determine the amount of compaction required based on consideration of compaction equipment atmospheric conditions and acceptance requirements .
double seal coat shall be constructed in two courses in accordance with the following sections of this specification .
a minimum of num hours shall be allowed for curing of the first course before application of the second course .
num surface preparations before the asphalt binder is applied the surface to be treated shall be swept clean of all dirt sand dust or objectionable matter by means of a power sweeper .
if base courses become ravelled the loose material shall be compacted before brooming and a prime coat applied .
section num specification num double seal coat august num num prime coat shall be repaired at no direct expense to the department .
dried mud or other foreign matter which can not be removed with the power sweeper shall be removed by hand blade or other methods .
application of prime coats shall be in accordance with specification num prime tack and fog coats .
num application of asphalt binder for all courses asphalt binder shall not be applied until the surface has been cleaned as required and the section approved by the consultant .
the asphalt binder shall be applied with a pressure distributor in a single uniform continuous spread over the section to be treated .
skipped areas shall be corrected by hand spray .
the application of asphalt binder shall not precede the application of seal coat aggregate by more than num metres .
asphalt binder shall not be spilled sprayed or tracked on completed sections of seal coat .
num application of aggregate the application of asphalt binder shall be followed immediately with the applicable course of aggregate of the designation and class shown on the drawings .
it shall be uniformly spread by means of an approved mechanical spreader .
num rolling immediately after spreading of each course the aggregate shall be rolled .
one total compaction coverage by the rollers shall be completed within one quarter hour after the aggregate has been spread and rolling shall continue until a smooth thoroughly compacted surface has been obtained .
num initial brooming between the time period of num hours and num hours after rolling of each course has been completed or after the initial set of the asphalt the surface shall be broomed to remove any remaining loose aggregate .
num repair of improperly covered areas any areas of either course that have not been properly covered after brooming shall be treated using hand methods if necessary .
num final brooming the contractor shall continue to broom the surface to remove any loose aggregate when required and as often as required during a two week period following the final application or as directed by the consultant .
all highwaytohighway junctions and all junctions of paved highways with municipal roads shall be swept clear of loose aggregate .
the contractor shall use a pickup broom for all brooming in urban and other areas where loose aggregate can not be swept onto sideslopes or onto ditches .
section num specification num double seal coat august num num num traffic accommodation and signing the contractor shall erect and maintain temporary construction signs in accordance with the traffic accommodation in work zones manual .
a traffic accommodation strategy as outlined in specification num traffic accommodation and temporary signing will be required for all phases of construction including line painting activities .
the signing strategy shall be developed based upon the requirements of the traffic accommodation in work zones second edition num manual .
num traffic convoy traffic shall be accommodated through the work .
the contractor shall at his own expense provide flagmen pilot vehicles andor illuminated arrow boards as required .
traffic and construction equipment including aggregate haul trucks shall not travel over uncovered surfaces of fresh asphalt binder .
traffic shall not use the sections of seal coat until after rolling is complete .
traffic convoy at speeds not exceeding num km per hour shall commence at the start of seal coat application and shall continue up to six hours after all rolling has been completed as directed by the consultant .
num interim lane markings the contractor shall provide interim painted lane markings on all newly constructed surfaces once sufficient brooming has been complete or on tacked surfaces that are to be exposed to traffic overnight .
all paint spots shall be num mm wide and num mm long shall be applied lengthwise to the road surface shall be spaced num m apart on centre in tangent sections and num m apart on curves shall employ the same paint colour as the permanent marking and shall be completely covered with glass beads at the time of painting .
num protection of highway appurtenances the contractor shall ensure that all highway appurtenances including wheel guards guardrail signs and delineators as well as bridge structures and appurtenances are protected from asphalt andor aggregate contamination .
in addition to being responsible for the cleanup of any contaminated areas the contractor is advised that many bridge components and materials are affected by cleanup and any costs for repair of damaged structures will be charged to the contractor .
num painted roadway lines and pavement messages the contractor shall paint all roadway lines and pavement messages for the areas receiving seal coat in accordance with specifications num painted roadway lines and num painted pavement messages .
all painted roadway lines and painted pavement messages applied to the final seal coat surface shall be applied twice at the full application rate for each application .
the second application shall be completed after the contractors final brooming .
on two lane highways the second application will be from the opposite direction of the initial application .
in all cases the roadway shall not be posted at gazetted highway speeds until all work including line painting has been completed .
the maximum length of roadway posted at less than section num specification num double seal coat august num num gazetted highway speeds shall not exceed num km .
num requirements for acceptance requirements for the acceptance of the completed double seal coat are as follows i materials shall meet all specified requirements ii a minimum of num chip coverage shall be obtained with no single bare area greater than num mnum in any one square metre iii there shall be no streaking or ravelling iv the finished surface shall have a uniform even texture v no overrich or bleeding areas shall be evident vi no loose aggregate shall be evident and vii all new lane markings as required have been applied in accordance with specification num painted roadway lines .
work that does not meet the foregoing requirements shall be repaired or reconstructed to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num completion of line painting the contractor shall complete the painting of roadway lines within five days of completing the placing of the double seal on each individual roadway .
failure to meet this requirement will result in a penalty of num per day for each calendar day delay in completing the painting .
the department may extend the time allowed to complete the painting up to a maximum of ten days providing i the contractor submits a written request to the consultant accompanied by a detailed proposed line painting schedule .
ii the reason for the request stated in the request is one of the following a the double seal coat requires additional curing time and subsequent brooming work prior to painting the traffic markings or b the work site is not available to the contractor through no fault of the contractor or c the consultant suspends the work and standby payments are due in accordance with specification num general or d there is a delay resulting from an order of a court or from strikes or lockouts or e the traffic markings can not be painted for reasons of inclement weather or conditions resulting from inclement weather .
section num specification num double seal coat august num num num measurement and payment double seal coat will be measured in square metres and payment will be made at the unit price bid per square metre for application of seal coat for each course applied .
this payment will be full compensation for preparing the existing surface supplying paint and painting interim lane markings supplying and applying the asphalt binder supplying processing hauling placing and rolling the aggregate brooming quality control traffic accommodation and traffic convoy services using the standard number of pilot vehicles as specified .
payment for additional pilot vehicles as approved by the consultant will be paid for as extra work in accordance with specification num general .
no separate payment will be made for any additional equipment tools or labour employed to satisfy special brooming requirements .
no payment will be made for any costs incurred to rectify defective work .
num line and pavement message painting payment for supplying paint and painting roadway lines intersections interchanges and messages will be made in accordance with the applicable sections of specifications num painted roadway lines and num painted pavement messages .
this payment will be made separately for each application of painted roadway lines andor painted pavement messages .
num supply of aggregate contrary to specification num supply of aggregate no separate payment will be made for supplying aggregate for the seal coat .
however if the contractor supplies aggregate from a crown source on undeeded land operated primarily under lease or licence and for which the department does not have a reservation the department will deduct num per tonne from the total payments made under the contract .
the tonnage will be determined by multiplying the total square metres for each course applied by a conversion factor of num kilograms per square metre .
section num specification num graded aggregate seal coat august num table of contents num graded aggregate seal coat num num general num num materialsnum num aggregate num num temporary markersnum num asphaltnum num blotter sand num num line painting materials num num equipmentnum num testingnum num quality control testing num num testing by the consultant num num onsite communication systemnum num traffic accommodation and signingnum num traffic accommodation strategynum num preconstruction advertising num num traffic convoynum num construction num num surface preparations num num application areasnum num rolling and brooming num num protection of structures num num temporary markersnum num pavement markings num num painted roadway lines and pavement messagesnum num durable pavement message markingsnum num grooved rumble stripsnum num requirements for acceptance num num completion of line paintingnum num measurement and payment num num general num num supply of aggregate num section num specification num graded aggregate seal coat august num num num graded aggregate seal coat num general graded aggregate seal coat shall consist of a surface treatment composed of an asphalt binder and a graded aggregate spread and compacted in one application on a prepared surface to the lines and dimensions shown on the drawings or as designated by the consultant .
num materials num aggregate the contractor shall produce crushed aggregate in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling for the designation and class of material specified .
the contractor shall supply aggregate materials in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate and haul aggregate materials in accordance with specification num hauling .
num temporary markers the contractor shall supply temporary reflectorized centerline markings in accordance with the alberta transportation products list .
num asphalt the contractor shall supply a high float type emulsified asphalt binder in accordance with specification num supply of asphalt .
num blotter sand the contractor shall maintain a supply of blotter sand onsite at all times .
in the case of an emulsion release where the emulsion has the potential to wash off the road surface into nearby ditches or streams the blotter sand shall be used to soak up the free emulsion .
num line painting materials the contractor shall supply all line painting materials in accordance with specification num supply of line painting materials .
num equipment the contractor shall use the following equipment a a selfpowered pressure asphalt distributor meeting the requirements as listed in specification num prime tack and fog coats .
b a sufficient number of power sweepers to adequately broom loose aggregate from all sections of seal coated roadway .
all power sweepers shall be equipped with a minimum of one yellow rotating warning light .
c a selfpropelled aggregate spreader capable of spreading the aggregate uniformly at the specified rate in one application over the fullwidth of the asphalt applied .
the spreaders shall be capable of controlling and adjusting the width and rate of spread .
the spreaders section num specification num graded aggregate seal coat august num num shall be equipped with the necessary devices to enable it to be attached securely to the aggregate haul truck while in the process of dumping the aggregates into the spreader .
d a minimum of two selfpropelled pneumatic rollers each with a minimum static weight of num tonnes .
the rollers shall be capable of reversing direction without causing backlash or damage to the seal coat .
e the contractor shall supply pilot vehicles for convoying traffic .
the pilot vehicles shall have sufficient accompanying personnel to provide convoy services on a num hour per day availability .
all pilot vehicles shall be equipped as follows a two way radio for communication .
an overhead revolving beacon with an amber lens a minimum of num mm high and num mm wide .
the beacon shall be mounted on the top of the vehicle fully visible to traffic approaching from both the front and rear .
a sequential arrowboard meeting the requirements as described in specification num general .
the arrowboard shall be controlled from a console located in the vehicle cab .
the arrowboard display shall be visible to traffic approaching the rear of the trucks .
additional pilot vehicles beyond the standard number specified may be exempt from including a sequential arrowboard with the approval of the consultant .
the contractor shall cease seal coat application if any equipment integral to either the compaction sweeping or traffic accommodation operations is not available or is not in good working order as determined by the consultant .
num testing num quality control testing quality control and quality control testing are the responsibility of the contractor throughout every stage of the work from the crushing and production of aggregates to the final accepted product .
tests performed by the consultant will not be considered to be quality control tests .
the contractor shall provide and pay for equipment and qualified personnel to perform all field testing necessary to determine and monitor the characteristics of the materials produced and incorporated into the work and the final product produced .
quality control testing requirements for aggregates are listed in specification num aggregate production and stockpiling .
the contractor shall provide the consultant with daily inspection reports containing the following information date description of seal coat completed i.e .
highway number control section lane beginning and end stations .
total area treated target and bulk measured application rates for both the asphalt emulsion and aggregate .
daily inspection reports shall be submitted no later than the day following placement .
section num specification num graded aggregate seal coat august num num num testing by the consultant the consultant may from time to time take samples and carry out testing and inspection of materials incorporated or being incorporated into the work .
tests performed by the consultant will not be considered to be quality control tests .
the contractor shall cooperate with the consultant for such sampling testing and inspection .
such testing and inspection shall not relieve the contractor from any obligation to perform all the work strictly in accordance with the requirements of the contract .
the contractor shall provide at his own expense stands sampling devices and other facilities as the consultant may require to safely obtain representative samples of the item being produced .
num onsite communication system the contractor shall provide an onsite communications system for workers that are remote from the active seal coat zone .
workers are considered remote from the active work zone where they are not in a position to readily walk to an appointed location to use a communications device .
the following work activities are considered to be remote from the active work zone flagging operations traffic convoy operations placing of davidson roadway markers sweeping operations outside of the active work zone rolling operations outside the active work zone the contractor shall also provide communications devices for any other remote activity as directed by the consultant .
num traffic accommodation and signing num traffic accommodation strategy the contractors traffic accommodation strategy tas shall address all phases of construction including subsequent brooming and line painting activities .
the tas shall be developed based upon the requirements of drawing tcsbnuma or tcsbnumb as appropriate .
in addition to the minimum requirements the contractors traffic accommodation strategy shall include the following a strategy for the protection of workers when placing davidson temporary road pavement markers .
a strategy for the accommodation of traffic when seal coating bridge decks .
a strategy for the accommodation of traffic through all major intersections and approaches .
no seal coat application work shall commence until the contractors traffic accommodation strategy has been reviewed and accepted by the consultant .
during periods of heavy traffic volume as determined by the consultant the contractor shall shut down construction operations that may impede the safe flow of public traffic .
section num specification num graded aggregate seal coat august num num num preconstruction advertising the contractor shall advertise the seal coat construction a minimum of num days in advance of the commencement of work on each respective highway section .
preconstruction advertising for seal coat work at stand alone bridge deck locations is not required .
the mechanism for advertising the seal coat work shall be standard business advertising signs with minimum dimensions of num m high and num m wide .
signs shall be comprised of a metal frame with adjustable legs .
the signs shall have minimum of num lines with num letters per line .
letters shall be a minimum of num cm wide and num cm high .
wording of the signs shall be as follows with the applicable lengths and dates entered seal coat construction next xxx km month day day expect delays the signs shall be placed on the outside sideslope in a level position a minimum of num m above the edge of pavement .
placement of the sign on the shoulder or in the ditch will not be permitted .
the contractor shall ensure the signs are anchored down to prevent tipping over .
alternative types of signs may be used upon approval by the consultant .
the contractor shall revise the dates on the preconstruction advertising signs as required based on any changes to the construction schedule .
signs shall be installed at locations designated by the consultant .
depending on the scheduling the contractor may be required to install advertising signs at multiple sites simultaneously .
num traffic convoy traffic convoy by pilot vehicles not exceeding num km per hour shall be used on all seal coat projects .
traffic convoy shall be initiated at the commencement of seal coat application .
traffic convoy may be required for subsequent brooming activities depending upon site specific traffic conditions such as length of work zone available site distances traffic volumes etc .
notwithstanding the previous traffic convoy will be required whenever the length of subsequent brooming activities within the driving lanes is greater than num kilometres .
on all highways traffic convoy shall continue until second brooming of the seal coat is complete and the speed restriction has been increased to num km per hour or as otherwise directed by the consultant .
num pilot vehicles for twolane highways the number of pilot vehicles required for seal coating operations on two lane highways shall be as follows distance between flag stations km num num num num num num num num num num num standard number of pilot vehicles num num num section num specification num graded aggregate seal coat august num num num construction the placement of graded aggregate seal coat shall be limited to the period from may num to september num .
the extent of surface preparation required and the method of application of the graded aggregate seal coat including application rates for the asphalt binder and the processed aggregate shall be determined by the contractor .
the contractor shall also determine the amount of compaction required based on consideration of compaction equipment atmospheric conditions and acceptance requirements .
construction shall be carried out during daylight hours only .
num surface preparations before the asphalt binder is applied the surface to be treated shall be cleaned of all dirt sand dust or objectionable matter .
asphalt binder shall not be applied until the surface has been cleaned as required and the section approved by the consultant .
num application areas unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings the contractor shall not apply seal coat to roadway shoulders or to bridge decks .
the contractor shall apply seal coat as follows i to each through travel lane to the widths shown on the contract drawing regardless of the widths shown on the intersection drawings .
ii at intersections to all parallel lanes and their respective tapers in general conformance with the drawing entitled seal coat applications at intersections cbnummnum or cbnum nummnum as applicable or as shown on the shaded intersection drawings if provided .
iii to all passing and climbing lanes and their respective tapers .
iv application on bridge decks where required will generally be from curb face to curb face .
num rolling and brooming immediately after spreading the aggregate shall be rolled .
after initial set of the binder normally num to num hours depending on atmospheric condition further compaction of the seal coat shall continue by using either further rolling or controlled traffic or a combination of both until a thoroughly compacted surface is obtained .
the contractor shall determine the amount of additional compaction required based on consideration of compaction equipment traffic conditions atmospheric conditions and acceptance requirements .
once compaction has been achieved light brooming of the surface shall be undertaken to remove any loose aggregate .
the contractor shall broom the graded aggregate seal coat in daylight hours only when required and as often as required during a two week period following the initial application or as directed by the consultant .
section num specification num graded aggregate seal coat august num num the contractor shall use a pickup broom for all brooming in urban and other areas where loose aggregate can not be swept onto sideslopes or onto ditches .
the contractor shall sweep all paved intersections and all paved farm and field approaches clear of loose chips .
the contractor shall use a pickup broom when sweeping all bridge decks .
the contractor shall hand broom areas where the pickup broom can not reach .
under no circumstances shall material be swept over the bridge rail .
the contractor shall ensure that chips or other materials are not propelled into the air during brooming operations .
num protection of structures structures curbs guardrail and other appurtenances shall not be spattered with the asphalt binder .
the contractor shall remove any spattering caused by his operation .
asphalt binder shall not be spilled sprayed or tracked on completed sections of seal coat .
the contractor shall not operate vibratory rollers in vibratory mode on any bridge deck .
the contractor shall ensure that bridge expansion joints drains curbs and appurtenances are protected from asphalt andor chip contamination .
in addition to being responsible for the cleanup of any contaminated areas the contractor is advised that many bridge components and materials are affected by cleanup and any costs for repair of damaged structures will be charged to the contractor .
num temporary markers the contractor shall supply and install temporary reflectorized centreline markings davidson temporary road pavement markers or equivalent on the centreline of the roadway immediately before applying the asphalt binder .
markers shall be placed at num m intervals on tangent sections and at num m intervals on curves and shall remain in place .
num pavement markings num painted roadway lines and pavement messages the contractor shall reference and record the location and configuration of all existing painted roadway lines and painted pavement messages for the areas to receive graded aggregate seal coat and reestablish the markings after seal coat application in accordance with specifications num painted roadway lines and num painted pavement messages .
painted roadway lines and painted pavement messages shall be applied twice at the full application rate for each application .
on two lane highways the second application shall be applied from the opposite direction of the initial application .
all edge lines shall be painted completely off the seal coat and will only require one paint application .
in all cases the roadway shall not be posted at gazetted highway speeds until all work including line painting has been completed .
the maximum length of roadway posted at less than gazetted highway speeds shall not exceed num km .
section num specification num graded aggregate seal coat august num num num durable pavement message markings unless otherwise directed the contractor shall preserve all existing durable pavement message markings maintaining them free of contamination by asphalt binder andor seal coat aggregate .
where the contractor fails to preserve existing durable pavement message markings he shall remove any chip seal coat materials and replace the markings at his own expense .
num grooved rumble strips unless otherwise directed the contractor shall preserve all existing shoulder and stop condition grooved rumble strips maintaining them free of contamination by asphalt binder andor seal coat aggregate .
where the contractor fails to preserve existing grooved rumble strips he shall reestablish the grooved rumble strips at his own expense .
num requirements for acceptance requirements for the acceptance of the completed graded aggregate seal coat are as follows i materials shall meet all specified requirements ii a minimum of num aggregate coverage has been obtained with no single bare area greater than nummnum in any one square metre iii there is no streaking or ravelling iv the surface of the seal has a uniform even texture v no overrich or bleeding areas are evident and vi no loose aggregate is evident .
vii all existing pavement markings have been preserved or replaced in accordance with specifications num painted roadway lines and num painted pavement messages .
graded aggregate seal coat that does not meet the foregoing requirements shall be repaired or reconstructed at the contractors expense to the satisfaction of the consultant .
the contractor may use hand application methods to reseal small isolated areas in need of repair .
regardless of the method used all repaired or reconstructed areas shall have a uniform texture and appearance .
num completion of line painting the contractor shall complete the replacement of roadway lines within five days of completing the placing of the seal coat on each individual roadway .
failure to meet this requirement will result in a penalty of num per day for each calendar day delay in completing the painting .
the department may extend the time allowed to complete the painting up to a maximum of ten days providing i the contractor submits a written request to the consultant accompanied by a detailed proposed line painting schedule .
ii the reason for the request stated in the request is one of the following a the seal coat requires additional curing time and subsequent brooming work prior to painting the traffic markings or b the work site is not available to the contractor through no fault of the contractor or section num specification num graded aggregate seal coat august num num c the consultant suspends the work and standby payments are due in accordance with specification num general or d there is a delay resulting from an order of a court or from strikes or lockouts or e the traffic markings can not be painted for reasons of inclement weather or conditions resulting from inclement weather .
num measurement and payment num general the amount of graded aggregate seal coat or graded aggregate seal coat on bridge decks considered for acceptance will be based upon the estimated quantities as shown in the unit price schedule .
generally a variance in these quantities will only be considered when the scope of the work has been modified by the department .
however the department reserves the right to measure the work actually constructed to confirm compliance with the design and any such measurement will become the basis for the final payment .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per square metre for graded aggregate seal coat or graded aggregate seal coat bridge decks as applicable .
payment will be full compensation for preparing the existing surface protecting bridge structures where applicable supplying and installing temporary lane markers supplying and applying the asphalt binder supplying processing hauling placing and rolling the aggregate brooming the finished surface replacing andor maintaining pavement markings roadway line painting quality control traffic accommodation and traffic convoy services using the standard number of pilot vehicles as specified and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete this work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
all costs associated with preconstruction advertising including the fabrication installation maintenance updating and removal of signs the provision and operation of the onsite communication system and the supply and application of blotter sand as required will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
payment for the provision of pilot vehicles in excess of the standard number specified when approved by the consultant will be made in accordance with section num extra work of specification num general .
no separate or additional payment will be made for any additional equipment tools or labour employed to satisfy special brooming requirements .
no payment will be made for any costs incurred to rectify defective work .
num supply of aggregate the contractor is advised that if aggregate is supplied from a crown source on undeeded land operated primarily under lease or license and for which the department does not have a reservation the department will deduct num per tonne from the total payments made under the contract .
the tonnage will be determined by multiplying the total square metres of chip seal work performed by a conversion factor of num kilograms per square metre .
section num specification num chip seal coat august num table of contents num chip seal coat num num general num num materialsnum num aggregate num num temporary markersnum num asphaltnum num water num num blotter sand num num line painting materials num num testingnum num quality control testing num num testing by the consultant num num equipmentnum num onsite communication systemnum num traffic accommodation and signingnum num traffic accommodation strategynum num preconstruction advertising num num traffic convoynum num construction num num general num num temporary markersnum num application areasnum num protection of bridge structuresnum num rolling and brooming num num speed restrictionsnum num pavement markings num num painted roadway lines and pavement messagesnum num durable pavement message markingsnum num grooved rumble stripsnum num requirements for acceptance num num timing for completion of pavement markings num num measurement and payment num num general num num supply of aggregate num section num specification num chip seal coat august num num num chip seal coat num general chip seal coat shall consist of a wearing course composed of processed aggregates held in place by an asphalt binder spread and rolled on a prepared surface to the lines and dimensions shown on the drawings or as designated by the consultant .
num materials num aggregate the contractor shall produce crushed aggregate in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling for the designation and class of material specified .
the contractor shall supply aggregate materials in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate and haul aggregate in accordance with specification num hauling .
num temporary markers the contractor shall supply temporary reflectorized centerline markings in accordance with the alberta transportation products list .
num asphalt the contractor shall supply a cationic rapid set asphalt binder in accordance with specification num supply of asphalt .
num water the contractor shall supply all water required for washing the aggregate .
num blotter sand the contractor shall maintain a supply of blotter sand onsite at all times .
in the case of an emulsion release where the emulsion has the potential to wash off the road surface into nearby ditches or streams the blotter sand shall be used to soak up the free emulsion .
num line painting materials the contractor shall supply all line painting materials in accordance with specification num supply of line painting materials .
num testing num quality control testing quality control and quality control testing are the responsibility of the contractor throughout every stage of the work from the crushing and production of aggregates to the final accepted product .
the contractor shall provide and pay for equipment and qualified personnel to perform all field testing necessary to determine and monitor the characteristics of the materials produced and incorporated into the work and the final product produced .
quality control testing requirements for aggregates are listed in specification num aggregate production and stockpiling .
section num specification num chip seal coat august num num the contractor shall provide the consultant with daily inspection reports containing the following information date description of seal coat completed i.e .
highway number control section lane beginning and end stations .
total area treated target and bulk measured application rates for both the asphalt emulsion and aggregate .
daily inspection reports shall be submitted no later than the day following placement .
num testing by the consultant the consultant may from time to time take samples and carry out testing and inspection of materials incorporated or being incorporated into the work .
tests performed by the consultant will not be considered to be quality control tests .
the contractor shall cooperate with the consultant for such sampling testing and inspection .
such testing and inspection shall not relieve the contractor from any obligation to perform all the work strictly in accordance with the requirements of the contract .
the contractor shall provide at his own expense such stands sampling devices and other facilities as the consultant may require to safely obtain representative samples of the item being produced .
num equipment the following equipment shall be used i a selfpowered pressure asphalt distributor meeting the requirements as listed in specification num prime tack and fog coats .
ii a selfpropelled aggregate spreader capable of spreading the aggregate uniformly at the specified rate in numapplication over the full width of the asphalt applied .
the spreader shall be capable of controlling and adjusting the width and rate of spread .
the spreader shall be equipped with the necessary devices to enable it to be attached securely to the aggregate haul truck while in the process of dumping the aggregates into the spreader .
iii selfpropelled pneumatic rollers with a minimum static weight of num tonnes and capable of reversing direction without causing backlash or damage to the chip seal coat .
the number of rollers deployed shall be in accordance with the operating conditions outlined in subsection num rolling and brooming .
iv a minimum of three power sweepers in working condition prior to the start of seal coat activities .
two of the brooms shall be dedicated to sweeping chip seal coat placed that same day .
a third broom shall be used for brooming loose chips on chip seal coat placed in previous days .
all power sweepers shall be equipped with a minimum of one yellow rotating warning light .
v the contractor shall supply pilot vehicles for convoying traffic .
the pilot vehicles shall have sufficient accompanying personnel to provide convoy services on a num hour per day availability .
all pilot vehicles shall be equipped as follows section num specification num chip seal coat august num num a two way radio for communication .
an overhead revolving beacon with an amber lens a minimum of num mm high and num mm wide .
the beacon shall be mounted on the top of the vehicle fully visible to traffic approaching from both the front and rear .
a sequential arrowboard meeting the requirements as shown in specification num general .
the arrowboard shall be controlled from a console located in the vehicle cab .
the arrowboard display shall be visible to traffic approaching the rear of the trucks .
additional pilot vehicles beyond the standard number specified may be exempt from including a sequential arrowboard with the approval of the consultant .
the contractor shall cease chip seal coat application if any equipment integral to either the compaction sweeping or traffic accommodation operations is not available or is not in good working order as determined by the consultant .
num onsite communication system the contractor shall provide an onsite communications system for workers that are remote from the active chip seal coat zone .
workers are considered remote from the active work zone where they are not in a position to readily walk to an appointed location to use a communications device .
the following work activities are considered to be remote from the active work zone flagging operations traffic convoy operations placing of davidson roadway markers sweeping operations outside of the active work zone rolling operations outside the active work zone the contractor shall also provide communications devices for any other remote activity as directed by the consultant .
num traffic accommodation and signing num traffic accommodation strategy the contractors traffic accommodation strategy tas shall address all phases of construction including subsequent brooming and line painting activities .
the tas shall be developed based upon the requirements of drawing tcsbnuma or tcsbnumb as appropriate .
in addition to the minimum requirements of the guideline diagram for typical signing seal coat operations four lane divided highway traffic accommodation on four lane divided highways shall be treated as a one lane closure and shall utilize traffic cones positioned in accordance with the minimum requirements shown on traffic accommodation guideline drawing tcsb numb .
crossing of the centre median by construction equipment or vehicles will not be permitted .
in addition to the minimum requirements the contractors traffic accommodation strategy shall include the following a strategy for the protection of workers when placing davidson temporary road pavement markers .
section num specification num chip seal coat august num num a strategy for the accommodation of traffic when chip seal coating bridge decks .
a strategy for the accommodation of traffic through all major intersections and approaches .
no seal coat application work shall commence until the contractors traffic accommodation strategy has been reviewed and accepted by the consultant .
during periods of heavy traffic volume as determined by the consultant the contractor shall shut down construction operations that may impede the safe flow of public traffic .
on a divided highways the contractor shall not close or restrict a roadway lane for a distance greater than numkilometres in advance of the aggregate spreader .
num preconstruction advertising the contractor shall advertise the chip seal construction a minimum of num days in advance of the commencement of work on each respective highway section .
preconstruction advertising for seal coat work at stand alone bridge deck locations is not required .
the mechanism for advertising the seal coat work shall be standard business advertising signs with minimum dimensions of num m high and num m wide .
signs shall be comprised of a metal frame with adjustable legs .
the signs shall have minimum of num lines with num letters per line .
letters shall be a minimum of num cm wide and num cm high .
wording of the signs shall be as follows with the applicable lengths and dates entered chip seal construction next xxx km month day day expect delays the signs shall be placed in a level position on the outside sideslope with the bottom of the sign a minimum of num m above the edge of pavement .
placement of the sign on the shoulder or in the ditch will not be permitted .
the contractor shall ensure the signs are anchored down to prevent tipping over .
alternative types of signs may be used upon approval by the consultant .
the contractor shall revise the dates on the preconstruction advertising signs as required based on any changes to the construction schedule .
signs shall be installed at locations designated by the consultant .
depending on the scheduling the contractor may be required to install advertising signs at multiple sites simultaneously .
num traffic convoy traffic convoy by pilot vehicles not exceeding num km per hour shall be used on all chip seal coat projects .
on two lane highways traffic convoy shall be initiated at the commencement of chip seal coat application .
on divided highways traffic convoy shall commence after rolling is complete .
section num specification num chip seal coat august num num traffic convoy may be required for subsequent brooming activities depending upon site specific traffic conditions such as length of work zone available site distances traffic volumes etc .
notwithstanding the previous traffic convoy will be required whenever the length of subsequent brooming activities within the driving lanes is greater than num kilometres .
on all highways traffic convoy shall continue until second brooming of the chip seal coat is complete and the speed restriction has been increased to num km per hour or as otherwise directed by the consultant .
num pilot vehicles on twolane highways the number of pilot vehicles required for seal coating operations on two lane highways shall be as follows distance between flag stations km num num num num num num num num num num num standard number of pilot vehicles num num num num pilot vehicles on fourlane highways unless otherwise specified in the special provisions or determined by the consultant the contractor shall provide num pilot vehicles for seal coating operations on four lane highways .
num construction num general chip seal coat application shall commence no earlier than may num and shall be performed no later than august num of any year .
the work shall take place during daylight hours only .
the extent of surface preparation required and the method of application of the chip seal coat including application rates for the asphalt binder and the processed aggregate shall be determined by the contractor .
num temporary markers the contractor shall supply and install temporary reflectorized centreline markings davidson temporary road pavement markers or equivalent on the centreline of the roadway immediately before applying the asphalt binder .
markers shall be placed at num m intervals on tangent sections and at num m intervals on curves and shall remain in place .
num application areas unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings the contractor shall not apply seal coat to roadway shoulders or to bridge decks .
the contractor shall apply seal coat as follows i to each through travel lane to the widths shown on the contract drawing regardless of the widths shown on the intersection drawings .
ii at intersections to all parallel lanes and their respective tapers in general conformance with the drawing entitled seal coat applications at intersections cbnummnum or cbnum nummnum as applicable or as shown on the shaded intersection drawings if provided .
section num specification num chip seal coat august num num iii to all passing and climbing lanes and their respective tapers .
iv application on bridge decks where required will generally be from curb face to curb face .
num protection of bridge structures the contractor shall not operate vibratory rollers in vibratory mode on any bridge deck .
the contractor shall ensure that bridge expansion joints drains curbs and appurtenances are protected from asphalt andor chip contamination .
in addition to being responsible for the cleanup of any contaminated areas the contractor is advised that many bridge components and materials are affected by cleanup and any costs for repair of damaged structures will be charged to the contractor .
num rolling and brooming immediately after spreading the chips shall be rolled .
the contractor shall use a minimum of two rollers .
additional rollers shall be deployed as required to keep pace with aggregate spreader production and to ensure that the entire chip treated surface receives a minimum of three complete passes .
roller speeds shall not exceed num kmh .
no traffic shall be allowed on freshly placed chip seal coat until rolling has been completed .
after rolling and initial set of the binder the driving lanes and paved shoulders shall be broomed to remove any loose chips .
any brooming activities performed during days following chip application shall be referred to as subsequent brooming .
the contractor shall continue to broom the driving lanes and paved shoulders to remove any loose chips when required and as often as required during a two week period following the initial application or as directed by the consultant .
all highwaytohighway junctions and all junctions of paved highways with municipal roads shall be swept clear of loose chips .
the contractor shall use a pickup broom for all brooming in urban and other areas where loose chips can not be swept onto sideslopes or onto ditches .
brooming operations that are against traffic flow shall only be carried out if the contractor has implemented proper traffic accommodation operations .
on all highways brooming operations done during hours of darkness shall be accompanied with a trailing arrow board capable of operating in hazard mode where applicable .
the contractor shall sweep all paved intersections and all paved farm and field approaches clear of loose chips .
the contractor shall use a pickup broom when sweeping all bridge decks .
the contractor shall hand broom areas where the pickup broom can not reach .
under no circumstances shall material be swept over the bridge rail .
the contractor shall ensure that chips or other materials are not propelled into the air during brooming operations .
section num specification num chip seal coat august num num num speed restrictions for subsequent brooming activities within the driving lanes the posted speed restriction shall be num km per hour for two lane highways and num km per hour for multilane highways .
in all cases the total length of roadway under num km per hour speed restriction including application activities and subsequent brooming activities shall not exceed num kilometres .
num pavement markings num painted roadway lines and pavement messages the contractor shall reference and record the location and configuration of all existing painted roadway lines and painted pavement messages for the areas to receive chip seal coat and re establish the markings after seal coat application in accordance with specifications num painted roadway lines and num painted pavement messages .
painted roadway lines and painted pavement messages shall be applied twice at the full application rate for each application .
on two lane highways the second application shall be applied from the opposite direction of the initial application .
all edge lines shall be painted completely off the seal coat and will only require one paint application in all cases the roadway shall not be posted at gazetted highway speeds until all work including line painting has been completed .
the maximum length of roadway posted at less than gazetted highway speeds shall not exceed num km .
num durable pavement message markings unless otherwise directed the contractor shall preserve all existing durable pavement message markings maintaining them free of contamination by asphalt binder andor seal coat aggregate .
where the contractor fails to preserve existing durable pavement message markings he shall remove any chip seal coat materials and replace the markings at his own expense .
num grooved rumble strips unless otherwise directed the contractor shall preserve all existing shoulder and stop condition grooved rumble strips maintaining them free of contamination by asphalt binder andor seal coat aggregate .
where the contractor fails to preserve existing grooved rumble strips he shall reestablish the grooved rumble strips at his own expense .
num requirements for acceptance requirements for the acceptance of the completed chip seal coat are as follows i materials shall meet all specified requirements ii a minimum of num chip coverage shall be obtained with no single bare area greater than num mnum in any one square metre iii there shall be no streaking or ravelling iv the finished surface shall have a uniform even texture v no overrich or bleeding areas shall be evident section num specification num chip seal coat august num num vi no loose chips shall be evident and vii all existing pavement markings have been preserved or replaced in accordance with specifications num painted roadway lines and num painted pavement messages .
work that does not meet the foregoing requirements shall be repaired or reconstructed to the satisfaction of the consultant .
the contractor may use hand application methods to reseal small isolated areas in need of repair .
regardless of the method used all repaired or reconstructed areas shall have a uniform texture and appearance .
num timing for completion of pavement markings the contractor shall complete the first application of paint for roadway lines and pavement messages within five days of completing the placement of chip seal on each separate roadway .
failure to meet this requirement will result in a penalty of num per day for each calendar day delay in completing the painting .
the department may extend the time allowed to complete the painting up to a maximum of ten days providing i the contractor submits a written request to the consultant accompanied by a detailed proposed line painting schedule .
ii the reason for the request stated in the request is one of the following a the chip seal coat requires additional curing time and subsequent brooming work prior to painting the traffic markings or b the work site is not available to the contractor through no fault of the contractor or c the consultant suspends the work and standby payments are due in accordance with specification num general or d there is a delay resulting from an order of a court or from strikes or lockouts or e the traffic markings can not be painted for reasons of inclement weather or conditions resulting from inclement weather .
the second application of paint shall commence no earlier than two weeks following the first application of paint but shall be completed prior to the specified or adjusted contract completion date .
num measurement and payment num general the amount of chip seal coat or chip seal coat on bridge decks considered for acceptance will be based upon the estimated quantities as shown in the unit price schedule .
generally a variance in these quantities will only be considered when the scope of the work has been modified by the department .
however the department reserves the right to measure the work actually constructed to confirm compliance with the design and any such measurement will become the basis for the final payment .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per square metre for chip seal coat or chip seal coat bridge decks as applicable .
payment will be full compensation for preparing the existing surface protecting bridge structures where applicable supplying and installing temporary lane markers supplying and applying the asphalt binder supplying processing hauling placing and rolling the aggregate brooming the finished surface replacing andor section num specification num chip seal coat august num num maintaining pavement markings roadway line painting quality control traffic accommodation and traffic convoy services using the standard number of pilot vehicles as specified and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete this work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
all costs associated with preconstruction advertising including the fabrication installation maintenance updating and removal of signs the provision and operation of the onsite communication system and the supply and application of blotter sand as required will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
payment for the provision of pilot vehicles in excess of the standard number specified when approved by the consultant will be made in accordance with section num extra work of specification num general .
no separate or additional payment will be made for any additional equipment tools or labour employed to satisfy special brooming requirements .
no payment will be made for any costs incurred to rectify defective work .
num supply of aggregate the contractor is advised that if aggregate is supplied from a crown source on undeeded land operated primarily under lease or license and for which the department does not have a reservation the department will deduct num per tonne from the total payments made under the contract .
the tonnage will be determined by multiplying the total square metres of chip seal work performed by a conversion factor of num kilograms per square metre .
section num specification num microsurfacing august num table of contents num microsurfacingnum num general num num materials num num aggregatenum num mineral fillernum num field control additive num num waternum num asphaltnum num mix design num num testingnum num equipment num num generalnum num mixing equipmentnum num proportioning device num num spreading equipmentnum num auxiliary equipmentnum num sampling requirements num num constructionnum num generalnum num seasonal and weather limitationsnum num removal of durable pavement lines and markings num num surface preparationnum num trafficnum num evaluation sectionnum num handwork and cleanupnum num width of applicationnum num roadway lines and pavement message markingsnum num acceptance criteria num num measurement and paymentnum num supply of aggregatenum num trial batchesnum num microsurfacing num num rut repair by microsurfacing num section num specification num microsurfacing august num num num microsurfacing num general microsurfacing is a slurry seal type of application which is placed on a prepared pavement at locations and conforming to the lines and dimensions specified or as designated by the consultant .
the microsurfacing treatment is intended to provide a smooth durable skid resistant surface .
application can be for rut filling andor surfacing the entire travel lane .
the microsurfacing mixture shall consist of a cationic polymer modified asphalt mineral aggregate mineral filler field control additive and water .
num materials num aggregate the contractor shall produce aggregate that is num manufactured and is evaluated as being fully compatible with the emulsion .
the contractor shall supply aggregate materials in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate and haul aggregate materials in accordance with specification num hauling .
the aggregate gradation including mineral filler shall be within the following limits for the type as specified sieve size m percent passing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num the contractor shall split aggregates for the microsurfacing into coarse and fine fraction prior to crushing of the coarse fraction .
the crushed coarse and the fine fraction shall be stockpiled separately .
the contractor shall select a screen size at which splitting will take place .
splitting of aggregates shall be controlled such that the coarse aggregate fraction before crushing shall contain no more than num passing the num num sieve .
the aggregate quality shall meet the following requirements la abrasion lossnum aashto tnum num maximum sand equivalent aashto tnum num minimum note num to be determined on the parent aggregate source .
test can be waived if prior testing indicated compliance or suitable performance for past microsurfacing .
section num specification num microsurfacing august num num num mineral filler the contractor shall supply the mineral filler which shall be introduced into the mineral aggregate .
mineral filler may be non airentrained type gu portland cement hydrated lime or any other approved mineral filler that is free of lumps .
the amount and type of mineral filler needed will be determined by the laboratory mix design and will be considered as part of the material gradation requirement .
an increase or decrease of less than num may be permitted in the field for improving the mix consistency or set times .
num field control additive the contractor shall supply a field control additive and apply it as required to effectively maintain the quickset characteristics of the mix and prevent premature breaking of the material in the spreader box .
additives must be included as part of the mix design and be compatible with the other components of the mix .
num water the contractor shall supply suitable water free from soluble salts and any other harmful contaminants for mixing of the microsurfacing material and prewetting of the existing pavement .
num asphalt the emulsified asphalt shall be a quicktraffic polymer modified asphalt emulsion conforming to the requirements of aashto mnum for cqsnumh with the following changes i the residue after distillation shall be tested in accordance with astm dnum except that the test temperature shall be a maximum of num c and shall be maintained at num c num c for num minutes .
ii the residue after distillation shall be a minimum of num .
the residue after distillation shall also meet the following requirements test method tests on residue specification aashto tnum softening point num c minimum aashto tnum penetration at num c num num dmm astm num kinematic viscosity num c num cstsec minimum the polymer material shall be milled or blended into the asphalt or emulsifier solution prior to the emulsification process .
the addition rate of polymer modifier shall be a minimum of num polymer solids by mass of asphalt residue .
num mix design test procedures contained in this specification are based upon the publication prepared by the international slurry seal surfacing association issa titled recommended performance guidelines for microsurfacing anum revised february num .
section num specification num microsurfacing august num num the contractor shall supply the mix design and all components of the mix .
the contractor shall submit a mix design to the consultant a minimum of num working days prior to the placement of any microsurfacing material .
the mix design shall be prepared by a testing laboratory that has prior experience in the design of microsurfacing mixes using issa test methods and design procedures .
no microsurfacing material shall be placed prior to the consultant reviewing and accepting the submitted mix design .
compatibility of the aggregate polymermodified emulsion mineral filler and other additives shall be verified by the mix design .
all component materials used in the mix design shall be representative of the materials proposed by the contractor for use on this project .
the mix design shall list the characteristics and proportions of all materials used in the microsurfacing formulation .
the microsurfacing mix design submission shall contain test results for all aggregate and mixture properties as herein specified .
the microsurfacing material shall meet the following mix design requirements issa test no .
description specification issa tbnum wet cohesion num minutes minimum set num minutes minimum traffic num kgcm minimum num kgcm minimum or near spin issa tbnum excess asphalt by lwt sand adhesion num gmnum maximum issa tbnum wet stripping pass num minimum issa tbnum wettrack abrasion loss onehour soak sixday soak num gmnum maximum num gmnum maximum issa tbnum lateral displacement num maximum issa tbnum classification compatibility num grade points minimum aaa baa issa tbnum mix time num c controllable to num s minimum the mix design proportions shall be within the following limits residual asphalt num to num by dry weight of aggregate .
mineral filler num to num by dry weight of aggregate .
the microsurfacing material shall be designed to accommodate traffic without damage within one hour of placement .
num testing quality control and quality control testing are the responsibility of the contractor throughout every stage of the work from production of aggregates to the final accepted product .
tests that may be performed by the consultant to determine compliance with specifications will be quality assurance tests and will not be considered as quality control tests .
section num specification num microsurfacing august num num the contractor shall provide and maintain equipment and qualified personnel to perform all testing necessary to determine and monitor the characteristics of the materials produced and incorporated in the microsurfacing .
the contractor shall provide safe and convenient means for accurately and representatively sampling each aggregate stream being produced during all screening splitting and crushing processes .
the consultant may inspect the aggregate production process and test and monitor the quality of the material being produced by the contractor at any time and as often as he deems necessary .
such inspection or testing shall not in any way relieve the contractor of the responsibility for producing aggregates that meet the specifications in all respects .
quality control testing and monitoring shall be completed by the contractor according to the requirements outlined in the following table and shall be reported to the consultant within one working day of the completion of each test .
quality control testing requirements for microsurfacing projects test standard minimum frequency aggregate production sieve analysis attnum one per num tonnes or a minimum of two per project whichever is greater .
determining pitrun contamination of the uncrushed coarse fraction attnum part ii one per num hours of plant production .
sampling asphalt cement provide to consultant for quality assurance testing .
attnum one per day .
equipment calibration note num once per project inspection note num daily provide to consultant the day following application .
note num machine calibration .
each mixing unit to be used in performance of the work shall be calibrated in the presence of the consultant prior to construction .
the calibration shall be documented and shall include the individual calibration of aggregate mineral filler and emulsified asphalt at various settings which can be related to the machine proportioning devices to verify the application rate and mix design compliance .
note num daily inspection report .
the contractor shall maintain a daily inspection report documenting the following information highway control section date calibration control settings as applicable beginning and end stations total area of application mnum counter readings beginning ending and total quantities of component materials used quantity weight of microsurfacing applied .
section num specification num microsurfacing august num num target application rate of the microsurfacing kgmnum bulk daily application rate of microsurfacing kgmnum results of three random checks for the microsurfacing application rates using the equipment counters num equipment num general the contractor shall provide all equipment tools machines and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
all equipment shall be maintained in a clean and satisfactory working condition at all times to ensure a high quality product .
num mixing equipment the contractor shall provide a selfpropelled microsurfacing mixing machine specifically designed and manufactured to lay microsurfacing .
the equipment shall be able to accurately deliver and proportion the aggregate emulsified asphalt mineral filler field control additive and water to a revolving multiblade twin shafted mixer and discharge the mixed product on a continuous flow basis .
the machine shall be equipped to allow the operator to have full control of the forward and reverse speed during application of the microsurfacing material .
num proportioning device the contractor shall provide proportioning devices that are properly marked for the individual volume or weight proportioning of each raw material to be added to the mix .
these proportioning devices can be revolution counters or similar devices and shall be used in the material calibration for determining the mix design dial and gate settings and calculating the materials output at any time .
num spreading equipment num general a mechanical spreader box shall be attached to the paver or slurry machine .
the spreader box shall be equipped with rotating paddle shafts to agitate and spread the material throughout the box and be capable of uniformly spreading the microsurfacing mixture .
a front seal shall be provided to ensure no loss of the mixture at the road contact point .
the rear seal shall act as the final strike off and shall be adjustable .
spreading equipment shall be capable of spreading the mixture to fill cracks and minor surface irregularities and shall leave a uniform application of hifriction material on the surface .
the spreader box and rear strike off shall be so designed and operated that a free flow of material to the rear strike off is achieved .
the spreader box shall have suitable means provided to side shift the box to compensate for any change in longitudinal alignment .
rut filling spreader boxes shall be specifically designed for rut filling applications .
num continuous spread equipment when specified in the special provisions the contractor shall utilize continuous spread equipment .
this equipment shall be capable of being supplied with microsurfacing application section num specification num microsurfacing august num num materials on a continuous basis without stopping or creating transverse joints for a minimum distance of num lanekm .
truck mounted mixing and spreading units using a batch placement operation will not be permitted .
the contractor shall supply a sufficient number of supply vehicles to ensure a continuous placement operation .
num auxiliary equipment surface cleaning equipment hand tools and any support equipment shall be provided by the contractor as necessary to perform the work .
prior to the start of microsurfacing placement the contractor shall supply to the consultant a num m metal straightedge for determining conformance to acceptance criteria .
num sampling requirements the contractor may have to arrange to have suitable sampling facilities in order for the consultant to obtain representative field samples of the microsurfacing mixture and each of the component materials .
num construction num general the microsurfacing mixture shall be homogeneous during and following mixing and spreading .
the microsurfacing mixture shall be of the desired consistency when exiting the mixer and no additional materials shall be added .
a sufficient amount of material shall be carried in all parts of the spreader box at all times so that complete coverage is obtained .
overloading of the spreader box shall be avoided .
no lumping balling or unmixed aggregate will be permitted .
the material shall not have segregation of the emulsion and aggregate fines from the coarser aggregate .
no streaks such as those caused by oversize aggregate shall be left in the finished surface .
if excessive streaking or drag develops the operation will be stopped until the contractor proves to the consultant that the situation has been corrected .
a summary of the quantity and application rate of microsurfacing placed and a list of quantities used for each of the components shall be submitted daily to the consultant .
the application rate for the surface pass shall be num num kgmnum or as determined by the consultant .
no excessive buildup uncovered areas or unsightly appearances will be permitted .
num seasonal and weather limitations the placement of microsurfacing shall be limited to the period from june num to september num .
microsurfacing shall not be placed when in the opinion of the consultant damage to the finished product may occur for any reason .
microsurfacing shall be placed only when weather conditions are free of fog and precipitation the atmospheric temperature is a minimum of num c and rising and temperatures below num c are section num specification num microsurfacing august num num not forecast for the num hr .
period following application .
microsurfacing shall not be placed when the temperature is below num c and falling .
num removal of durable pavement lines and markings unless otherwise specified existing durable pavement lines and markings located within the areas to be microsurfaced shall be removed by cold milling or other means acceptable to the consultant .
cold milling shall be restricted to the minimum depth and dimensions necessary to remove all of the durable marking material .
the contractor shall remove the debris from the cold milled areas and dispose of the material at an approved location .
the milled areas shall be repaired by spray patching to the satisfaction of the consultant .
line removal shall not precede microsurfacing by more than num calendar days .
num surface preparation the area to be surfaced shall be thoroughly cleaned of loose aggregate debris and other deleterious materials to the satisfaction of the consultant .
except in cases where an application of tack coat is specified in the special provisions the surface to be treated shall be prewetted by fogging with water ahead of the spreader box .
pre wetting shall be to the extent necessary to the ensure the pavement surface is dampened without creating areas of freestanding water .
when a tack coat is specified the contractor shall use the same polymer modified emulsion to be used in the microsurfacing mix .
the tack coat shall be diluted at a ratio of num part emulsion to num parts water by volume and shall be applied at a rate of num to num kgmnum .
the tack coat shall be allowed to cure sufficiently before microsurfacing application .
num traffic the modified emulsified asphalt shall be formulated so that the material will cure sufficiently such that rolling traffic can be allowed on the surface within one hour of placing with no damage to the surface .
areas with rut fills deeper than num mm and fills in areas where hard sharp turning or braking occurs may require up to one additional hour of cure time as determined by the consultant .
the contractor shall ensure that all lanes of travel remain open for traffic every night .
adequate traffic control warning devices shall be used to control the movement of traffic in and around the construction site in accordance with the specifications .
proper lane delineation subject to the approval of the consultant shall be used by the contractor to protect the microsurfacing from traffic until the new surface will support traffic without damage .
all traffic control signs and devices shall be in accordance with standard specification num traffic accommodation and temporary signing .
the contractor shall suspend his operations during periods of high traffic volumes as directed by the consultant .
section num specification num microsurfacing august num num num evaluation section the contractor shall mix a trial batch using the mix design submitted .
unless otherwise specified the contractor may construct his evaluation section of microsurfacing at any location chosen by the contractor .
the evaluation section shall be between num m and num m in length .
no further microsurfacing will be permitted until the evaluation section has been inspected and accepted by the consultant .
the consultant will inspect the evaluation section one hour after placement .
if the evaluation section does not meet the specified acceptance criteria the contractor shall repeat the trial batch and evaluation process until an acceptable evaluation section is constructed as determined by the consultant .
the consultant may stop operations at any time during the evaluation procedure and may require the contractor to submit a new mix design .
all sections of unacceptable trial batch material placed on the highway surface shall receive a second layer of microsurfacing in accordance with the specifications .
num handwork and cleanup small areas of nonuniform application shall be spot repaired by hand using squeegees to provide complete and uniform coverage .
to be considered acceptable a finish equivalent to or better than that applied by the spreader box will be required .
areas not to be microsurfaced such as shoulders ditches and gutters shall have the microsurfacing material removed on a daily basis .
all loose aggregate shall be swept and removed from the highway surface .
num width of application the microsurfacing shall be applied between the painted edge lines of the highway .
the contractor shall apply the microsurfacing neatly up to the painted edge lines but shall not cover any part of the painted edge lines .
all median crossovers will receive microsurfacing treatment as directed by the consultant .
num roadway lines and pavement message markings the contractor shall reference and record the location and configuration of all existing roadway lines and message markings to ensure that they are reestablished correctly .
the contractor shall provide interim lane markings on all newly placed microsurfacing or on tacked surfaces that are to be exposed to traffic overnight .
interim lane marking paint spots shall be the same colour as the subsequent painted lines .
all paint spots shall be a minimum of num mm wide and num mm long and shall be applied lengthwise to the road surface .
paint spots shall be spaced num m on centre in tangent sections and num m on curves .
paint spots shall be completely covered with glass beads at the time of painting .
the contractor shall paint all roadway lines and pavement messages for the areas receiving microsurfacing in accordance with standard specifications num painted roadway lines and num painted pavement messages .
section num specification num microsurfacing august num num all painted roadway lines and painted pavement messages applied to the microsurfacing shall be applied twice at the full application rate for each application .
on two lane highways the second application shall be from the opposite direction of the initial application .
the contractor shall repaint all edge lines upon completion of the microsurfacing construction .
all edge lines shall be painted completely off the newly constructed microsurface and will require only one paint application .
in all cases the roadway shall not be posted at gazetted highway speeds until all work including line painting has been completed .
the maximum length of roadway posted at less than gazetted highway speeds at one time shall not exceed num km .
the contractor shall provide a minimum of three days advance notice to the consultant informing him of the scheduled date and time of the commencement of line painting operations .
prior to painting a joint inspection of the areas to be painted will be carried out by the consultant the contractor and the painting subcontractor if applicable .
scheduling of the joint inspection shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
any painting performed prior to the joint inspection will be considered unauthorized work and may not be paid for .
num acceptance criteria requirements for the acceptance of the completed microsurfacing include the following i materials shall meet all specified requirements .
ii the finished microsurfacing shall have a uniform texture free from excessive scratch marks tears or other surface irregularities .
tear marks in any num mnum area per lane are considered excessive if there are a four or more marks num mm wide x num mm long or larger .
b any marks num mm wide x num mm long or larger .
iii there shall be no transverse ripples or longitudinal streaks of num mm or greater in depth when measured by placing a num m straightedge over the finished surface in any direction .
iv the edges of the microsurfacing shall be finished uniformly with a neat appearance along the roadway centreline lane lines shoulder pavement edge and curb lines .
v the finished surface shall have a uniform even texture .
vi no overrich or bleeding areas shall be evident .
vii no loose chips shall be evident .
viii all existing pavement markings have been preserved or replaced in accordance with standard specifications num painted roadway lines and num painted pavement messages .
work that does not meet the foregoing requirements shall be repaired or reconstructed by the contractor to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num microsurfacing august num num num measurement and payment num supply of aggregate contrary to standard specification num supply of aggregate no separate payment will be made for the supply of aggregate for microsurfacing .
however if the contractor supplies aggregate from a crown source on undeeded land operated primarily under lease or licence and for which the department does not have a reservation the department will deduct num per tonne from the total payments made under the contract .
the tonnage will be determined by summing the aggregate quantities reported on the contractors daily inspection report or other means as determined by the consultant .
num trial batches payment for trial batches will be in accordance with the following when trial batches of microsurfacing are placed in a location outside the project limits all costs associated with the trial batch will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made when trial batches are placed in a location within the project limits trial batches that meet the specified acceptance criteria will be paid at the applicable unit price bid .
if the trial batch fails to meet the specified acceptance criteria no payment will be made for the unacceptable trial batch .
microsurfacing for the repair of unacceptable trial batches placed at locations within the project limits will be paid for at the applicable unit price bid .
num microsurfacing measurement of microsurfacing will be based on the estimated quantities as shown in the unit price schedule unless otherwise specified .
a variance in these quantities will only be considered when the scope of work has been modified by the department .
the department reserves the right to measure the work actually constructed to confirm compliance with the design .
any such measurement will be the basis for the final payment .
no allowances will be made for additional quantities that may result from ruts or an otherwise irregular surface crosssection .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per square metre for microsurfacing and will be full compensation for removal of durable message lines andor markings where required including disposal of debris and spray patching of milled areas surface preparation designing the mix the supply and application of tack coat if applicable supplying and processing of all material including but not limited to aggregate emulsified asphalt binder water mineral filler and field additives hauling and placing the mixture traffic control quality control and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
unless otherwise noted in the special provisions reapplication of roadway lines and message markings will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
section num specification num microsurfacing august num num num rut repair by microsurfacing measurement of microsurfacing used solely for rut repair will be by the linear metre of individual wheel path microsurfaced measured to the nearest metre .
payment will be made at the unit price bid for rut repair by microsurfacing and will be full compensation for removal of durable message markings where required including disposal of debris and spray patching of milled areas surface preparation designing the mix the supply and application of tack coat if applicable supplying and processing of all material including but not limited to aggregate emulsified asphalt binder water mineral filler and field additives hauling and placing the mixture traffic control quality control and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num asphalt pavement crack routing and sealing august num table of contents num asphalt pavement crack routing and sealing num num general num num materialsnum num crack sealant num num blotting agentsnum num equipmentnum num crack routing and sealingnum num sampling and testingnum num general num num definitions num num test methods num num acceptance sampling and testing of crack sealant materialnum num acceptance sampling and testing of routing and sealingnum num appeal of acceptance test results and appeal testingnum num measurement and payment num section num specification num asphalt pavement crack routing and sealing august num num num asphalt pavement crack routing and sealing num general the purpose of crack sealing is to prolong the life of existing pavements by preventing moisture from penetrating the roadway structure and by preventing the spalling of material from the edges of the cracks .
the work shall consist of routing cleaning and drying cracks and sealing them with crack sealant between the limits shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
num materials num crack sealant the contractor shall choose and supply hot pour rubberized crack sealant material from the proven products of the alberta transportation products list .
products not listed as proven require the departments approval prior to use .
the contractor shall provide the consultant with the following information five days prior to commencing the work name and mailing address of crack sealant supplier and manufacturer name of crack sealant product to be supplied written confirmation from the manufacturer that the crack sealant to be supplied meets all specified requirements along with test results that demonstrate that the product meets all specified requirements .
the contractor shall verify that all crack sealant delivered and used in the work is the type and grade ordered .
the contractor shall supply the consultant with the manufacturers quality control test results indicating at the minimum cone penetration and flow for each batch of crack sealant .
these test results shall be supplied at the time of delivery of each batch of crack sealant to the work .
all crack sealant supplied shall be subject to inspection sampling and testing by the department and the contractor shall cooperate in the inspection and sampling process .
when directed by the consultant the contractor shall obtain representative samples of the crack sealant delivered to the work .
num blotting agents when necessary the contractor shall supply one of the following blotting agents screened sand with a maximum topsize of num mm cement flyash the use of other products shall be subject to the approval of the consultant .
section num specification num asphalt pavement crack routing and sealing august num num num equipment the contractor shall supply all equipment necessary for completion of the work including but not limited to the melting kettle air compressor unit hot compressed air lance routing and crack sealing equipment and all related equipment such as fork lifts hoists and transport vehicles .
the melting kettle shall consist of a double jacketed oil bath kettle with thermometric controls which automatically control the product temperatures and with continuous agitation equipment to prevent localized variations in temperature .
the kettle shall be equipped with two calibrated thermometers to monitor the temperature of the crack sealant and the temperature of the heat transfer oil .
the mechanical router shall be capable of producing the specified rout crosssection .
the compressed air unit shall be equipped with water and oil traps and must produce sufficient air volume and pressure to remove all debris from the cracks .
it shall be capable of delivering a continuous stream of clean dry air at num kpa and num mnum min .
application equipment shall be capable of regulating the application of crack sealant directly to the road and shall be equipped with a thermometer to monitor the temperature of the material as it is applied .
the hot compressed air lance shall be capable of providing a continuous hot high pressure air stream numc at a rate of num msec with no flame at the exit nozzle .
num crack routing and sealing all work shall be performed during daylight hours only .
no work shall be performed if the visibility is less than num m. no work shall be performed during rain or snow or when the pavement surface is wet .
the maximum work area shall be num km in length .
the crack sealant shall not be applied when the pavement temperature is below num celsius .
unless otherwise directed by the consultant all transverse cracks between num mm and num mm in width and longitudinal cracks between num mm and num mm in width which are within the driving lanes of the pavement surface shall be routed and sealed .
routing and sealing shall extend num m into the pavement shoulders .
cracks shall be routed to the applicable crosssection shown on drawing cbnummnum keeping the crack in the centre of the rout crosssection .
prior to the application of crack sealant the road surface adjacent to the cracks shall be cleaned and all loose material and moisture shall be removed from the routed cracks .
all debris resulting from the cleaning and routing operation shall be removed from the road surface .
the routed cracks shall be treated with the hot compressed air lance until the pavement in the routed crack is dry and slightly darkened .
there shall be a maximum time period of num minutes between cleaning and drying the routed cracks and the application of the crack sealant .
crack sealant shall be heated and applied within the applicable specified temperature ranges and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
the heat transfer oil in the melting kettle shall not be heated in excess of num c above the safe heating temperature .
routed cracks shall be filled with crack sealant such that upon cooling the filled crack is as shown on the drawings .
section num specification num asphalt pavement crack routing and sealing august num num excessive crack sealant shall be removed from the pavement surface immediately following application .
traffic shall be kept off sealed cracks until the crack sealant has cured .
at locations such as intersections where this is not practical the contractor shall prevent tracking by applying a blotting agent to the crack sealant .
when a blotting agent is used it shall not be applied until the sealant has cooled sufficiently to prevent inclusion of the blotting agent into the sealant .
fuel asphalt and any other spills shall be cleaned up to the satisfaction of the consultant at the contractors expense .
num sampling and testing num general within this specification certain requirements limits and tolerances are specified regarding the quality of materials and workmanship supplied .
compliance with these requirements where so specified shall be judged by sampling and testing as described in this section .
acceptance testing is the responsibility of the consultant .
quality control including the provision of quality control test results for the crack sealant materials is the responsibility of the contractor .
accommodation of traffic for all sampling and testing is the responsibility of the contractor .
num definitions lot a days production of at least num linear metres of crack .
if a days production is less than num linear metres it shall be added to the production of subsequent days until a minimum of num linear metres is obtained for the lot .
if the last days production is less than num linear metres of crack it shall be added to the previous lot .
num test methods the latest edition of the following standard alberta transportation test methods att will be used for acceptance sampling and testing .
table num test methods test description test method num .
sampling crack sealant attnum num .
measurement of rout crosssection attnum num .
measurement of sealant filling attnum num .
measurement of crack missed attnum num .
appeal of quality assurance results attnum num .
random test site selection attnum part iii section num specification num asphalt pavement crack routing and sealing august num num num acceptance sampling and testing of crack sealant material the consultant will obtain a sample of crack sealant material for each lot in accordance with attnum .
testing of crack sealant material will be in accordance with the manufacturers specifications .
the department will determine the frequency of testing of sealant .
failing sealant test results will be reported within seven days of the departments designated quality assurance testing firm receiving the samples .
materials that do not conform to the stated tolerance shall result in a unit price adjustment for the linear metres of crack sealant for the lot or rejection as specified in table num .
the consultant will measure the sealant temperatures .
temperatures measured in excess of numc above the manufacturers specified safe heating temperature will result in the rejection of the material in use and the contractor shall dispose of the overheated materials in a manner acceptable to the consultant .
num acceptance sampling and testing of routing and sealing the consultant will measure sections of routed transverse and longitudinal cracks to determine compliance to the specified rout crosssection and the conformance of the rout to the path of the crack being routed .
if the existing crack is partially or entirely outside the rout crosssection or is within the rout crosssection but touching the side edge of the rout it shall be considered crack missed .
the consultant will measure sections of sealed crack to determine compliance with the specified filling requirements .
all sample locations will be determined on the basis of stratified random sampling in accordance with attnum part iii .
the random sites inspected by the consultant will be a minimum of num m in length and for the purpose of price adjustment there will be a minimum of num sites measured per lot for rout cross section crack missed and for filling of the rout with sealant .
sites will be inspected for rout crosssection after routing and before sealant is placed .
sites will be inspected for filling a minimum of num hour after the cracks are filled .
inspection for rout crosssection crack missed and rout filling shall be performed in accordance with attnum .
the contractor shall cooperate with the consultant obtaining test measurements and the department will not be responsible for any costs due to delays in the contractors operation due to testing activities .
num appeal of acceptance test results and appeal testing the following procedures will apply for an appeal i appeals will only be considered if the contractor can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the consultant that there is sufficient cause to support the appeal .
ii acceptance test results for any rejected or penalized lot may be appealed only once .
iii the contractor shall serve notice of an appeal to the consultant in writing within num hours of receipt of the test results .
iv for an appeal of the rout crosssections the contractor shall locate and prepare the appeal sites at the locations determined by the consultant .
the cracks shall be cleaned to an acceptable condition to allow for the measurement of the rout crosssection and the percent of the crack missed .
when the consultant has completed the measurements the contractor shall immediately reseal the test sites .
no separate payment will be made for site preparation for retesting and the resealing of cracks .
section num specification num asphalt pavement crack routing and sealing august num num v for an appeal of the percent of crack filled the consultant will determine new test sites and evaluate the filling of the routed crack at these new sites .
the contractor shall provide assistance as required for this appeal testing .
vi for an appeal of the materials characteristics testing the consultant will request a retest on the original material sample for the lot .
vii the results of the original measurements will be averaged with the results of the new tests and the new averages shall form the basis for payment except for compatibility and bond tests where a single acceptable test result will be considered sufficient for acceptance of the applicable characteristic .
if the new averages indicate that a penalty or rejection still apply for the lot or sublot then the contractor shall be responsible for the costs of the retesting .
the costs for retesting of crack sealant or rout crosssections shall be num per lot .
the cost of retesting for the percent of crack filled shall be num per lot .
if the results of retesting indicate that the subject lot has a reduced penalty then the department will be responsible for the cost of retesting .
num measurement and payment measurement will be made in metres of the length of cracks on which crack routing and sealing has been performed .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per metre for crack routing and sealing subject to the unit price adjustments specified in this section .
this payment will be full compensation for routing cleaning and drying the cracks cleaning the pavement surface supplying and applying the crack sealant quality control and traffic accommodation .
when payment adjustments equal num or greater the contractor may be required to remedy the lot to meet specified tolerances .
this shall include removing all sealant preparing the routs and resealing .
payment for the lot shall be based on the new work .
section num specification num asphalt pavement crack routing and sealing august num num table num lot unit price adjustments parameter limits adjustment factor crack sealant material based on material specification for each product num penalty if all num material parameters exceed specified requirements flow num no individual penalty cone penetration num num per dmm outside limit bond test pass no individual penalty resilience num num per point outside limit compatibility pass no individual penalty rout cross section crack missed and crack filled function of the specified rout crosssection width maximum of num deviation from the specified width penalty equal to num times the of crack with num deviation less than the specified width depth maximum of num deviation from the specified depth penalty equal to num times the of crack with num deviation less than the specified depth of crack missed maximum num missed penalty equal to the total of crack missed when num has been missed filling of routed crack maximum num subsidence from flush fill penalty equal to num times the of crack underfilled the unit price applicable to each lot quantity of crack routed and sealed shall be as follows lu bp bp af ca where lu is the lot unit price per lineal metre bp is the contract bid price per lineal metre for crack routing and sealing af is the sum of the adjustment factors for the crack sealant and ca is the sum of the adjustments for crack missed crack filled and crosssection deviations .
section num specification num asphalt pavement crack sealing august num table of contents num asphalt pavement crack sealingnum num general num num materialsnum num equipmentnum num crack sealing num num acceptance sampling and testing num num acceptance sampling and testing of crack sealant num num appeal of acceptance test results and appeal testing num num measurement and payment num section num specification num asphalt pavement crack sealing august num num num asphalt pavement crack sealing num general the purpose of crack sealing is to prolong the life of existing pavements by preventing moisture from penetrating the roadway structure and by preventing the spalling of material from the edges of the cracks .
the work shall consist of sealing cracks with crack sealant between the limits shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
num materials the contractor shall supply all materials necessary for the work including the crack sealant .
the contractor shall supply ecnum or hcnum crack sealant in accordance with specification num supply of asphalt .
products not listed as proven in the alberta transportation products list require department approval prior to use .
the contractor shall provide the consultant with the following information num days prior to commencing the work name and mailing address of crack sealant supplier and manufacturer name of crack sealant product to be supplied written confirmation from the manufacturer that the crack sealant to be supplied meets all specified requirements along with test results that demonstrate that the product meets all specified requirements .
the contractor shall verify that all crack sealant delivered and used in the work is the type and grade ordered .
the contractor shall supply the consultant with the manufacturers quality control test results as identified in table num for each batch of crack sealant .
these test results shall be supplied at the time of delivery of each batch of crack sealant to the work .
table num product quality control testing requirements cold pour a uniformity tltnum b viscosity tltnum c solids content astm dnum residue by evaporation procedure a d rate of curing num hour tltnum hot pour a softening point astm dnum b penetration numc astm dnum c viscosity astm dnum section num specification num asphalt pavement crack sealing august num num when necessary the contractor shall supply one of the following blotting agents screened sand with a maximum topsize of num mm cement flyash the use of other products shall be subject to the approval of the department num equipment the contractor shall supply all equipment necessary for completion of the work including but not limited to the melting kettle hot pour only crack sealing equipment and all related equipment such as fork lifts hoists and transport vehicles .
the melting kettle shall consist of a double jacketed oil bath kettle with continuous agitation equipment to prevent localized heating .
the kettle must be equipped with two thermometers to show the temperature of the crack sealant and the temperature of the heat transfer oil .
application equipment must be capable of regulating the application of crack sealant directly to the road .
num crack sealing all work shall be performed during daylight hours only .
no work shall be performed if the visibility is less than num m. no work shall be performed during rain or snow or when the pavement surface or cracks are wet .
the maximum work area shall be num km in length .
crack sealant shall not be applied when the atmospheric temperature at the construction site is below num celsius .
all cracks within the entire width of the pavement surface which are num mm and greater in width shall be sealed .
prior to the application of crack sealant the contractor shall ensure that the road surface adjacent to the cracks is clean .
hot pour crack sealant shall be heated to the temperature specified by the manufacturer .
overheating will not be permitted .
crack sealant shall be applied within the manufacturers specified temperature range .
crack sealant shall be applied so that the crack is flush filled immediately following application and a thin overband of sealant extends approximately num mm beyond the edges of the crack .
excess crack sealant shall be removed from the pavement surface immediately following application .
removal shall involve the use of a squeegee starting from the centerline and proceeding to the shoulder .
traffic shall be kept off sealed cracks until the crack sealant will not track under the action of traffic .
at locations such as intersections where this is not practical the contractor shall prevent tracking by applying a blotting agent to the crack sealant .
fuel asphalt and any other spills shall be cleaned up to the satisfaction of the consultant at the contractors expense .
section num specification num asphalt pavement crack sealing august num num work that does not meet the foregoing requirements shall be repaired or reconstructed to the satisfaction of the consultant and at the contractors expense .
num acceptance sampling and testing num acceptance sampling and testing of crack sealant all crack sealant supplied shall be subject to inspection sampling and testing by the department and the contractor shall cooperate in the inspection and sampling process .
the contractor shall obtain and submit to the consultant two representative samples of crack sealant material in accordance with attnum for each lot of production .
a lot is defined as a days production of at least num km of roadway .
if a days production is less than num km it shall be added to the production of subsequent days until a minimum of num km is obtained for the lot .
if the last days production is less than num km it shall be added to the previous lot .
the department will determine the frequency of testing of sealant .
cold pour materials that do not conform to the specification limits shall result in a unit price adjustment for each km of roadway in the lot in accordance with table num .
num appeal of acceptance test results and appeal testing the following procedures will apply for an appeal i appeals will only be considered if the contractor can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the consultant that there is sufficient cause to support the appeal .
ii acceptance test results for any penalized lot may be appealed only once .
iii the contractor shall serve notice of an appeal to the consultant in writing within num hours of receipt of the test results .
iv for an appeal of the materials characteristics testing the consultant will conduct a retest on the duplicate material sample for the lot .
v the results of the original measurements will be averaged with the results of the new tests and the new averages shall form the basis for payment .
num measurement and payment measurement will be made of the length of roadway in kilometres on which crack sealing has been performed .
a roadway will include all travel lanes shoulders acceleration and deceleration lanes truck turnouts and intersections .
a divided or twinned highway will be considered two separate roadways .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per kilometre for crack sealing subject to the unit price adjustments specified herein .
this payment will be full compensation for cleaning the road surface adjacent to the cracks supplying and applying the crack sealant quality control traffic accommodation and signing .
section num specification num asphalt pavement crack sealing august num num the following unit price adjustments apply only to ecnum or other approved cold pour materials and do not relieve the contractor of the requirements to complete the work in accordance with these specifications .
table num lot unit price adjustments requirement unit price adjustment solids num num to num num to num num no adjustment num num num the unit price applicable to each lot quantity of crack sealing shall be as follows lk bp bp af where lk is the lot unit price per kilometre bp is the contract bid price per kilometre and af is the adjustment factor for the crack sealant .
section num specification num crack repair spray patch august num table of contents num crack repair spray patch num num general num num materialsnum num equipmentnum num procedure num num schedule limitations num num measurement and payment num section num specification num crack repair spray patch august num num num crack repair spray patch num general the work consists of repairing transverse and longitudinal cracks by cleaning the defect of all rock dirt sand or other objectionable material applying asphalt binder as a tack material filling with a mixture of asphalt binder and crushed aggregate and compacting the mix .
num materials aggregate shall be supplied in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling and specification num supply of aggregate .
the contractor shall produce crushed aggregate meeting the following gradation specifications .
metric sieve size fm passing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num the contractor shall supply an emulsified asphalt binder appropriate for the aggregate materials used .
num equipment the contractor shall supply all equipment necessary to complete the work .
the equipment required includes but is not limited to the following an air compressor with a minimum rated capacity of num cubic metres per minute num cfm capable of blowing the crack clean of all dirt sand rock or other objectionable material .
a proprietary or prototype machine capable of spraying the asphalt into the crack and then combining crushed aggregate and asphalt and spraying the mixture into the crack .
appropriate compaction equipment .
num procedure the consultant will determine which cracks are to be repaired .
generally cracks with a width of less than num mm will not require repair .
potholes or other surface defects that are contiguous with cracks are considered to be crack related and shall be repaired by spray patching .
work shall not be performed when the atmospheric temperature at the work site is below numc .
all objectionable material shall be removed from the open crack and surrounding area by blowing with high pressure air streams or other means acceptable to the consultant .
section num specification num crack repair spray patch august num num cleaned cracks shall be sprayed with the emulsified asphalt and then sprayed with the combined asphalt and crushed aggregate mixture .
overspraying of the crack will be required to ensure a smooth transition between the repaired crack and the adjacent undisturbed pavement surface .
the repaired area shall be compacted to ensure adequate embedment of the asphalt aggregate mixture into and over the crack .
all loose aggregate and debris shall be swept or removed from the pavement surface and disposed of to the satisfaction of the consultant .
generally the debris may be swept or blown evenly over the sideslopes .
however when indicated in the special provisions or when directed by the consultant the contractor shall dispose of this material at an approved location outside the project limits .
num schedule limitations the contractor shall schedule his operations to ensure that crack repair is completed a minimum of two weeks prior to any required pavement overlay .
num measurement and payment measurement will be in metres based on the length of cracks acceptably treated .
measurements will be to the nearest num m. payment will be made at the unit price bid for crack repair spray patch and will be full compensation for cleaning the cracks disposing of the debris tacking supplying the crushed aggregate and asphalt binder producing hauling placing and compacting the mix traffic accommodation and signing and all labour materials equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num crack repair mill and fill august num table of contents num crack repair mill and fill num num general num num materialsnum num general num num aggregate num num asphaltnum num asphalt mix design num num equipmentnum num construction num num general num num crack repairnum num acceptance criterianum num measurement and payment num section num specification num crack repair mill and fill august num num num crack repair mill and fill num general the work consists of repairing cracks by milling a rectangular trench centered over the crack filling the trench with asphalt concrete pavement mix then compacting the mix .
num materials num general all materials necessary for the described herein shall be supplied by the contractor .
num aggregate the contractor shall produce crushed aggregate in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling .
unless otherwise specified aggregate shall meet the requirements for designation num material .
the contractor shall supply aggregate in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate and haul aggregate in accordance with specification num hauling .
num asphalt the contractor shall supply asphalt in accordance with specification num supply of asphalt .
the type and grade of asphalt shall be as specified in subsection num asphalt mix design .
the type and grade of liquid asphalt for tack coat shall be in accordance with section num materials of specification num prime tack and fog coats unless otherwise specified .
num asphalt mix design the asphalt mix design shall be prepared and submitted to the consultant in accordance with the asphalt mix design and job formula mix formulas specified in section num of specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps or section num of specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave .
unless otherwise specified the mix type shall be at the contractors discretion .
num equipment the contractor shall supply all equipment necessary for completion of the work including but not limited to the following a dry process cold milling machine capable of milling a rectangular trench meeting the specified dimensions .
milling machines using water to cool the milling head will not be permitted .
sweeping and blowing equipment capable of removing all loosened material from the milled trench and off the roadway surface .
hand spraying equipment for applying the tack coat .
all equipment necessary for supplying placing and compacting the asphalt concrete mix .
section num specification num crack repair mill and fill august num num num construction num general no work shall be carried out when the pavement surface is wet .
the consultant will designate which cracks are to be repaired .
the maximum continuous work area shall be num km in length .
for transverse crack repair work shall be confined to one lane at a time .
the contractor shall include these requirements in his traffic accommodation strategy .
num crack repair crack repairs will be designated as either mill and fill or shallow mill and fill .
unless otherwise specified the contractor shall mill a rectangular trench centered over the crack .
trench dimensions shall be as shown on drawing no .
cbnum mnum .
for transverse cracks the trench shall extend across the width of the lane and num m on to the shoulder unless otherwise specified .
all loosened material shall be removed from the trench and the milled surfaces shall be left clean and dry .
the milled material shall be swept to the shoulder of the road and disposed of on the sideslope .
when identified in the special provisions or if directed by the consultant the contractor shall remove the milled material from the roadway and dispose of it at an approved location outside the project limits .
the contractor shall apply tack coat to all exposed pavement edges by means of hand spraying .
unless otherwise specified the asphalt concrete pavement mix shall be placed and compacted to the top of the milled trench in lifts not greater than num mm thick to a minimum of num marshall density .
asphalt cores taken for density testing shall be taken from the center of the trenched area .
the contractor shall backfill all milled trenches within the same day .
where the drawings show that subsequent lifts of asphalt concrete pavement are to be placed the contractor shall schedule his operations to ensure that a minimum of one lift is placed prior to a seasonal shutdown .
num acceptance criteria the work shall comply with the following for final acceptance by the consultant all milled cracks conform with the specified milling profile .
milling conforms to the path of the crack with no part of the crack outside or touching the edge of the milled crosssection .
all milled cracks are filled with the proper asphalt mix .
the asphalt mix is compacted to the required density .
the filled areas provide a smooth transition between the infilled material and the adjacent undisturbed pavement surfaces .
section num specification num crack repair mill and fill august num num all milled material has been properly spread over the sideslope or otherwise disposed of and the work area is left in a neat and tidy condition acceptable to the consultant .
treated cracks failing to meet these criteria shall be repaired by the contractor at his own expense .
num measurement and payment measurement will be in metres based on the length of cracks acceptably repaired .
measurements will be to the nearest num m. payment will be made at the unit prices bid for crack repair mill and fill or crack repair shallow mill and fill as applicable and will be full compensation for cold milling disposal of milled material supplying and applying tack coat supplying placing and compacting the asphalt mix and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num cutting of pavement august num table of contents num cutting of pavementnum num general num num construction num num measurement and payment num section num specification num cutting of pavement august num num num cutting of pavement num general this specification covers the cutting of existing concrete curbs sidewalks driveways asphalt concrete pavement and base course materials where new surfacing materials are to be placed abutting the existing structure .
the location of pavement cuts will be shown on the drawings or as specified in the special provisions .
num construction wherever specified the contractor shall cut concrete curbs sidewalks driveways and existing pavement to the full thickness of the structure so that a smooth vertical edge results against which new materials can be effectively placed and compacted .
rough jagged edges will not be acceptable .
unless otherwise specified in the special provisions the contractor may utilize any cutting methodology provided the methods and equipment result in a clean and straight vertical cut .
all proposed methods and equipment employed by the contractor shall be reviewed and accepted by the consultant prior to the start of the work .
when trench excavation across an existing structure is required the contractor shall cut the existing pavement on both sides of the trench to the full depth of the structure .
the trench cuts shall result in a trench that is no wider than necessary to permit satisfactory installation of the works and to thoroughly compact the backfill material .
when the contractor cuts a trench across existing curb sidewalk driveway or roadway the contractor shall the backfill the trench with similar or better materials than those excavated .
the backfill work shall be performed in accordance with the applicable sections of the specifications .
all concrete asphalt concrete pavement and base course material that is cutaway shall be excavated loaded hauled and disposed of at a suitable disposal site provided by the contractor .
alternatively if the cutaway debris is sufficiently brokendown such that no piece is larger than num mm in any dimension the contractor may incorporate the debris in the highway embankment where such work exists .
num measurement and payment cutting of pavement will be measured in lineal metres of structure cut .
no allowance will be made based on the depth of cut or the type of material cut .
payment for this work will be made at the unit price bid for cutting of pavement .
the price bid will be considered full compensation for all labour materials equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
the removal and disposal of excavated material will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
when the contractor cuts a trench across existing surfaces the backfill of the trench with similar or better material will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps august num table of contents num asphalt concrete pavement end product specification num num general num num descriptionnum num definitions num num materials num num asphaltnum num aggregate num num interim lane markings num num reclaimed asphalt pavementnum num warm mix asphaltnum num asphalt mix design and job mix formulanum num responsibility for mix designnum num requirements for mix design num num verification of mix design num num variation from the job mix formulanum num warm mix asphalt technologynum num sampling and testingnum num general num num methods of testing for acceptance and appeal testingnum num quality control testing num num acceptance sampling and testing num num retesting following attempts to improve smoothness num num aggregate gradation requirementsnum num pavement segregation requirementsnum num inspections by the consultantnum num appeal of acceptance test results and appeal testing num num constructionnum num equipmentnum num preparation of existing surface num num transporting the asphalt mixnum num placing the mixnum num road intersections and entrancesnum num compacting the mix num num asphalt mix for others num num interim lane markings num num grooved rumble strips num num end product acceptance or rejection num num general num num end product acceptance num num end product rejectionnum num measurement and payment num num general num num asphalt concrete pavement epsnum num repair of failed areas in existing surfaces num num removal and disposal of fillet and ramp materialnum num transverse pavement joints num num preliminary leveling num num asphalt mix for others num num grooved rumble strips num section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num num asphalt concrete pavement end product specification num general num description asphalt concrete pavement acp shall consist of crushed aggregates or a combination of crushed aggregates and reclaimed asphalt pavement rap blend sand material as required and asphalt cement combined in a hot mix plant placed and compacted on a prepared surface in conformity to the lines grades dimensions and crosssections as shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
num definitions for purposes of this specification the following definitions will apply num acceptance limits i density and actual asphalt content acceptance limits for density and actual asphalt content are the limiting values of the lot mean within which the lot will be accepted at full increased or reduced payment for density as shown in table num a or full or reduced payment for actual asphalt content as shown in table num b. ii smoothness acceptance limit for smoothness is the limiting value of the profile index within which a sublot will be accepted with or without penalty assessment as shown in table num c. iii gradation acceptance limit for gradation is the limiting value of the lot mean within which the lot will be accepted as shown in table num e. num asphalt content i design asphalt content the asphalt content established by the approved mix design .
ii approved asphalt content the design asphalt content or subsequent adjustments to it .
such adjustments must be approved in writing by the consultant .
iii actual asphalt content the amount of asphalt binder in the mix as determined by attnum or attnum and includes an amount to correct for the asphalt binder lost due to absorption by the aggregate or aggregate loss .
this correction may be determined for each change in aggregate or asphalt binder .
num end product specification eps a specification whereby the department does not define methods of construction .
under eps the department will monitor the contractors control of the process that produces the items of construction and will accept or reject the end product according to a specified acceptance plan .
the contractor is entirely responsible for quality control .
end product acceptance is the responsibility of the department and includes a statistically oriented program of acceptance testing.job mix formula the job mix formula establishes the aggregate proportioning target aggregate gradation and approved asphalt content to be used for production of asphalt mix and requires the approval of section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num the consultant on the basis of a mix design .
num lot a lot is a portion of the work being considered for acceptance and is defined as the following i one days plant production of more than num hours where approved changes to the following criteria have not occurred a job mix formula b pavement density requirement c project a change in any one of the above may require a new lot designation .
ii one days plant production of less than num hours will be dealt with at the consultants option as follows a the material will be added to the previous days lot if the criteria specified in i remains the same or b the material will be added to the next days lot with the same criteria specified in i or c if it is the last time the mix is produced with these criteria then the production will be designated as a lot .
iii if the consultant suspects a portion of a lot is substandard he may order extra testing to define the area and severity of the deficiency .
a new lot will be designated for this portion if this extra testing indicates the mix is subject to unit price adjustment or rejection .
num rejection limit i density and actual asphalt content rejection limit for density and actual asphalt content is the limiting value of the lot mean beyond which a lot is rejected and not paid for as shown in tables num a and num b. ii smoothness rejection limit for smoothness is the limiting value of the profile index pri beyond which a sublot is rejected and not paid for as shown in table num c. iii gradation rejection limit for gradation is the limiting value of the lot mean beyond which a lot is rejected and not paid for as shown in table num e. num lot mean and range the lot mean is the arithmetic mean of a set of num or more test results constituting the sample for the lot .
the range represents the difference between the highest and lowest values within a set of test results .
num stratified random sample a stratified random sample is a set of test measurements taken one each from num or more separate stratified areas or segments within a lot in an unbiased way .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num num sublot a sublot is a portion of a lot that is one paver width wide and num m long on which the calculation for smoothness and assessment of workmanship and obvious defects are based .
num alberta transportation test procedures test methods designated in these specifications as att or tlt refer to alberta transportation tests .
num managed quality assurance mqa within this specification acceptance testing shall be applied using managed quality assurance mqa practices .
with mqa certain quality control test results provided by the contractor may be used in place of corresponding quality assurance test results as a basis for acceptance and payment .
the lots for which quality control test results are used for acceptance and payment will be at the discretion of the consultant .
num qc acceptance lot a lot chosen by the consultant in which acceptance testing for asphalt content and gradation is based upon the contractors quality control test results and for which no corresponding quality assurance test results are available .
all other quality assurance testing as outlined in this specification will remain the responsibility of the consultant .
quality assurance test results when available shall replace any quality control test results used for material acceptance .
num qa acceptance lot a lot in which all acceptance testing is conducted by the consultant using quality assurance test procedures as outlined in these specifications .
the number and selection of qa acceptance lots shall be determined as follows i first two lots of production for each mix type used except for mix type snum in which case the first lot shall be used and ii minimum of one additional lot per num num tonnes or portion thereof of total acp contract tender tonnage and iii one additional lot of top lift production for each mix type if two or more lifts are specified and iv any additional lots chosen by the consultant .
num materials num asphalt the contractor shall supply asphalt material in accordance with specification num supply of asphalt .
the types and grades of asphalt shall be as specified in the special provisions .
num aggregate the contractor shall produce crushed aggregates in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling for the designation and class of material specified .
the section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num contractor shall supply aggregate materials in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate and haul materials in accordance with specification num hauling .
num interim lane markings the contractor shall supply interim lane marking paint and glass beads from the list of approved products shown in the special provisions or specification amendments .
the contractor has the option of supplying reflectorized temporary pavement markers or self adhesive reflectorized pavement marking tape .
acceptable temporary pavement markers are shown on the alberta transportation products list .
num reclaimed asphalt pavement unless otherwise specified the contractor may elect to use suitable rap in the acp mixture to a maximum rap to virgin aggregate ratio of num .
suitable rap shall not contain any other additives including but not limited to sulphur crumb rubber asphalt rubber asbestos produced sand paving fabrics and reinforcement grids .
the handling stockpiling storage and hauling of all rap shall be in accordance with specification num cold milling asphalt pavement and shall prevent the contamination and consolidation of the material .
rheological testing of the rap is not required for mixtures using a maximum rap to virgin aggregate ratio of num .
for rapvirgin aggregate blends greater than num the contractor shall adjust the virgin asphalt grade andor undertake rheology testing of the rap and virgin asphalt cements according to the requirements listed in table num asphalt grade adjustment and rheology testing for rap usage .
table num asphalt grade adjustment and rheology testing for rap usage percentage of rap additive specified grade num num and num num and num num pg nump or note num note num nump note num note num num pg num or note num or note num note num or note num num pg num or note num or note num note num or note num num pg num or note num note num num note num note num num pg num or note num or note num note num or note num num note num or note num note num or note num all other pg grades no grade adjustment or rheology testing required .
note num note num note num virgin grade shall be selected according to the rheology blending procedures outlined in appendix xnum of aashto mnum .
note num virgin grade may be selected with penetration testing of the recovered rap and virgin asphalt binders with rheology blending according to tltnum recycling of asphalt concrete pavement .
allowable penetration values for the blended binders are contained in table numa .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num table numa allowable penetration values for rap virgin asphalt blends allowable penetration of blended binders dmm specified grade minimum maximum pg num num num pg num num num pg num num num pg num num num num warm mix asphalt warm mix asphalt wma technologies allow the production and compaction of regular asphalt concrete pavement at reduced temperatures .
the term wma technology is inclusive of a wide variety of additives and foaming systems .
the department will allow acp to be produced using a wma technology subject to the following conditions i the wma product to be used is selected from those listed on the alberta transportation products list .
ii the contractor informs the consultant of his intent to utilize wma technology a minimum of two weeks prior to the planned start of acp production .
information shall include the wma technology to be used including additive rate and the method of incorporation into the asphalt mix or mixing operations .
mixing and compaction temperatures shall be chosen by the contractor in accordance with subsection num equipment .
unless otherwise noted additional costs associated with the use of a wma technology including but not limited to mix design quality control testing andor equipment modifications shall be the contractors responsibility .
accepted acp production using a wma technology will be paid for at the applicable acp unit prices bid .
no separate or additional payment will be made for using a wma product or technology .
acp produced using a wma technology will be subject to all existing specifications .
the department may disallow the use of any wma technology which is deemed responsible for producing defective work as described in subsection num end product rejection .
contractors are advised that the shell thiopave product which contains both a sulphur additive and a wma additive has significantly different material properties from that of acp and is not covered under this specification .
proposals for using thiopave shall be submitted under the requirements of section num contract design change proposals of specification num general num asphalt mix design and job mix formula num responsibility for mix design preparation and submission of asphalt mix designs for consultant verification and approval are the responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor shall use professional engineering services and a qualified testing laboratory licensed to practice in the province of alberta to assess the aggregate materials proposed for use and to carry out the design of the asphalt mixture .
the section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num design testing laboratory shall have obtained prequalification status from the department in the category of mix design marshall .
all costs incurred in mix design formulation are the responsibility of the contractor .
shipping costs for samples sent to the consultant for verification and approval are the responsibility of the contractor .
num requirements for mix design asphalt mix designs shall follow the marshall method of mix design as described in design procedure tltnum .
the mix design at the design asphalt content shall meet the requirements in table num for the asphalt concrete mix type specified and the following .
all mixes shall be evaluated for moisture susceptibility in accordance with aashto test procedure tnum resistance of compacted bituminous mixture to moisture induced damage using either gyratory or marshall compacted specimens .
all specimens shall be formed using the same procedure .
all mix design submissions shall include the test results as outlined in test procedure tnum including the visual estimate of the degree of moisture damage .
the target minimum value for tensile strength ratio tsr shall be num .
mixes with a tsr value meeting the target minimum will be considered suitable for mix production and will not require the use of a liquid antistrip additive .
in such case the contractor may at his option elect to still use an antistrip additive .
all costs associated with the use of an antistrip additive in these cases shall be at the contractors expense and no separate or additional payment will be made by the department ..
mixes with a tsr value less than the target minimum shall be treated with a liquid antistrip additive at an additive rate of not less than num and not greater than num by weight of binder and retested for moisture susceptibility .
the treated mix will be considered suitable for mix production if the tsr value is num or higher and is improved over the untreated tsr value .
if the tsr value for the treated mix is less than num or less than the untreated tsr value the mix will be considered unsuitable and shall not be used for mix production .
liquid antistrip additives acceptable for use are listed on the alberta transportation products list .
warm mix asphalt wma chemical products which display antistripping characteristics and are listed on the alberta transportation products list will be treated as a liquid antistrip additive for payment purposes .
when a liquid antistrip additive is used the contractor shall include the following information with the mix design submission full details on the type of liquid antistrip additive to be supplied including product name product manufacturersupplier additive rate tsr values for the treated and untreated mixes the proposed method for incorporating the additive into the plant produced mix .
when the liquid antistrip additive is added to the asphalt cement at the mixing plant a separate pumping and metering system calibrated and electronically interlocked with the operating controls of the mixing plant shall be used .
the contractor shall have the necessary procedures inplace to safely sample the treated asphalt including where practicable an inline valve and sampling system .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num where moisture susceptibility test results indicate that the use of a liquid antistrip additive is required measurement of liquid antistrip additive incorporated into the mix will be on a per kilogram basis .
the contractor shall supply the consultant with a copy of all invoices or bills of lading for the antistrip additive .
payment for liquid antistrip additive will be made at the rate shown in the special provisions .
this payment will be full compensation for the supply and incorporation of the antistrip additive into the asphalt mix including all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary .
num august num table num asphalt concrete mix types and characteristics aggregate criteria marshall mix design criteria vma min by air voids mix type top size mm class for des .
num aggregate mf .
num min note num fractures num num faces min marshall stability n min no .
of blows flow mm air voids num num voids filled with asphalt hnum num num num one face num num num num num to num note num num num num hnum num num num num num num num to num note num num num num mnum num num num num num num num to num note num num num num lnum num note num num num num num num to num note num num num num num snum num note num num num num note num num to num note num num num num snum num num num num num num num to num note num num num num snum num note num num num num num num to num note num num num num minimum theoretical film thickness requirements m design air voids mix types hnum hnum mnum mix type lnum snum snum note num num and num num and num num and num num num num num num num num and num lnum for community airports only num num and num num num note num the percentage of manufactured fines in the num portion of the combined aggregate .
note num use the same number of blows as for the surface course or num blows if used as a surface course .
note num the design air voids shall be chosen as the lowest value within the range of num to num inclusive such that all other mix design criteria are met .
note num air void limits listed in note num shall be reduced by num for community airports .
vma at num air voids shall be a minimum of num .
a numa asphalt is normally used for community airports note num all fines manufactured by the process of crushing shall be incorporated into the mix .
note num theoretical film thickness shall be as follows depending on the specified mix type and design air voids .
the theoretical film thickness value shall be established in accordance with tltnum .
note num snum requirement only for a surface course section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num num verification of mix design the contractor shall submit the mix design to the consultant for verification and acceptance .
the contractors submission shall include the following information i aggregate source names and locations .
ii the gradation of each aggregate to be used in the mixture .
iii the percentage by mass of each aggregate to be used in the mixture .
iv the mix design gradation of the combined aggregate .
v other characteristics of the combined aggregate specified in specification num aggregate production and stockpiling .
vi all marshall mix design characteristics including graphs used in arriving at the final mix design the bulk specific gravity of the combined aggregates theoretical maximum specific gravities and the asphalt absorption of the combined aggregates .
vii identification of each asphalt supplier by name location and types and grades of asphalt to be supplied .
viii percent uncompacted voids fine aggregate angularity of loosely compacted minus num portion of the combined aggregate in accordance with tltnum .
no minimum value specified .
ix for each asphalt supplied asphalt specific gravity and recommended mixing and compaction temperatures for the preparation of design specimens .
x voids table to include air voids vma and voids filled with asphalt for various asphalt contents num increments and bulk densities increments of num kgmnum .
xi mix design submissions using rap shall include the rap source names and locations all rap asphalt content and gradation test results the bulk specific gravity of the rap aggregate the percentage by weight of rap to be used in the mixture and when required all rap rheological test results the design rheology and all blending charts used .
the consultant will require up to num working days from the time of receipt of the mix design to complete the design verification .
where required by the consultant for any change in the nature or sources of the aggregates or rap or where a new mix design is desired by the contractor the contractor shall provide a separate and complete mix design .
this new mix design shall be subject to verification and acceptance by the consultant .
the consultant may at any time require the contractor to provide representative samples of each of the aggregate components asphalt cement and rap for verification purposes .
a sufficient quantity of each component shall be provided to result in a num kg sample of combined aggregate at design proportions .
the consultant will require up to num working days from the time of receipt of the sample to verify the mix design .
the cost of such mix design verification will be borne by the department .
the contractor shall not produce any asphalt mix prior to receiving the consultants written section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num notice that the mix design has been verified .
any mix produced prior to receiving such notice will not be accepted .
the aggregate proportioning target gradation and asphalt content for the accepted mix design will then be the design mix formula and will become the job mix formula for the start in production of asphalt mix .
the contractor shall be responsible for producing mixes which conform with the specifications .
num variation from the job mix formula once the job mix formula has been established no alteration will be permitted unless approved by the consultant .
the lot mean marshall air voids as determined by the consultant shall not vary from the air voids in the approved mix design by more than num .
if the sum of any accepted alterations to the job mix formula is in excess of any one of the following limits away from the design mix formula a new mix design is required .
num passing the num num m sieve .
num passing the num m sieve .
num asphalt content .
num in target proportion of rap .
unless otherwise approved by the consultant the contractor may not request more than three alterations to the job mix formula without the provision of a new mix design .
any change to the job mix formula shall not result in a theoretical film thickness value less than that specified in table num asphalt concrete mix types and characteristics for the applicable design air voids .
any change in the target proportion for rap shall meet the requirements of section num materials for rheological testing of the blended asphalt and maximum rap to virgin aggregate ratio .
num warm mix asphalt technology num general mixes to be produced using a wma technology shall also meet the following design requirements .
in all cases the contractor shall provide a complete mix design including an evaluation for moisture susceptibility using the specified asphalt binder without the wma additive .
in cases where a wma product is added to the asphalt cement or to the asphalt mixture a separate mix design including an evaluation for moisture susceptibility will be required to confirm compliance to the specified mix design criteria .
the mix designer shall identify the mixing and compaction temperatures used for forming the design specimens .
the department will not consider the use of any proposed wma product which results in a section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num design binder content that is more than num below the corresponding value for the acp mix without the wma additive .
num sampling and testing num general during the progress of the work tests will be carried out on materials and workmanship in order to ensure compliance with the requirements of the specifications .
where it is required in these specifications that the contractor submit samples of materials or mixtures to the consultant for approval these samples shall be submitted in sufficient time for proper testing .
the consultants approval of any materials or mixture shall in no way relieve the contractor from his obligation to provide materials mixtures and workmanship in accordance with the specifications .
where specified random sampling procedures shall be followed and where no specific random sampling procedure is specified the sampling procedure shall be as identified by the consultant in the case of acceptance testing and by the contractor in the case of quality control testing .
the consultant shall have access to the work at all times for taking samples .
the contractor shall provide any assistance necessary for taking samples and shall reinstate pavement layers or other structures to the satisfaction of the consultant at the positions where samples have been taken .
compensation for providing assistance with sampling and for reinstatement where samples are taken shall be included in the unit price bid for the various items of work tested and no separate payment will be made .
the contractor shall provide at his own expense sampling stands sampling devices and other facilities which the consultant may require to safely obtain representative samples of the item being produced .
when required the contractor shall provide and prepare to the satisfaction of the consultant a suitable site for the parking of a mobile laboratory trailer .
the contractor shall provide power to the mobile laboratory trailer at his own expense .
num methods of testing for acceptance and appeal testing unless otherwise specified the latest edition of the following standard alberta transportation test methods att shown in table num will be used to determine material characteristics .
table num test methods on managed qa projects test description test method num sampling mixes attnum num coring attnum num extraction attnum num correction factor extracted asphalt content attnum part iii num percent fracture attnum num sieve analysis attnum num density immersion method waxed asphalt concrete specimens attnum section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num test description test method num density immersion method saturated surface dry asphalt concrete specimens attnum num density using automated vacuum sealing method aashto tnum num voids calculations asphalt concrete specimens attnum num percent compaction asphalt concrete pavement attnum num forming marshall specimens field method attnum num moisture content oven method asphalt concrete mixes attnum num smoothness of pavements profilograph method attnum num stratified random test sites for a.c.p .
projects attnum num appeal testing asphalt content density and gradation attnum num asphalt content ignition method attnum num correction factor ignition asphalt content attnum part ii additional test methods for qc acceptance lots only num asphalt content aashto tnum tnum or attnum or attnum notes in all test methods used as reference in this specification metric sieves as specified in canadian general standards board specification numgpnumm shall be substituted for any other specified wire cloth sieves in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling .
in all cases the latest amendment or revision current at the closing date of the tender is implied when reference is made to one of the above standards in the specification .
num quality control testing quality control testing is the responsibility of the contractor throughout every stage of the work from the crushing and production of aggregates to the final accepted product .
tests performed by the consultant will not be considered to be quality control tests .
the contractor shall provide and pay for equipment and qualified personnel to obtain all quality assurance core samples and perform all quality control testing necessary to determine and monitor the characteristics of the materials produced and incorporated into the work and the final product produced .
if the contractor elects to use rap the asphalt content and gradation of the rap shall be determined according to and at the frequencies specified in specification num cold milling asphalt pavement .
when required the rap rheology shall be determined at a minimum frequency of one per num num t of rap and a minimum of three samples shall be tested for each rap source .
test methods sampling and minimum frequency of testing are described in subsection num methods of testing for acceptance and appeal testing and table num quality control testing requirements .
the consultant may require an increase in the frequency of any quality control test which has a specified minimum frequency .
the contractor shall arrange and pay for any additional tests required by the consultant .
results of all quality control tests shall be submitted to the consultant as they become available .
in addition the quality control test results for mix asphalt content and aggregate gradation shall be provided to the consultant no later than num noon of the day following placement .
the contractor shall bear the cost of all consulting services retained by him .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num the contractor shall be totally responsible for production of aggregate and mixes that meet all the specified requirements .
table num quality control testing requirements managed qa testing projects test standard minimum frequency aggregate production see specification num asphalt mix plant calibration attnum once per project or as required inspection attnum num samples asphalt cement attnum see specification num tack prime and fog materials attnum see specification num cold feed aggregate attnum mix attnum num qa cores stratified random test sites chosen by the consultant attnum i qa cores for pavement density attnum ii qa cores for asphalt content and gradation attnum one per segment for each lot .
one per segment for selected lots as directed by the consultant .
tests with specified minimum frequencies mix asphalt content aashto tnum tnum or attnum or attnum num correction factors attnum part iii or attnum part ii as required mix moisture content attnum num aggregate sieve analysis attnum num pavement segregation segregation rating manual each lot tests with no specified minimum frequencies field formed marshall briquettes attnum num density immersion method saturated surface dry attnum num void calculations cores or formed specimens attnum num temperatures attnum num percent compaction cores or nuclear density attnum attnum or attnum num random test site locations attnum num correction factors nuclear moisturedensity measurement attnum num pavement smoothness attnum num num minimum frequency not specified .
num when a lot has eight hours of plant production or more a minimum of four plant checks plus four asphalt contents and four sieve analysis of the combined aggregate any combination of cold feed extraction or ignition are required .
when a lot has less than eight hours of plant production these tests shall be performed once for every two full hours of plant production .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num num acceptance sampling and testing num general within this specification certain requirements limits and tolerances are specified regarding the quality of materials and workmanship to be supplied .
compliance with these requirements where so specified shall be determined by statistical testing as described in this section .
acceptance testing is the responsibility of the consultant except for lots designated by the consultant as qc acceptance lots in which case the contractors quality control test results for asphalt content and aggregate gradation only may be used towards determining conditional material acceptance .
the contractor shall provide to the consultant all quality assurance density cores and any additional cores requested by the consultant for quality assurance testing for asphalt content and gradation by num noon of the day following placement unless otherwise permitted by the consultant .
prior to the contractor obtaining the cores the consultant may provide the contractor with new or different random sample locations .
the consultant may have the contractor obtain cores for quality assurance testing at any time throughout the project for any lot .
all cores provided to the consultant shall be in their original condition .
core preparation or sawing shall be done by the consultant .
all costs associated with pavement coring for both quality control and quality assurance testing shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
initial acceptance testing will be performed free of cost to the contractor .
the contractor shall be responsible for the cost of all quality assurance testing performed on material that is used to replace or overlay material that has been previously rejected .
the contractor shall be responsible for the cost of all quality assurance retesting performed following attempts to improve smoothness or to remove bumps or dips .
after all quality control tests for the lot are reported to the consultant the consultant will provide the contractor with a copy of the results of acceptance tests within one working day of their availability .
if the consultant determines that certain test results are faulty due to testing equipment malfunction improper testing procedures or calculations he will replace the faulty tests with new tests .
if the testing equipment malfunction improper testing procedures or calculations were on the part of the consultant the contractor shall be reimbursed num per location for obtaining cores .
num acceptance sampling and testing procedures num pavement sampling for density asphalt content and gradation pavement sampling will be done using stratified random sampling procedures .
a minimum of num tests per lot will be selected as follows i the lot will be divided into num or more segments of approximately equal quantity .
ii in each segment a test site will be located by using random numbers to determine the longitudinal distance from the end of the segment and the lateral distance from the edge of section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num the segment .
in no case will a lateral distance be less than num m from the shoulder or num m from any other edge of a mat except when matching mats in which case the test site may be within num m of the joint .
for lifts of num mm or less samples for asphalt content and gradation may be obtained by the consultant using the sampling mix behind paver method described in attnum .
if sufficient numbers of mix samples can not be obtained in this manner stratified random core samples shall be taken by the contractor as determined by the consultant in order to perform the minimum five tests per lot .
on lots designated by the consultant as qc acceptance lots material sampling for quality control testing of asphalt content and gradation may consist of cold feed aggregate or loose mix or core samples as outlined in attnum attnum or attnum .
num pavement sampling for smoothness the surface of the sublots in the final lift of asphalt concrete pavement will be profiled by the consultant in accordance with attnum using a california cox model profilograph .
other makes of profilograph machines may be used if they have been individually approved by the department .
profiles will be made approximately at the traffic wheel paths .
smoothness testing will also be undertaken on all passing climbing deceleration and acceleration lanes that are greater than num m in length and on all interchange ramps .
the following pavement surfaces will be excluded from profilograph smoothness testing .
i main alignment portions interchange ramps and all other lanes where the regular posted speed i.e .
without construction activities is less than num kilometres per hour .
ii turn lanes and storage lanes .
iii tapers iv portions of pavement which as determined by the consultant are influenced by man holes water valves or other embedded hardware .
all pavement surfaces within the driving lanes of the above exclusions shall show no variation greater than num mm from the edge of a num m straightedge placed in any direction excluding deviations due to crown breaks as shown on the drawings .
locations for testing and the need for testing of straightedge deviation will be as determined by the consultant .
smoothness testing will extend completely across all transverse joints between existing pavement and acp placed under this contract .
penalty assessments and acceptancerejection criteria will apply to all such bumps and dips identified .
pri assessment for smoothness will be determined starting at the location where all wheels of the profilograph are on acp placed under this contract .
weather permitting acceptance testing for smoothness will normally be completed within two weeks following the completion of all paving work subject to smoothness testing .
all smoothness acceptance criteria will apply regardless of the year that the pavement is placed and the year that it is tested .
requests by the contractor to have portions of the work tested prior to the completion of all paving will be considered subject to the availability of the consultants profilograph testing crew and seasonal weather conditions .
in such cases the contractor will be invoiced by the department at a rate of num to cover the extra mobilization and travel costs associated with each occurrence .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num num asphalt mix sampling sampling of the asphalt mixture for marshall compaction comparison will be carried out by the consultant using the procedures identified in attnum .
num exclusions to random sampling random sampling methods will not be applied when the consultant samples mix behind the paver on lifts of num mm or less nor to small areas such as tapers approaches areas of handwork gores nor for asphalt mix used for isolated leveling and repair of failed areas nor for aggregate or asphalt mix chosen for qc acceptance lot testing .
num retesting following attempts to improve smoothness when the test results on a sublot of acp indicate a penalty because of smoothness the contractor may make one attempt to improve the smoothness on the sublot by additional work in which case the following shall apply i the contractor shall notify the consultant in writing that he will make one attempt to improve smoothness .
ii additional work on a sublot to improve smoothness shall be completed within num calendar days from the time the contractor receives written notification from the consultant indicating the smoothness test results for that sublot .
sublots assessed to be in reject due to smoothness or bumps and dips greater than num mm shall be repaired as outlined in subsection num end product rejection .
the contractor shall not undertake any method of repair that is detrimental to the quality of the pavement .
any method of heating that has a detrimental effect on the pavement in the opinion of the consultant will not be allowed .
the consultant will retest any sublots in which the contractor has made one attempt to improve smoothness .
the sublot assessment for smoothness will be based upon the retested values .
num aggregate gradation requirements the following requirements apply to asphalt concrete pavement material in all lifts except preliminary leveling and those lots designated as qc acceptance lots .
price adjustments for aggregate gradation variation will be based on the variation of the lot mean gradation from the job mix formula tolerance for each sieve size as shown in tables num d and num e and the corresponding adjustment points as shown in table num f. for lifts greater than num mm in thickness the lot mean gradation will be determined using the sieve analysis of core samples .
for lifts num mm or less the lot mean gradation will be determined using the sieve analysis of mix andor core samples .
when the lot mean gradation is outside the job mix formula tolerance the penalty assessment will be num per tonne for each mean adjustment point up to the limits shown in table num of specification num aggregate production and stockpiling .
when the lot mean gradation is outside the limits of table num the penalty assessment will be num per tonne for each mean adjustment point outside those limits regardless of the job mix formula tolerance .
if the maximum deviation shown in table num e is exceeded the lot is rejected .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num when the lot mean gradation for all sieve sizes is within the job mix formula tolerance and within the limits of table num and individual test results for each sieve size are within the allowable range shown in table num d a bonus of num per tonne will be applied .
num pavement segregation requirements num general the finished surface of the top lift of acp shall have a uniform texture and be free of segregated areas .
num classifying pavement segregation a segregated area is defined as an area of the pavement where the texture differs visually from the texture of the surrounding pavement .
for the purposes of classifying pavement segregation only segregated areas greater than nummnum and centreofpaver streaks greater than num m in length will be considered .
moderate or severe segregated areas which do not meet these size parameters will be considered obvious defects .
pavement segregation will be classified as follows slight the matrix asphalt cement and fine aggregate is in place between the coarse aggregate .
however there is more stone in comparison to the surrounding acceptable mix .
moderate significantly more stone than the surrounding mix moderately segregated areas usually exhibit a lack of surrounding matrix .
severe appears as an area of very stony mix stone against stone with very little or no matrix .
centreofpaver streak appears as a continuous or semicontinuous longitudinal streak typically located in the middle of the paver mat .
num inspections for pavement segregation num inspections by the contractor the contractor shall perform a daily inspection of the paving operations on all lifts of pavement to identify any instances of pavement segregation .
if segregation is evident the contractor shall take immediate corrective action to his operations to prevent any further occurrence of segregation .
num inspections by the consultant i inspections during construction the consultant will inspect the lower lifts of pavement to identify any instances of pavement segregation .
if segregation is evident the consultant will immediately notify the contractor so that corrective action can be taken to prevent further occurrence of segregation .
the consultant will also inspect the top lift of pavement .
typically each pavement lot would be inspected as soon as possible after the lot is placed .
during the inspections of the top lift the consultant will identify and record any areas of slight moderate and severe segregation and any areas of centerofpaver streak .
areas requiring repair in accordance with subsection section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num num will be marked by the consultant .
the consultant will provide the contractor with a written assessment indicating location and severity of the segregated areas as soon as practical following each inspection .
ii inspection following construction an inspection following construction will not normally be conducted unless the department has concerns that additional segregation not identified during construction may be present .
if deemed necessary by the department this inspection will be conducted approximately num weeks after the completion of all paving work .
during this inspection the consultant will identify and record any areas of slight moderate and severe segregation and any areas of centreofpaver streak which were not identified in the inspections during construction .
the consultant will provide the contractor with a written assessment indicating location and severity of the segregated areas as soon as practical following this inspection .
num repairing pavement segregation pavement segregation identified during post construction inspections will not require repair .
however this will not relieve the contractor from his responsibility to repair any obvious defects deteriorated repairs or failures which become evident within the warranty period .
pavement segregation identified in the inspections performed during construction shall be repaired by the contractor at his expense and in accordance with the following moderate and severe segregation in the top lift of pavement and on entrances and intersections shall require repair .
for entrances and the portion of intersections outside the through travel lanes and shoulders areas of moderate and severe segregation shall be repaired in accordance with the methods of repair listed for moderate segregation .
intersections and entrances shall also be neatly shaped smooth and free of surface defects and depressions .
slight segregation on any lift of pavement will not require repair .
moderate segregation on lower lifts will not require repair .
severe segregation on lower lifts will only require repair in instances where in the opinion of the consultant the segregated area will affect the long term structural integrity of the pavement structure .
such repair will not be required in instances where the consultant determines that the paver screed is dragging due to distortion of the existing surface .
only moderate and severely segregated centreofpaver streak on the top lift of pavement will require repair .
the following methods of repair are preapproved moderate segregation the contractor has the option of using a slurry patch or a hot mix patch .
severe segregation the contractor has the option of removal and replacement or overlay .
any other methods of repair proposed by the contractor will be subject to the approval of the consultant with the exception that the application of asphalt by distributor hand spraying squeegeeing etc .
will not be permitted as a method of repair under any circumstances .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num repairs for segregation using an overlay shall be for the entire pavement width .
repairs for segregation using removal and replacement shall be for the full lane width full lane width and shoulder or the shoulder only as applicable depending on the extent of the segregated area .
the full depth of the asphalt lift shall be removed and replaced with new acp using an appropriate paver and cold milling equipment .
all acp material used for overlay and removal and replacement repairs shall have a tack coat applied prior to placement and will be subject to the requirements of subsection num end product rejection .
the consultant will mark out the area of repair .
the marked area shall extend a minimum of num m beyond the segregated area .
for centreofpaver streak the marked area shall extend a minimum of num mm laterally and num m longitudinally beyond the streak .
all repairs shall be regular in shape and finished using good workmanship practices to provide an appearance suitable to the consultant .
traffic shall be kept off all repairs for a sufficient period of time to ensure that tracking does not occur .
all hot mix and other repairs for which compaction is normally required shall be properly compacted .
in the event repairs cover existing roadway lines or markings the contractor shall reinstate the lines and markings at his expense and to the satisfaction of the consultant .
repairing pavement segregation will not affect the assessment of segregation payment adjustments .
repairs shall be completed during construction or shortly after construction except when prevented by inclement weather or seasonal shutdown .
in these cases the contractor shall complete the repairs prior to june num of the following year .
num appeal of acceptance test results and appeal testing num density asphalt content and gradation appeal testing will be done using attnum .
the contractor may appeal the results of acceptance testing of density asphalt content or gradation for any rejected or penalized lot only once .
appeals will only be considered if cause can be shown .
quality control test results for density that are provided to the consultant subsequent to the contractors receipt of the quality assurance test results for that lot will not be considered when evaluating cause for an appeal .
the appeal shall be for all tests within the lot and there will be no appeal allowed for single tests within a lot .
any attempt to improve density on the appealed lot after the consultant has tested the lot for acceptance shall void the appeal and the original test results will apply .
the following procedures will apply for an appeal i for gradation and asphalt content appeals the contractor shall serve notice of appeal to the consultant in writing within num hours of receipt of the test results .
for all other appeals notice shall be served to the consultant in writing within num hours of receipt of the test results .
ii the consultant will arrange and pay for an independent testing laboratory certified to operate in the province of alberta to perform the appeal testing .
the personnel employed section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num or testing laboratory retained by the contractor for quality control testing on the project will not be used for appeal testing .
iii the consultant will determine the number and location of the new tests for each segment in accordance with subsection num .
the contractor shall sample the pavement at such locations and provide the samples to the consultant .
iv for appeals other than gradation appeals the single high and single low test results from the old lot will be rejected and the remaining test results will be added to the results of the new tests .
a new lot mean for the test results will be determined and used for acceptance and unit price adjustment .
for gradation appeals all tests from the old lot will be retained and averaged with the new appeal tests .
a new lot mean and range for all tests will be determined and used for acceptance and unit price adjustment .
the new values thus determined in all cases will be binding on the contractor and the department .
num smoothness the contractor may appeal acceptance test results of smoothness of any rejected or penalized sublot once .
the appeal shall be in writing and submitted within num hours of receipt of the test results .
any attempt to improve smoothness on the appealed sublot after the consultant has tested the lot for acceptance shall void the appeal and the original test results will apply .
the appeal testing will be performed by a firm that is prequalified by the department for qa smoothness testing .
the new results will be binding on the contractor and the department .
num segregation rating the contractor may appeal the segregation rating in any portion of the work or the entire project for lane.kms that are not in bonus .
the following procedures will apply for an appeal i the contractor must serve written notice of the appeal to the consultant within num days of receipt of a written segregation assessment .
the written notice shall detail the lanekms and nature of the appeal .
ii the department will determine a representative sample of the portion of the work appealed and will reassess this area .
generally this reassessment will be completed within num week of the consultants receipt of the written notice of appeal .
based on the reassessment of the representative sample the department will determine whether or not a reassessment of the entire appealed work is necessary .
num payment of appeal testing costs for asphalt content smoothness or gradation if the new results show that a penalty no longer applies then sampling and testing costs for the appeal procedures for that lot will be the responsibility of the department .
furthermore in such cases the contractor shall be reimbursed sampling costs at the rate of num per location .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num if the new results verify that any unit price reduction or rejection remains valid for that lot then the contractor will be invoiced by the department for the testing costs for the appeal procedures at the following rates asphalt content num for the first appeal lot and num for all subsequent lots if an asphalt correction factor is not required .
gradation num per appeal .
profilograph num per hour travel time testing time and standby time .
num payment of appeal testing costs for density if the new results indicate that the new lot mean for density is no longer in a penalty situation and that the lot mean has increased by more than num then the costs of sampling and testing for the appeal procedures shall be the responsibility of the department .
furthermore in such cases the contractor shall be reimbursed sampling costs at the rate of num per location .
if the new results indicate that the lot mean for density is either in a penalty situation or has not increased by more than num then the contractor shall be invoiced by the department for the sampling and testing costs for the appeal procedures at a rate of num per lot appealed .
num payment of appeal testing costs for segregation rating if a reassessment of the appealed work results in a change in the original rating the revised rating will apply .
if the overall payment adjustment for the appealed work is reduced by an amount of num or greater the cost of the reassessment will be borne by the department .
if there is no change to the overall payment adjustment or if the overall payment is decreased by an amount less than num or if the overall payment adjustment is increased the contractor will be charged an amount of num for the appeal .
num construction num equipment num general equipment shall be designed and operated to produce an end product complying with the requirements of this specification .
num mixing plant mixing plants shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and shall be calibrated prior to commencing production of the specified mix .
the contractor shall provide the consultant with a certificate of calibration which certifies that the plant has been calibrated to produce a uniform mixture in accordance with the job mix formula .
when asphalt concrete pavement contains reclaimed asphalt pavement the mixing plant shall be capable of thoroughly separating and heating the rap particles and blending the rap with virgin aggregate and any required asphalt cement to create a homogeneous mix at the plant discharge .
the plant shall also contain specialized mixing equipment that will prevent the rap section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num from coming into direct contact with the flame thus minimizing blue smoke and oxidation of the asphalt in the rap .
all equipment used for producing wma shall be calibrated .
wma additive products which include separate pumping and metering systems shall be electronically interlocked with the operating controls of the mixing plant .
the contractor shall provide the consultant with copies of all invoices or bills of lading for wma products added to the asphalt cement or mix in the field .
plants using an injection foaming system shall be calibrated and operated according to recommendations from the plant manufacturer or equipment supplier .
asphalt binders used for water injection foaming shall not include antifoaming additives .
num mix production aggregate and asphalt shall be combined to produce a uniform mixture of specified gradation at an asphalt content in accordance with the approved job mix formula and in which all particles of aggregate are uniformly coated .
unless otherwise specified the maximum mixing temperature for all grades of asphalt shall be num c or for chemical or polymer modified asphalts as recommended in writing by the asphalt supplier .
plant emissions shall not exceed the limits set by alberta environment .
num preparation of existing surface num general failed areas in existing surfaces shall be repaired in accordance with specification num subgrade preparation or as directed by the consultant .
areas requiring repair will be identified by the consultant in consultation with the contractor .
before the asphalt mix is placed dirt and other objectionable material shall be removed from the surface to be paved by brooming or other methods and a tack coat or prime coat shall be applied in accordance with specification num prime tack and fog coats .
existing fillets and ramps at approaches to railway crossings and bridge structures or adjacent to paved surfaces or other structures shall be removed to the depths shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
the removed material shall be disposed of and the exposed surfaces shall be prepared as directed by the consultant .
contact edges of existing mats and contact faces of curbs gutters manholes sidewalks and bridge structures shall be coated with a thin film of liquid asphalt material before placing the asphalt mix .
num preliminary leveling areas that require preliminary leveling will be as shown on the drawings or as identified in the field by the consultant .
generally areas that show depressions rutting or other deformations to a depth of num mm or greater will be designated by the consultant for preliminary leveling .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num pavement lifts that are specified or shown on the drawings with designated lift thickness less than num mm shall be considered as preliminary leveling and shall be placed using a paver .
preliminary leveling not specified to be placed using a paver lift shall be spread using a motor grader or other methods approved by the consultant .
all of the following shall apply for acceptance i if the material type for preliminary leveling is not specified or shown on the drawings it shall be the same designation and class as specified for the subsequent lift of asphalt concrete pavement ii regardless of how the asphalt mix is spread a minimum of one pneumatic tired roller shall be used for compaction and a minimum density of num of the marshall density as determined by the consultant is required iii preliminary leveling is intended to be a separate operation and shall not be done as part of the construction of the subsequent lift of asphalt concrete pavement .
for the purposes of determining the unit price adjustments listed in table num a and lump sum sublot assessments listed in table num c preliminary leveling is not considered to be a lift .
num transverse pavement joints transverse joints between existing pavement and acp placed under this contract shall be of a vertical butt type well bonded sealed and finished to provide a continuous smooth profile across the joint .
this shall include tieins to all paved road allowances median crossovers and approaches to bridges and railway crossings .
tieins to streets parking lots and other urban approaches shall be as specified in the special provisions .
to accomplish this the existing pavement shall be coldmilled to expose a vertical surface against which new acp may be placed .
the depth of the cold milling shall be equal to the thickness of the final lift .
in longitudinal section the minimum slope of the milled area shall be num horizontal to num vertical all in general conformance with drawing cbnum mnum .
in plan the contractor shall cut the joint in the following manners i the joint may be cut at num to the centreline of the roadway across the full width of each mat or ii the joint may be cut at num to the roadway centreline across the travel lanes and contiguously at num to the roadway centreline elsewhere .
iii for median crossovers bridges and railway crossings the joint shall be cut parallel to the crossing .
when the existing pavement has been removed in advance of paving the joint area the contractor shall construct a smooth taper at the joint area to a slope of at least num horizontal to num vertical .
the taper may be placed on tar paper and shall be removed when paving is resumed as directed by the consultant .
the transverse joint shall be straight and have a vertical face when the taper is removed .
unless otherwise noted in the special provisions the contractor shall assume ownership of all rap resulting from cold milling operations and dispose of the material in an approved manner .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num num transporting the asphalt mix the mix shall be transported in accordance with the requirements of specification num hauling .
trucks used for transportation of the mix shall be compatible with the size and capacity of the spreading equipment .
truck boxes shall be clean free from accumulations of asphalt mix and foreign material .
excess truck box lubricants such as light oil detergent or lime solutions shall not be allowed to contaminate the mix and shall be disposed of in an environmentally acceptable manner .
petroleum based truck box lubricants shall not be used .
during transport the mix shall be completely covered to protect it from precipitation and excessive heat loss by securely fastened waterproofed tarpaulins unless otherwise approved by the consultant .
num placing the mix asphalt mix shall be placed only on dry surfaces .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings the asphalt mix shall be placed in the following lift thicknesses i in a single lift when the design compacted total thickness is num mm or less .
ii in two or more lifts when the design compacted total thickness is greater than num mm .
the lift thickness selection shall be determined by the contractor except that a the maximum thickness of any lift shall be num mm .
b the minimum thickness of a top lift shall be num mm unless it is placed directly over a mix type snum in which case the minimum thickness shall be num mm .
c when a total acp thickness of num mm is specified the thickness of the first lift shall be num mm and the final lift shall be num mm .
d when a total acp thickness of num mm or more is specified the minimum thickness of all lifts except the top lift shall be num mm or greater .
e the minimum lift thickness for any lift using a mix type snum shall be num mm .
lift thickness will normally be designed and expressed in increments of num mm .
longitudinal joints will not be permitted between the edges of driving lanes in the final lift of acp .
longitudinal joints shall be offset a minimum of num mm from one lift to the next .
longitudinal and transverse joints shall be vertical butt type well bonded and sealed and finished to provide a continuous smooth profile across the joints .
surplus material at longitudinal joints shall be disposed of in a manner acceptable to the consultant .
broadcasting surplus material across the mat will not be permitted .
all longitudinal joints shall be straight and uniform with no lateral waviness .
any mat contact that is not straight or uniform as determined by the consultant shall be trimmed by sawcutting or using some other method acceptable to the consultant prior to placing the adjacent mat .
the material removed shall be disposed of to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num any mat with a contact edge that has deteriorated cracked or slumped due to improper rolling or vehicle traffic shall be trimmed by sawcutting or some other method acceptable to the consultant prior to placing the adjacent mat .
the length of contact edge to be trimmed removed and disposed of will be as determined by the consultant .
if required by the consultant the contact edge of any mat placed by the contractor shall be coated with a thin film of liquid asphalt before placing the adjacent mat .
when paving is discontinued in any lane or in any lift the mat shall be tapered to a slope of num horizontal to num vertical .
the taper may be placed on tar paper and shall be removed when paving is resumed .
the transverse joint shall be straight and have a vertical face when the taper is removed .
transverse construction joints from one lift to the next shall be separated by at least num m. where the construction of a top lift of pavement next to a concrete curb section or curb and gutter section will be delayed the contractor shall construct a temporary asphalt concrete fillet next to the concrete section in accordance with the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
these fillets shall be removed when paving is resumed .
placement of acp adjacent to guardrail shall be in accordance with typical barrier drawing no .
teb num .
num road intersections and entrances road intersections and entrances shall be paved in accordance with the drawings or as herein described in these specifications .
on all road intersections median cross overs and residential farm entrances the asphalt mix shall be spread by means of a paver .
no grader laying will be permitted except for bottom lift or preliminary leveling .
on all other entrances the asphalt mix shall be spread by means determined by the contractor and in a manner acceptable to the consultant .
num compacting the mix all asphalt mix including those areas of the mat which are excluded from testing as noted in subsection num shall be thoroughly compacted and after final rolling the finished surface of the mat shall be free from segregation waves hairline cracks and other obvious defects .
the rollers or drums shall be kept moist with water or nonpetroleum based release agents to prevent adhesion .
excess water or release agents shall not be used .
after final rolling is complete the contractor shall ensure that the finished mat has cooled for a minimum period of num hours before opening the section to traffic .
num asphalt mix for others the contractor shall make available on request additional asphalt mix for the use of the department .
the estimated quantity of additional mix is shown in the unit price schedule as asphalt mix for others .
this additional mix will be picked up at the mixing plant by other forces at times that are mutually agreeable to the contractor and the consultant .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num num interim lane markings the contractor shall provide interim lane markings on all newly constructed acp surfaces or on tacked surfaces that are to be exposed to traffic overnight .
when paint is used the paint shall be the same colour as the permanent markings designed for the work .
all paint spots shall be num mm wide and num mm long shall be applied lengthwise to the road surface shall be spaced num m apart on centre in tangent sections and num m apart on curves and shall be completely covered with glass beads at the time of painting .
when selfadhesive reflectorized pavement marking tape is used the spacing shall be the same as is used for paint spots .
tape on lower lifts does not need to be removed prior to placement of the next lift of pavement .
if tape is used on the upper lift it shall be removed immediately prior to painting the permanent lane markings .
when temporary pavement markers are used they shall be placed at num m intervals on tangent sections and at num m intervals on curves .
markers used on the upper lift must remain in place until the permanent markings are applied .
markers used on lower lifts shall be removed immediately prior to placement of the next lift of pavement .
num grooved rumble strips when specified in the special provisions the contractor shall construct grooved rumble strips as shown on drawing cbnummnum .
no grooving will be done across intersections or accesses nor at any other locations specified by the consultant .
the grooving shall be applied only to the top lift of the pavement and may be formed by any means which the contractor may propose and which are acceptable to the consultant .
the contractor shall remove and repair any grooving placed beyond the limits outlined at his own expense .
num end product acceptance or rejection num general the contractor shall provide an end product conforming in quality and accuracy of detail to the dimensional and tolerance requirements of the specifications and drawings .
where no tolerances are specified the standard of workmanship shall be in accordance with normally accepted good practice .
num end product acceptance num acceptance at full or increased payment acceptance of any lot at full or increased payment will occur if it contains no obvious defects and if i the lot mean for density of the compacted mix in the lot is not in penalty or reject according to the criteria outlined in table num a .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num ii the lot mean for actual asphalt content of the mix is within num of the approved asphalt content .
on qc acceptance lots where quality assurance test results for asphalt content are not available the contractors quality control test results shall be used .
quality assurance test results when available shall replace any corresponding quality control test results .
iii for smoothness full payment will occur if the profile index of all sublots in the lot in the top lift of pavement are not in penalty or reject according to the criteria outlined in table num c. increased payment will occur if the profile index of all sublots in the lot in the top lift of pavement is num. iv individual bumps and dips in the top lift of pavement do not exceed num mm .
v for gradation in qa acceptance lots only full payment will occur if there are no lot mean adjustments for gradation and increased payment will occur if there are no lot mean adjustments and the maximum range as shown in table num d is not exceeded for any sieve size in the lot .
for gradation in qc acceptance lots consideration is only given to acceptance at full payment .
no increased payment will be applied using quality control test results .
num acceptance at reduced or adjusted payment acceptance of any lot at reduced payment will occur if it contains no obvious defects and if i the quality assurance test results are such that the lot or sublot meets with requirements for acceptance at a reduced payment .
for asphalt content and aggregate gradation no decreased payment will be applied using quality control test results .
ii the lot or sublot is approved in respect of all other requirements .
iii the contractor has not notified the consultant in writing that he will exercise his option to repair or remove and replace the work at his own cost with work meeting the requirements for acceptance at full or increased payment .
iv individual bumps and dips measuring num mm or greater have been repaired .
v individual bumps and dips exceeding num mm and less than num mm which have been designated by the consultant as unacceptable have been repaired .
both bonus and penalty adjustments may be made for any lot in accordance with section num measurement and payment .
num end product rejection if the lot mean for density actual asphalt content or gradation are outside the applicable acceptance limits then the lot is rejected automatically regardless of the values of the other control characteristics .
if the smoothness of the top lift of any sublot is outside the acceptance limit then the sublot is rejected automatically regardless of the values of the other control characteristics .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num the finished surface of any lift shall have a uniform close texture and be free of visible signs of poor workmanship .
any obvious defects as determined by the consultant such as but not limited to the following will be cause for automatic rejection of asphalt concrete pavement regardless of the values of any other control characteristic .
i individual bumps and dips num mm or greater .
the consultant may reject asphalt concrete pavement with individual bumps and dips exceeding num mm and less than num mm .
ii segregated areas not already covered in subsection num pavement segregation requirements .
iii areas of excess or insufficient asphalt .
iv improper matching of longitudinal and transverse joints .
v roller marks .
vi tire marks .
vii cracking or tearing .
viii sampling locations not properly reinstated .
ix improperly constructed patches .
x top lift surfaces which are torn due to the dragging of the paver screed .
xi any final lift surface with a variation greater than num mm from the edge of a num m straightedge placed in any direction on the surface .
when acp is rejected by reason of obvious defects the minimum area of rejection will be sublot size as defined in subsection num of this specification .
rejected work shall be promptly repaired remedied overlaid or removed and replaced all in a manner acceptable to the consultant .
the contractor shall be responsible for all costs including materials .
no payment will be made for work in any lot or sublot which has been rejected until the defects have been remedied .
if an overlay is used as a corrective measure on a defective lot or sublot the overlay thickness will be subject to the approval of the consultant .
where an overlay is used as a corrective measure in any lane adjacent lanes shall also be overlayed to the same thickness and length regardless of whether the adjacent lanes were acceptable or not .
the overlay will be subject to the same specifications as the original pavement except that the minimum thickness of an overlay shall be the lesser of num mm or the design lift thickness of the defective material .
num measurement and payment num general the unit prices for the following items of work will be full compensation for all labour material tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work in accordance with these specifications .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num num asphalt concrete pavement eps accepted asphalt concrete pavement will be measured in tonnes and will be paid for at the unit price bid per tonne for asphalt concrete pavement eps for the applicable asphalt mix type subject to the unit price adjustments and assessments hereinafter specified .
this payment will be full compensation for supplying applying and maintaining tack coat supplying the asphalt binder processing hauling and placing the mix interim lane marking and quality control .
num payment for acceptable work the following end product properties of asphalt concrete pavement eps will be measured for acceptance in accordance with subsection num acceptance sampling and testing .
i density ii actual asphalt content iii smoothness iv aggregate gradation for the density actual asphalt content and gradation of a lot to be acceptable the lot means must be within the acceptance limits shown in tables num a num b and num e respectively .
for each lot the unit price adjustments for density and actual asphalt content will be the amounts shown in tables num a and num b for the sample mean of the test results for that lot .
for each lot the unit price adjustment for gradation will be as defined in subsection num aggregate gradation requirements .
the unit price applicable to each lot quantity of asphalt concrete pavement eps will be calculated as follows lot unit price per tonne contract unit price bid per tonne the sum of the unit price adjustment for pad and paa and pag where pad unit price adjustment for density bonus or penalty paa unit price adjustment for asphalt content penalty only qa acceptance lots only pag unit price adjustment for gradation bonus or penalty qa acceptance lots only if the lot mean for density actual asphalt content or gradation for any lot is outside the acceptance limit the lot is rejected and no payment will be made for the quantity of asphalt concrete pavement in that lot until the defect has been remedied .
for the smoothness of any sublot in the top lift of acp to be acceptable the pri must be within the limits shown in table num c. for each sublot in the top lift of acp the penalty assessment for smoothness will be the amounts shown in table num c for the pri of that sublot .
all of these penalty assessments so determined will be deducted from the payments made for asphalt concrete pavementeps .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num every sublot in the top lift of acp that is outside the acceptance limit for smoothness will be rejected and payment will not be made for the quantity of asphalt concrete pavement in these sublots until they have been made acceptable .
payment for the remainder of the lot will be made in accordance with the above formula using pad paa and pag as determined for the lot from which will be subtracted any penalty assessment for smoothness .
no payment will be made for any material equipment or manpower used to improve acceptable work that is or was subject to unit price adjustment or penalty assessment .
num segregation payment adjustments payment adjustments for pavement segregation shall apply to the top lift of acp only and in accordance with the following segregated areas centreofpaver streak and any repaired segregated areas identified by the consultant either during construction or during the inspection conducted num weeks after the completion of paving work will be used to determine payment adjustments .
payment adjustments will not apply to segregated areas num mnum or less or on centreofpaver streaks num metre or less in length .
segregated areas excluding centreofpaver streaks separated by less than num metres shall be considered a single area for the determination of payment adjustments .
for centreof paver streaks each area will be measured separately for payment adjustments .
payment adjustments for segregation will not apply to entrances or the portion of an intersection outside the through travel lanes and shoulders .
payment adjustments will not apply to instances where the consultant determines that the paver screed is dragging .
if a segregated area is identified by the contractor and repaired prior to inspection by the consultant it will be classified as moderate for the purpose of determining payment adjustments .
payment adjustments will apply regardless of the year the pavement is placed and the year the pavement is inspected .
the total payment adjustment for segregation is determined as follows each lane.km of the completed pavement will be inspected separately by the consultant .
a lane includes the adjoining shoulder .
measurement of lane.kms will be made in num kilometre or partial kilometre long segments num lane wide as shown on the contract plan .
acceleration and deceleration lanes and interchange ramps are considered separate lanes .
for each lane.km the consultant will determine the following i the total number of slight segregated areas and ii the total number of moderate and severe segregated areas and iii the total length of centreofpaver streak determined by adding each instance of streak that is in excess of num metre in length these values will be used for the segregation frequencies and length of centreofpaver streak in tables a b c as applicable with the exception that for partial lanekms the segregation frequency for slight segregation will be calculated by dividing the actual number of section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num slight segregated areas by length of the segment assessed expressed in kilometres and rounding to the nearest whole number .
table a payment adjustment for slight segregation segregation frequency of slight areas per lanekm payment adjustment per lanekm num num num or num num greater than num number of areas num x num table b payment adjustment for moderate and severe segregation segregation frequency of moderate and severe areas per lanekm payment adjustment per lanekm num num greater than num number of areas x num table c payment adjustment for centreofpaver streak length of centreofpaver streak per lanekm payment adjustment per lanekm num metre or less num greater than num metre num per linear metre num lane kilometres with no areas of segregation of any type or severity or any centreofpaver streaks will be assigned a bonus payment of num per lane.km .
for partial lane.kms the bonus will be prorated based upon the actual length of the segment assessed .
num lane kilometres with num or num areas of slight segregation no moderate or severely segregated areas and no centreofpaver streak will be assigned a bonus payment of num per lane.km .
for partial lane.kms the bonus will be prorated based upon the actual length of the segment assessed .
notes total payment adjustment per lanekm for segregation will be the sum of tables a b and c. for partial lane kilometres the payment adjustments for table a will be prorated based upon the actual length of segment assessed .
the maximum penalty adjustment for segregation shall be limited to num per lanekm .
for partial lanekms this adjustment will be prorated based upon the actual length of segment assessed .
num payment for work that had been rejected but was made acceptable when defects have been remedied in lots or sublots which had been rejected payment for the original quantity of material in those lots or sublots will be made subject to unit price adjustments and penalty assessments determined as follows i penalty or bonus assessments will be made for smoothness as follows section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num penalty or bonus assessments for pri will be the amounts shown in the applicable section of table num c and will be based on profilograph tests following any corrective action taken by the contractor .
the penalty assessment for each bump or dip over num mm will be num for multilift pavements and num for singlelift or curb and gutter applications .
penalty assessments for bumps and dips will be based on initial profilograph testing conducted by the consultant .
repairs carried out by the contractor will not affect the penalty assessment for bumps and dips .
if bumps or dips are treated by the contractor prior to profilograph tests by the consultant such defects will be considered greater than num mm and will be assessed at the applicable penalty assessment rates .
ii the unit price adjustment for asphalt content density and gradation will be based on testing of the replacement or overlay material where applicable .
where replacement or overlay material does not cover the entire lot or sublot prior tests on the uncovered area will be averaged with new tests on the corrective work .
the unit price adjustment determined through retesting of the corrective work will be applied to that quantity of material in the lot or sublot which was originally rejected to determine payment .
no payment will be made for any material used to replace repair or overlay rejected work and all corrective work shall be performed entirely at the contractors expense .
num repair of failed areas in existing surfaces repair of failed areas in existing surfaces as identified under subsection num will be paid for at the contract unit prices bid for the work .
unit price adjustment will not apply to material used to repair failed areas in existing surfaces .
num removal and disposal of fillet and ramp material the removal and disposal of fillet andor ramp material will be considered incidental to the work and will not be paid for separately .
num transverse pavement joints constructing transverse pavement joints including any required coldmilling will be considered incidental to the work and will not be paid for separately .
num preliminary leveling accepted material used for preliminary leveling will be measured and paid for at the unit price bid for asphalt concrete pavement eps where applicable .
unit price adjustments will not apply to material used for leveling .
no payment will be made for unacceptable material .
num asphalt mix for others accepted additional asphalt concrete mixture will be measured in tonnes and paid for at the unit price bid for asphalt mix for others .
unit price adjustment will not apply to additional asphalt concrete received at the plant by other forces .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num num grooved rumble strips measurement of shoulder grooving will be made parallel to the road centreline to the nearest num km of through highway chainage for each side of the road where accepted grooving is performed .
payment for shoulder grooving will be made at the unit price bid per kilometre for grooved rumble strips .
this payment will be full compensation for all labour equipment tools materials and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num table num a unit price adjustment for density unit price adjustment dollars per tonne of marshall density design lift thickness lot mean num mm or greater lower lifts less than num mm and greater than num mm lower lifts num mm lower lifts num mm or greater top lift only less than num mm and greater than num mm top lift only num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num table num a unit price adjustment for density unit price adjustment dollars per tonne of marshall density design lift thickness lot mean num mm or greater lower lifts less than num mm and greater than num mm lower lifts num mm lower lifts num mm or greater top lift only less than num mm and greater than num mm top lift only num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num .. num num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num num of unit price num num remove replace num num num of unit price num num remove replace num num num of unit price num num remove replace num num num of unit price num num remove replace num num num of unit price num num remove replace num num num of unit price num num remove replace num num num of unit price num num remove replace num num num of unit price num num remove replace num num num of unit price num num remove replace num num num of unit price num num remove replace num num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num table num a unit price adjustment for density unit price adjustment dollars per tonne of marshall density design lift thickness lot mean num mm or greater lower lifts less than num mm and greater than num mm lower lifts num mm lower lifts num mm or greater top lift only less than num mm and greater than num mm top lift only num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
num remove replace remove replace remove replace remove replace overlay or rm.rp .
notes single lifts only are considered top lifts .
preliminary leveling is not considered a lift .
table num b unit price adjustment for asphalt content unit price adjustment for asphalt content paa per tonne top lift lower lift deviation of the actual asphalt content from the approved asphalt content below above below above from num to num num num num num from num to num num num num num from num to num num num num num from num to num num num num num from num to num num num num num from num to num num num from num to num num num from num to num num num notes for top lift deviations of more than num the contractor shall either overlay or remove and replace the previously placed mix .
for lower lift deviations of more than num the department will determine whether removal and replacement is necessary .
for material that is allowed to stay in place payment will be at num of the unit price bid .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num table num c lump sum sublot assessment for smoothness assessment for smoothness of top lift per sublot lump sum pri cnum cnum cnum num num num num num and num or less num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num reject reject num num num num num num num num num num num num num num greater than num reject num num sublot may be accepted subject to approval of the department with an assessment of num pavement smoothness will be assessed based upon the type of construction as follows .
type of construction table num c assessment column two or more paver laid lifts minimum design lift thickness of num mm .
cnum single lift with design lift thickness greater than or equal to num mm cnum mill and replace or reprofile by cold milling full pavement width with one or more paver laid lifts greater than or equal to num mm .
cnum mill and inlay entire lane with one or more paver laid lifts greater than or equal to num mm cnum any cold milling of the entire lane or full pavement width with a single lift overlay less than num mm .
cnum hot inplace recycling or mill and inlay cnum curb and gutter cnum single lift with design lift thickness less than num mm .
cnum penalty assessments for bumps and dips will be applied to all applicable top lifts of pavements section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num table num d gradation tolerances for the lot mean from the job mix formula and maximum range between individual test results in a lot sieve size m characteristics num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num tolerances for the lot mean from the job mix formula num num num num num num maximum range between individual test results in a lot num num num num num num num include all sieve sizes up to one size smaller than top size .
table num e maximum deviation for the lot mean from the gradation limits specified in table num of specification num aggregate production and stockpiling sieve size m characteristic num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num maximum deviation for the lot mean from specification num gradation limits num num num num include all sieve sizes up to one size smaller than top size .
table num f a and b adjustment points for deviation in gradation sieve size m mean num num num num num num num num num num num num for each num deviation num num for each num deviation num num for each num deviation num num for each num deviation num num for each num deviation num deviation num num deviation num num for each num deviation num for each additional num deviation num include all sieve sizes up to one size smaller than top size .
lot mean adjustment points will be calculated for each lot .
if the lot mean does not exceed the requirements in table num e a lot gradation price adjustment per tonne will be applied based on the following formula pag a x num b x num bonus section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps num august num where pag unit price adjustment for gradation bonus or penalty qa acceptance lots only a mean adjustment points assessed within the gradation limits specified in specification num but beyond the job mix formula tolerance requirements in table num d. b mean adjustment points assessed outside the gradation limits specified in specification num regardless of the job mix formula tolerance .
bonus num when there are no mean adjustment points and the maximum range as shown in table num d is not exceeded for any sieve size in the lot .
section num specification num milled rumble strips august num table of contents num milled rumble stripsnum num general num num equipmentnum num general num num milling machine num num construction num num general num num traffic accommodation num num construction of milled rumble stripsnum num repair of unacceptable rumble stripsnum num fog coat num num measurement and payment num num milled shoulder and centreline rumble strips num num milled rumble strips for stop conditions num num fog coat num section num specification num milled rumble strips august num num num milled rumble strips num general this specification describes the construction of milled rumble strips along roadway shoulders and centerlines and at locations with stop conditions .
rumble strips constructed along roadway shoulders and centerlines are designed to alert drivers when they leave the intended travel lane .
rumble strips constructed across the travel lanes are intended to alert drivers of an upcoming stop condition .
num equipment num general the contractor shall provide all equipment necessary for completion of the work .
num milling machine milling machines shall be equipped as follows i cutting heads for milling shoulder rumble strips shall be capable of producing grooves meeting the requirements detailed on standard drawing cbnummnum .
ii cutting heads for milling centre line rumble strips shall be capable of producing grooves meeting the requirements detailed on standard drawing cbnummnum .
iii cutting heads for milling rumble strips at stop conditions shall be capable of producing grooves meeting the requirements detailed on standard drawing cbnummnum .
machines shall be equipped with integral sweeping device mounted directly behind the cutter or a separate sweeping operation shall be conducted as construction of the rumble strips progresses within the signed construction zone .
num construction num general work shall be carried out during daylight hours only and only when visibility is num m or greater .
active work areas shall not exceed num km in length .
num traffic accommodation the contractor shall supply sequential arrow boards as part of his traffic accommodation measures for rumble strip construction .
arrow boards shall meet the requirements of specification num traffic accommodation and temporary signing .
num construction of milled rumble strips rumble strips shall be constructed at the locations listed in the special provisions shown on the drawings or designated by the consultant .
section num specification num milled rumble strips august num num rumble strips shall be milled into the top lift of pavement only .
centreline rumble strip installations on new pavements shall take place after the specified roadway lines have been applied .
rumble strips of the types specified shall be constructed as shown on the drawings in accordance with the following requirements and as directed by the consultant .
shoulder rumble strips shall be constructed as shown on standard drawing cbnummnum typical layout for continuous milled rumble strips for shoulders centreline rumble strips shall be constructed as shown on standard drawing cbnummnum typical layout for milled rumble strips for center line and rumble strips for stop conditions shall be constructed as shown on standard drawing cbnummnum typical layout for milled rumble strips for stop conditions .
contractors are advised that due to space constraints it may not be possible to construct the standard number of rumble strips for stop conditions at some intersection locations .
at such locations the contractor shall construct the number of strips prescribed in the special provisions or as designated by the consultant .
after milling the grooves the contractor shall sweep the milled areas clean and dispose of the milling debris at an approved location .
patterns of milled rumble strips constructed outside the tolerances shown on the drawings or rumble strips exhibiting obvious defects will be rejected and the contractor shall be responsible for repairing the unacceptable work .
num repair of unacceptable rumble strips areas where unacceptable rumble strips have been constructed shall be repaired by the contractor to the satisfaction of the consultant .
rumble strips shall then be reestablished at these locations .
the contractor shall submit details of his proposed repair methods to the consultant for review and acceptance prior to implementation .
all costs associated with the repair of unacceptable rumble strips will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
num fog coat when indicated in the special provisions or directed by the consultant the contractor shall apply a fog coat to milled areas .
the fog coat shall be applied in accordance with the requirements of standard specification num prime tack and fog coats and shall extend num mm beyond the width of the rumble strips .
roadway lines covered or contaminated by the fog coat application shall be repainted by the contractor .
the fog coat application rate shall be adequate to provide uniform complete coverage without excessive pooling within the rumble strips .
the consultant may direct the contractor to apply blotter sand to any rumble strips with excessive liquid asphalt .
the blotter sand shall be swept prior to any required repainting of the roadway lines .
supply and application of the blotter sand if necessary will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
section num specification num milled rumble strips august num num num measurement and payment num milled shoulder and centreline rumble strips measurement of milled centreline rumble strips will be by the kilometre for the actual sections of roadway where milled rumble strips have been acceptably constructed .
measurement will be carried out parallel to the roadway centre line and will be to the nearest num km .
measurement of milled shoulder rumble strips will be by the kilometre for each side of the road for the actual sections of roadway where milled rumble strips have been acceptably constructed .
measurement will be to the nearest num km .
payment will be made at the unit prices bid for milled rumble strip shoulder andor milled rumble strip centreline as applicable and will be full compensation for traffic accommodation constructing the milled rumble strips removing and disposing of all debris and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num milled rumble strips for stop conditions milled rumble strips for stop conditions will be measured by the set .
a set will be comprised of all rumble strips required at a respective stop location .
payment will be made at the unit price bid for milled rumble strips for stop conditions and will be full compensation for traffic accommodation constructing the milled rumble strips removing and disposing of all debris and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num fog coat where fog coat application is required as indicated in the special provisions payment for this work will be made in accordance with specification num prime tack and fog coats of the standard specifications for highway construction .
when fog coat application is designated onsite by the consultant payment for this work will be made in accordance with section num extra work of specification num general .
payment for repainting of roadway lines covered or contaminated by fog coat application will be made at unit prices bid for roadway lines supplying paint and painting for the type of line painted .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num table of contents num asphalt concrete pavement superpavenum num general num num descriptionnum num definitions num num materials num num asphaltnum num aggregate num num interim lane markings num num reclaimed asphalt pavementnum num warm mix asphaltnum num asphalt mix design and job mix formulanum num responsibility for mix designnum num requirements for mix design num num verification of mix design num num variation from the job mix formulanum num warm mix asphalt technologynum num sampling and testingnum num general num num methods of testing for acceptance and appeal testingnum num quality control testing num num acceptance sampling and testing num num retesting following attempts to improve smoothness num num aggregate gradation requirementsnum num pavement segregation requirementsnum num appeal of acceptance test results and appeal testing num num constructionnum num equipmentnum num preparation of existing surface num num transporting the asphalt mixnum num placing the mixnum num road intersections and entrancesnum num compacting the mix num num asphalt mix for others num num interim lane markings num num grooved rumble strips num num end product acceptance or rejection num num general num num end product acceptance num num end product rejectionnum num measurement and payment num num general num num asphalt concrete pavement superpave num num repair of failed areas in existing surfaces num num removal and disposal of fillet and ramp materialnum num transverse pavement joints num num preliminary leveling num num asphalt mix for others num num grooved rumble strips num section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num num asphalt concrete pavement superpave num general num description asphalt concrete pavement acp shall consist of crushed aggregates or a combination of crushed aggregates and reclaimed asphalt pavement rap blend sand material as required and asphalt cement combined in a hot mix plant placed and compacted on a prepared surface in conformity to the lines grades dimensions and crosssections as shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
this specification shall apply only to mixes specified to be designed using the superpave mix design procedure and shall not be used for mixes designated according to alberta transportations conventional mix type specifications .
num definitions for purposes of this specification the following definitions will apply num acceptance limits i density and actual asphalt content acceptance limits for density and actual asphalt content are the limiting values of the lot mean within which the lot will be accepted at full increased or reduced payment for density as shown in table num a or full or reduced payment for actual asphalt content as shown in table num b. ii smoothness acceptance limit for smoothness is the limiting value of the profile index within which a sublot will be accepted with or without penalty assessment as shown in table num c. num asphalt content i design asphalt content the asphalt content established by the approved mix design .
ii approved asphalt content the design asphalt content or subsequent adjustments to it .
such adjustments must be approved in writing by the consultant .
iii actual asphalt content the amount of asphalt binder in the mix as determined by att num or attnum and includes an amount to correct for the asphalt binder lost due to absorption by the aggregate or aggregate loss .
this correction may be determined for each change in aggregate or asphalt binder .
num end product specification eps a specification whereby the department does not define methods of construction .
under eps the department will monitor the contractors control of the process that produces the items of construction and will accept or reject the end product according to a specified acceptance plan .
the contractor is entirely responsible for quality control .
end product acceptance is the responsibility of the department and includes a statistically oriented program of acceptance testing .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num num job mix formula the job mix formula establishes the aggregate proportioning target aggregate gradation and approved asphalt content to be used for production of asphalt mix and requires the approval of the consultant on the basis of a mix design .
num lot a lot is a portion of the work being considered for acceptance and is defined as the following i one days plant production of more than num hours where approved changes to the following criteria have not occurred a job mix formula b pavement density requirement c project a change in any one of the above may require a new lot designation .
ii one days plant production of less than num hours will be dealt with at the consultants option as follows a the material will be added to the previous days lot if the criteria specified in i remains the same or b the material will be added to the next days lot with the same criteria specified in i or c if it is the last time the mix is produced with these criteria then the production will be designated as a lot .
iii if the consultant suspects a portion of a lot is substandard he may order extra testing to define the area and severity of the deficiency .
a new lot will be designated for this portion if this extra testing indicates the mix is subject to unit price adjustment or rejection .
num rejection limit i density and actual asphalt content rejection limit for density and actual asphalt content is the limiting value of the lot mean beyond which a lot is rejected and not paid for as shown in tables num a and num b. ii smoothness rejection limit for smoothness is the limiting value of the profile index pri beyond which a sublot is rejected and not paid for as shown in table num c. num lot mean and range the lot mean is the arithmetic mean of a set of num or more test results constituting the sample for the lot .
the range represents the difference between the highest and lowest values within a set of test results .
num stratified random sample a stratified random sample is a set of test measurements taken one each from num or more separate stratified areas or segments within a lot in an unbiased way .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num num sublot a sublot is a portion of a lot that is one paver width wide and num m long on which the calculation for smoothness and assessment of workmanship and obvious defects are based .
num alberta transportation test procedures test methods designated in these specifications as att or tlt refer to alberta transportation tests .
num superpave mix design procedure mix design procedure developed as a product of the strategic highway research program shrp and described in the latest edition of the american association of state highway and transportation officials aashto standard specification for superpave volumetric mix design designation mnum .
num managed quality assurance mqa within this specification acceptance testing shall be applied using managed quality assurance mqa practices .
with mqa certain quality control test results provided by the contractor may be used in place of corresponding quality assurance test results as a basis for acceptance and payment .
the lots for which quality control test results are used for acceptance and payment will be at the discretion of the consultant .
num qc acceptance lot a lot chosen by the consultant in which acceptance testing for asphalt content and gradation is based upon the contractors quality control test results and for which no corresponding quality assurance test results are available .
all other quality assurance testing as outlined in this specification will remain the responsibility of the consultant .
quality assurance test results when available shall replace any quality control test results used for material acceptance .
num qa acceptance lot a lot in which all acceptance testing is conducted by the consultant using quality assurance test procedures as outlined in these specifications .
the number and selection of qa acceptance lots shall be determined as follows i first two lots of production for each mix type used and ii minimum of one additional lot per num num tonnes or portion thereof of total acp contract tender tonnage and iii one additional lot of top lift production for each mix type if two or more lifts are specified and iv any additional lots chosen by the consultant .
num materials num asphalt the contractor shall supply asphalt material in accordance with specification num supply of section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num asphalt .
the types and grades of asphalt shall be as specified in the special provisions .
num aggregate the contractor shall produce crushed aggregates in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling for the designation and class of material specified .
the contractor shall supply aggregate materials in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate and haul materials in accordance with specification num hauling .
for superpave designated aggregates table num specifications for aggregate shall be replaced with table numa superpave aggregate gradation specifications .
metric sieves in accordance with cgsb spec .
numgpnumm shall be used in place of the sieves specified in the aashto specifications .
specifications for other aggregate properties are given in table numc superpave aggregate properties .
table numa superpave aggregate gradation specifications passing sieve size m nominal maximum size mm num num num num num num num num num min .
num num num min .
num num num num num min .
num num num max .
num num num num num max .
num num num max num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num note gradation classification the combined aggregate gradation shall be classified as coarsegraded when it passes below the primary control sieve pcs as defined in table numb .
all other gradations shall be classified as finegraded .
table numb gradation classification pcs for nominal maximum aggregate size passing num mm num mm num mm primary control sieve m num num num num num num pcs control point passing num num num section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num table numc superpave aggregate properties aggregate angularity coarsenum finenum elongated particlesnum clay content detrimental matter plasticity index property and test method attnum tltnum astm num aashto t num tlt num aashto tnum traffic esals million num num num num num num to num num num num num num to num num num num num num to num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num num num as listed for des .
num aggregates in specification num aggregate production and stockpiling non plastic num num denotes that num of the coarse aggregate has one fractured face and num two fractured faces .
num minimum air voids in loosely compacted fine aggregate .
num maximum weight of thin or elongated particles ratio of num .
note disregard the mention of aashto values for coarse and fine aggregate angularity listed for pavement layers num mm from pavement surface .
num interim lane markings the contractor shall supply interim lane marking paint and glass beads from the list of approved products shown in the special provisions or specification amendments .
the contractor has the option of supplying reflectorized temporary pavement markers or self adhesive reflectorized pavement marking tape .
acceptable temporary pavement markers are shown on the alberta transportation products list .
num reclaimed asphalt pavement unless specified otherwise the contractor may elect to use suitable rap in the acp mixture to a maximum rap to virgin aggregate ratio of num .
suitable rap shall not contain any other additives including but not limited to sulphur crumb rubber asphalt rubber asbestos produced sand paving fabrics and reinforcement grids .
the handling stockpiling storage and hauling of all rap shall be in accordance with specification num cold milling asphalt pavement and shall prevent the contamination and consolidation of the material .
rheological testing of the rap is not required for mixtures using a maximum rap to virgin aggregate ratio of num .
for rapvirgin aggregate blends greater than num the contractor shall adjust the virgin asphalt grade andor undertake rheology testing of the rap and virgin asphalt cements according to the requirements listed in table num asphalt grade adjustment and rheology testing for rap usage .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num table num asphalt grade adjustment and rheology testing for rap usage percentage of rap additive specified grade num num and num num and num num pg nump or note num note num nump note num note num num pg num or note num or note num note num or note num num pg num or note num or note num note num or note num num pg num or note num note num num note num note num num pg num or note num or note num note num or note num num note num or note num note num or note num all other pg grades no grade adjustment or rheology testing required .
note num note num note num virgin grade shall be selected according to the rheology blending procedures outlined in appendix xnum of aashto mnum .
note num virgin grade may be selected with penetration testing of the recovered rap and virgin asphalt binders with rheology blending according to tltnum recycling of asphalt concrete pavement .
allowable penetration values for the blended binders are contained in table numa .
table numa allowable penetration values for rap virgin asphalt blends allowable penetration of blended binders dmm specified grade minimum maximum pg num num num pg num num num pg num num num pg num num num num warm mix asphalt warm mix asphalt wma technologies allow the production and compaction of regular asphalt concrete pavement at reduced temperatures .
the term wma technology is inclusive of a wide variety of additives and foaming systems .
the department will allow acp to be produced using a wma technology subject to the following conditions i the wma product to be used is selected from those listed on the alberta transportation products list .
ii the contractor informs the consultant of his intent to utilize wma technology a minimum of two weeks prior to the planned start of acp production .
information shall include the wma technology to be used including additive rate and the method of incorporation into the asphalt mix or mixing operations .
mixing and compaction temperatures shall be chosen by the contractor in accordance with subsection num equipment .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num unless otherwise noted additional costs associated with the use of a wma technology including but not limited to mix design quality control testing andor equipment modifications shall be the contractors responsibility .
accepted acp production using a wma technology will be paid for at the applicable acp unit prices bid .
no separate or additional payment will be made for using a wma product or technology .
acp produced using a wma technology will be subject to all existing specifications .
the department may disallow the use of any wma technology which is deemed responsible for producing defective work as described in subsection num end product rejection .
contractors are advised that the shell thiopave product which contains both a sulphur additive and a wma additive has significantly different material properties from that of acp and is not covered under this specification .
proposals for using thiopave shall be submitted under the requirements of section num contract design change proposals of specification num general num asphalt mix design and job mix formula num responsibility for mix design preparation and submission of asphalt mix designs for consultant verification and approval are the responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor shall use professional engineering services and a qualified testing laboratory licensed to practice in the province of alberta to assess the aggregate materials proposed for use and to carry out the design of the asphalt mixture .
the design testing laboratory for superpave mixes shall have obtained prequalification status from the department in the category of asphalt concrete mix design superpave .
all costs incurred in mix design formulation are the responsibility of the contractor .
shipping costs for samples sent to the consultant for verification and approval are the responsibility of the contractor .
num requirements for mix design the asphalt mix design shall follow the aashto designation mnum standard specification for superpave volumetric mix design with design criteria changes as outlined in this section .
the bulk specific gravity of the rap aggregate shall be determined according to tltnum .
the mix design at the design asphalt content shall meet the requirements in tables numa and b for the superpave mix type specified in the special provisions and design requirements listed under subsection num moisture susceptibility criteria .
num superpave mix type designations superpave mix types shall be expressed as trafficsagg .
where traffic design traffic loadings is expressed within one of the following ranges num for num num esals num for num and num num esals num for num and num num esals num for num and num num esals num for num and num x num esals num for num num esals s value of c for coarse mixes or f for fine mixes to be chosen by the contractor as section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num follows c if design aggregate gradation falls below the control point for the pcs as outlined in table numb gradation classification f if design aggregate gradation falls on or above the control point for the pcs as outlined in table numb gradation classification .
agg .
expressed as num num or num based upon nominal maximum aggregate size as chosen by the consultant .
example a superpave mix type numsnum has a design traffic loading between num and num num esals and is to use a num mm nominal maximum size aggregate .
num superpave design criteria table numa superpave volumetric criteria trafficnum esals millions required density of max .
specific gravity air voids voids filled with asphalt ninitial ndesign nmaximum num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num minimum voids in mineral aggregate criteria nominal aggregate size mm num num num num num num num design esals are the anticipated project traffic level expected on the design lane over a numyear period .
regardless of the actual design life of the roadway determine the design esals for num years and choose the appropriate ndesign level .
num for num mm nominal maximum size mixtures the specified vfa range shall be num to num for the design traffic levels num million esals .
table numb superpave dust proportion criteria finesasphalt ratio all aggregate sizes and traffic levels f design aggregate gradations num to num all aggregate sizes and traffic levels c design aggregate gradations num to num note the finesasphalt fa ratio is defined as the ratio of the percent of aggregate passing the numm sieve to the percent of effective asphalt content by weight of dry aggregate .
the number of gyrations shall be selected according to the design traffic loadings listed in the superpave mix type designation and compactive effort requirements listed in table numc superpave design gyratory compactive effort .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num table numc superpave design gyratory compactive effort design traffic loading esals millions number of gyrations ninitial ndesign nmaximum num num num num num to num num num num num num num num num moisture susceptibility criteria all mixes shall be evaluated for moisture susceptibility in accordance with aashto test procedure tnum resistance of compacted bituminous mixture to moisture induced damage using gyratory compacted specimens .
all mix design submissions shall include the test results as outlined in test procedure tnum including the visual estimate of the degree of moisture damage .
the target minimum value for tensile strength ratio tsr shall be num .
mixes with a tsr value meeting the target minimum will be considered suitable for mix production and will not require the use of a liquid antistrip additive .
in such case the contractor may at his option elect to still use an antistrip additive .
all costs associated with the use of an antistrip additive in these cases shall be at the contractors expense and no separate or additional payment will be made by the department ..
mixes with a tsr value less than the target minimum shall be treated with a liquid antistrip additive at an additive rate of not less than num and not greater than num by weight of binder and retested for moisture susceptibility .
the treated mix will be considered suitable for mix production if the tsr value is num or higher and is improved over the untreated tsr value .
if the tsr value for the treated mix is less than num or less than the untreated tsr value the mix will be considered unsuitable and shall not be used for mix production .
liquid antistrip additives acceptable for use are listed on the alberta transportation products list .
warm mix asphalt wma chemical products which display antistripping characteristics and are listed on the alberta transportation products list will be treated as a liquid antistrip additive for payment purposes .
when a liquid antistrip additive is used the contractor shall include the following information with the mix design submission full details on the type of liquid antistrip additive to be supplied including product name product manufacturersupplier additive rate tsr values for the treated and untreated mixes the proposed method for incorporating the additive into the plant produced mix .
when the liquid antistrip additive is added to the asphalt cement at the mixing plant a separate pumping and metering system calibrated and electronically interlocked with the operating controls of the mixing plant shall be used .
the contractor shall have the necessary procedures inplace to safely sample the treated asphalt including where practicable an inline valve and sampling system .
where moisture susceptibility test results indicate that the use of a liquid antistrip additive is section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num required measurement of liquid antistrip additive incorporated into the mix will be on a per kilogram basis .
the contractor shall supply the consultant with a copy of all invoices or bills of lading for the antistrip additive .
payment for liquid antistrip additive will be made at the rate shown in the special provisions .
this payment will be full compensation for the supply and incorporation of the antistrip additive into the asphalt mix including all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary num verification of mix design the contractor shall submit the mix design to the consultant for verification .
the contractors submission shall include the following information i aggregate source names and locations .
ii the gradation of each aggregate to be used in the mixture using the sieve sizes listed in table numa superpave aggregate gradation specifications .
iii the percentage by mass of each aggregate to be used in the mixture .
iv the mix design gradation of the combined aggregate .
v other characteristics of the combined aggregate specified in table numc superpave aggregate properties .
vi all superpave mix design characteristics including graphs used in arriving at the final mix design the bulk specific gravity of the combined aggregates graph of theoretical maximum specific gravities the asphalt absorption of the combined aggregates and tensile strength ratio both with and without freezethaw conditioning .
vii identification of each asphalt supplier by name location and types and grades of asphalt to be supplied .
viii for each asphalt supplied asphalt specific gravity and recommended mixing and compaction temperatures for the preparation of design specimens .
ix voids table to include air voids vma and voids filled with asphalt for various asphalt contents num increments and bulk densities increments of num kgmnum .
x mix design submissions using rap shall include the rap source names and locations all rap asphalt content and gradation test results the bulk specific gravity of the rap aggregate the percentage by weight of rap to be used in the mixture and when required all rap rheological test results the design rheology and all blending information used .
the consultant will require up to num working days from the time of receipt of the mix design to complete the design verification .
where required by the consultant for any change in the nature or sources of the aggregates or rap or where a new mix design is desired by the contractor the contractor shall provide a separate and complete mix design .
this new mix design shall be subject to verification and acceptance by the consultant .
the consultant may at any time require the contractor to provide representative samples of each of the aggregate components asphalt cement and rap for verification purposes .
a sufficient quantity of each component shall be provided to result in a num kg sample of combined aggregate at design proportions .
the consultant will require up to num working days from the time of receipt of the sample to verify the mix design .
the cost of such mix design verification will be borne by the department .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num the contractor shall not produce any asphalt mix prior to receiving the consultants written notice that the mix design has been verified .
any mix produced prior to receiving such notice will not be accepted .
the aggregate proportioning target gradation and asphalt content for the accepted mix design will then be the design mix formula and will become the job mix formula for the start in production of asphalt mix .
the contractor shall be responsible for producing mixes which conform with the specifications .
num variation from the job mix formula once the job mix formula has been established no alteration will be permitted unless approved by the consultant .
the lot mean gyratory air voids at ndesign as determined by the consultant shall not vary from the corresponding air voids in the approved mix design by more than num .
if the sum of any approved alterations to the job mix formula are in excess of any one of the following limits away from the design mix formula a new mix design is required .
num passing the num num m sieve .
num passing the num m sieve .
num asphalt content .
num in target proportion of rap .
unless otherwise approved by the consultant the contractor may not request more than three alterations to the job mix formula without the provision of a new mix design .
all job mix formulas shall meet the aggregate gradation requirements of table numa and the dust proportion criteria listed in table numb .
num warm mix asphalt technology num general mixes to be produced using a wma technology shall also meet the following design requirements .
in all cases the contractor shall provide a complete mix design including an evaluation for moisture susceptibility using the specified asphalt binder without the wma additive .
in cases where a wma product is added to the asphalt cement or to the asphalt mixture a separate mix design including an evaluation for moisture susceptibility will be required to confirm compliance to the specified mix design criteria .
the mix designer shall identify the mixing and compaction temperatures used for forming the design specimens .
the department will not consider the use of any proposed wma product which results in a design binder content that is more than num below the corresponding value for the acp mix without the wma additive .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num num sampling and testing num general during the progress of the work tests will be carried out on materials and workmanship in order to ensure compliance with the requirements of the specifications .
where it is required in these specifications that the contractor submit samples of materials or mixtures to the consultant for approval these samples shall be submitted in sufficient time for proper testing .
the consultants approval of any materials or mixture shall in no way relieve the contractor from his obligation to provide materials mixtures and workmanship in accordance with the specifications .
where specified random sampling procedures shall be followed and where no specific random sampling procedure is specified the sampling procedure shall be as identified by the consultant in the case of acceptance testing and by the contractor in the case of quality control testing .
the consultant shall have access to the work at all times for taking samples .
the contractor shall provide any assistance necessary for taking samples and shall reinstate pavement layers or other structures to the satisfaction of the consultant at the positions where samples have been taken .
compensation for providing assistance with sampling and for reinstatement where samples are taken shall be included in the unit price bid for the various items of work tested and no separate payment will be made .
the contractor shall provide at his own expense sampling stands sampling devices and other facilities which the consultant may require to safely obtain representative samples of the item being produced .
when required the contractor shall provide and prepare to the satisfaction of the consultant a suitable site for the parking of a mobile laboratory trailer .
the contractor shall provide power to the mobile laboratory trailer at his own expense .
num methods of testing for acceptance and appeal testing unless otherwise specified the latest edition of the following standard alberta transportation test methods att shown in table num will be used to determine material characteristics .
table num test methods on managed qa projects test description test method num .
sampling mixes attnum num .
coring attnum num .
extraction attnum num .
correction factor extracted asphalt content attnum part iii num .
percent fracture attnum num .
sieve analysis attnum num .
density immersion method waxed asphalt concrete specimens attnum num .
density immersion method saturated surface dry asphalt concrete specimens attnum section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num test description test method num .
voids calculations asphalt concrete specimens attnum num .
percent compaction asphalt concrete pavement attnum num .
forming gyratory specimens aashto tpnum num .
moisture content oven method asphalt concrete mixes attnum num .
smoothness of pavements profilograph method attnum num .
stratified random test sites for a.c.p .
projects attnum num .
appeal testing asphalt content density and gradation attnum num .
asphalt content ignition method attnum num .
correction factor ignition asphalt content attnum part ii num maximum specific gravity of bituminous mixes astm dnum additional test methods for qc acceptance lots only num asphalt content aashto tnum tnum or attnum or attnum notes in all test methods used as reference in this specification metric sieves as specified in canadian general standards board specification numgpnumm shall be substituted for any other specified wire cloth sieves in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling .
in all cases the latest amendment or revision current at the closing date of the tender is implied when reference is made to one of the above standards in the specification .
num quality control testing quality control testing is the responsibility of the contractor throughout every stage of the work from the crushing and production of aggregates to the final accepted product .
tests performed by the consultant will not be considered to be quality control tests .
the contractor shall provide and pay for equipment and qualified personnel to obtain all quality assurance core samples and perform all quality control testing necessary to determine and monitor the characteristics of the materials produced and incorporated into the work and the final product produced .
when the contractor elects to use rap the asphalt content and gradation of the rap shall be determined according to and at the frequencies specified in specification num cold milling asphalt pavement .
when required the rap rheology shall be determined at a minimum frequency of one per num num t of rap and a minimum of three samples shall be tested for each rap source .
test methods sampling and minimum frequency of testing are described in subsection num methods of testing for acceptance and appeal testing and table num quality control testing requirements superpave managed qa testing projects .
the consultant may require an increase in the frequency of any quality control test which has a specified minimum frequency .
the contractor shall arrange and pay for any additional tests required by the consultant .
results of all quality control tests shall be submitted to the consultant as they become available .
in addition the quality control test results for mix asphalt content and aggregate gradation shall be provided to the consultant no later than num noon of the day following placement .
the contractor shall bear the cost of all consulting services retained by him .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num the contractor shall be totally responsible for production of aggregate and mixes that meet all the specified requirements .
table num quality control testing requirements superpave managed qa testing projects test standard minimum frequency aggregate production see specification num asphalt mix plant calibration attnum inspection attnum once per project or as required num samples asphalt cement attnum see specification num tack prime and fog materials attnum see specification num cold feed aggregate qc testing num attnum mix attnum num qa cores stratified random test sites chosen by the consultant attnum one per segment for each lot .
i qa cores for pavement density attnum ii qa cores for asphalt content and gradation attnum one per segment for selected lots as directed by the consultant .
tests with specified minimum frequencies mix asphalt content aashto tnum tnum or attnum or attnum num correction factors attnum part iii or attnum part ii as required mix moisture content attnum num aggregate sieve analysis attnum num pavement segregation segregation rating manual each lot tests with no specified minimum frequencies field formed gyratory briquettes aashto tpnum num maximum specific gravity of bituminous mixes gmm astm dnum num density immersion method saturated surface dry attnum num void calculations cores or formed specimens attnum num num temperatures attnum num percent compaction cores or nuclear density attnum attnum or attnum num num random test site locations attnum num correction factors nuclear moisture density measurement attnum num pavement smoothness attnum num num minimum frequency not specified .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num num when a lot has eight hours of plant production or more a minimum of four plant checks plus four asphalt contents and four sieve analysis of the combined aggregate any combination of cold feed extraction or ignition are required .
when a lot has less than eight hours of plant production these tests shall be performed once for every two full hours of plant production .
num percent compaction and core air voids based upon the lot mean maximum specific gravity gmm .
air voids on gyratory formed specimens based upon corresponding individual maximum specific gravity gmm test values .
num acceptance sampling and testing num general within this specification certain requirements limits and tolerances are specified regarding the quality of materials and workmanship to be supplied .
compliance with these requirements where so specified shall be determined by statistical testing as described in this section .
acceptance testing is the responsibility of the consultant except for lots designated by the consultant as qc acceptance lots in which case the contractors quality control test results for asphalt content and aggregate gradation only may be used towards determining conditional material acceptance .
the contractor shall provide to the consultant all quality assurance density cores and any additional cores requested by the consultant for quality assurance testing for asphalt content and gradation by num noon of the day following placement unless otherwise directed by the consultant .
prior to the contractor obtaining the cores the consultant may provide the contractor with new or different random sample locations .
the consultant may have the contractor obtain cores for quality assurance testing at any time throughout the project for any lot .
all cores provided to the consultant shall be in their original condition .
core preparation or sawing shall be done by the consultant .
all costs associated with pavement coring for quality control and quality assurance testing shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
initial acceptance testing will be performed free of cost to the contractor .
the contractor shall be responsible for the cost of all quality assurance testing performed on material that is used to replace or overlay material that has been previously rejected .
the contractor shall be responsible for the cost of all quality assurance retesting performed following attempts to improve smoothness or to remove bumps or dips .
after all quality control tests for the lot are reported to the consultant the consultant will provide the contractor with a copy of the results of acceptance tests within one working day of their availability .
if the consultant determines that certain test results are faulty due to testing equipment malfunction improper testing procedures or calculations he will replace the faulty tests with new tests .
if the testing equipment malfunction improper testing procedures or calculations were on the part of the consultant the contractor shall be reimbursed num per locations for obtaining cores .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num num acceptance sampling and testing procedures num pavement sampling for density asphalt content and gradation pavement sampling will be done using stratified random sampling procedures .
a minimum of num tests per lot will be selected as follows i the lot will be divided into num or more segments of approximately equal quantity .
ii in each segment a test site will be located by using random numbers to determine the longitudinal distance from the end of the segment and the lateral distance from the edge of the segment .
in no case will a lateral distance be less than num m from the shoulder or num m from any other edge of a mat except when matching mats in which case the test site may be within num m of the joint .
for lifts of num mm or less samples for asphalt content and gradation may be obtained by the consultant using the sampling mix behind paver method described in attnum .
if sufficient numbers of mix samples can not be obtained in this manner stratified random core samples shall be taken by the contractor as determined by the consultant in order to perform the minimum five tests per lot .
on lots designated by the consultant as qc acceptance lots material sampling for quality control testing of asphalt content and gradation may consist of cold feed aggregate or loose mix or core samples as outlined in attnum attnum or attnum .
num pavement sampling for smoothness the surface of the sublots in the final lift of asphalt concrete pavement will be profiled by the consultant in accordance with attnum using a california cox model profilograph .
other makes of profilograph machines may be used if they have been individually approved by the department .
profiles will be made approximately at the traffic wheel paths .
smoothness testing will also be undertaken on all passing climbing deceleration and acceleration lanes that are greater than num m in length and on all interchange ramps .
tapers will not be subject to smoothness testing .
the following pavement surfaces will be excluded from profilograph smoothness testing .
i main alignment portions interchange ramps and all other lanes where the regular posted speed i.e .
without construction activities is less than num kilometres per hour .
ii turn lanes and storage lanes .
iii tapers iv portions of pavement which as determined by the consultant are influenced by man holes water valves or other embedded hardware .
all pavement surfaces within the driving lanes of the above exclusions shall show no variation greater than num mm from the edge of a num m straightedge placed in any direction excluding deviations due to crown breaks as shown on the drawings .
locations for testing and the need for testing of straightedge deviation will be as determined by the consultant .
smoothness testing will extend completely across all transverse joints between existing pavement and acp placed under this contract .
penalty assessments and acceptancerejection criteria will apply to all such bumps and dips identified .
pri assessment for smoothness will be determined starting at the location where all wheels of the profilograph are on acp placed section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num under this contract .
weather permitting acceptance testing for smoothness will normally be completed within two weeks following the completion of all paving work subject to smoothness testing .
all smoothness acceptance criteria will apply regardless of the year that the pavement is placed and the year that it is tested .
requests by the contractor to have portions of the work tested prior to the completion of all paving will be considered subject to the availability of the consultants profilograph testing crew and seasonal weather conditions .
in such cases the contractor will be invoiced by the department at a rate of num to cover the extra mobilization and travel costs associated with this testing .
num asphalt mix sampling sampling of the asphalt mixture for gyratory compaction comparison will be done by the consultant using the procedures identified in attnum .
num exclusions to random sampling random sampling methods will not be applied when the consultant samples mix behind the paver on lifts of num mm or less nor to small areas such as tapers approaches areas of handwork gores nor for asphalt mix used for isolated leveling and repair of failed areas nor for aggregate or asphalt mix chosen for qc acceptance lot testing .
num retesting following attempts to improve smoothness when the test results on a sublot of acp indicate a penalty because of smoothness the contractor may make one attempt to improve the smoothness on the sublot by additional work in which case the following shall apply i the contractor shall notify the consultant in writing that he will make one attempt to improve smoothness .
ii additional work on a sublot to improve smoothness shall be completed within num calendar days from the time the contractor receives written notification from the consultant indicating the smoothness test results for that sublot .
sublots assessed to be in reject due to smoothness or bumps and dips greater than num mm shall be repaired as outlined in subsection num end product rejection .
the contractor shall not undertake any method of repair that is detrimental to the quality of the pavement .
any method of heating that has a detrimental effect on the pavement in the opinion of the consultant will not be allowed .
the consultant will retest any sublots in which the contractor has made one attempt to improve smoothness .
the sublot assessment for smoothness will be based upon the retested values .
num aggregate gradation requirements the following requirements apply to asphalt concrete pavement material in all lifts except preliminary leveling and those lots designated as qc acceptance lots .
price adjustments for aggregate gradation variation will be based on the variation of the lot mean gradation from the job mix formula tolerance for each size as shown in table num d section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num and the corresponding adjustment points as shown in table num e. for lifts greater than num mm in thickness the lot mean gradation will be determined using the sieve analysis of core samples .
for lifts num mm or less the lot mean gradation will be determined using the sieve analysis of mix andor core samples .
when the lot mean gradation is outside the job mix formula tolerance the penalty assessment will be num per tonne for each mean adjustment point within the limits shown in table numa excluding the requirements of table numb .
when the lot mean gradation is outside the limits of table numa excluding the requirements of table numb the penalty assessment will be num per tonne for each mean adjustment point outside those limits regardless of the job mix formula tolerance .
when the lot mean gradation for all sieve sizes is within the job mix formula tolerance and within the limits of table numa excluding the requirements of table numb and individual test results for each sieve size are within the allowable range shown in table num d a bonus of num per tonne will be applied .
num pavement segregation requirements num general the finished surface of the top lift of acp shall have a uniform texture and be free of segregated areas .
num classifying pavement segregation a segregated area is defined as an area of the pavement where the texture differs visually from the texture of the surrounding pavement .
for the purposes of classifying pavement segregation only segregated areas greater than nummnum and centreofpaver streaks greater than num m in length will be considered .
moderate or severe segregated areas which do not meet these size parameters will be considered obvious defects .
pavement segregation will be classified as follows slight the matrix asphalt cement and fine aggregate is in place between the coarse aggregate .
however there is more stone in comparison to the surrounding acceptable mix .
moderate significantly more stone than the surrounding mix moderately segregated areas usually exhibit a lack of surrounding matrix .
severe appears as an area of very stony mix stone against stone with very little or no matrix .
centreofpaver streak appears as a continuous or semicontinuous longitudinal streak typically located in the middle of the paver mat .
num inspections for pavement segregation num inspections by the contractor the contractor shall perform a daily inspection of the paving operations on all lifts of pavement to identify any instances of pavement segregation .
if segregation is evident the contractor shall take immediate corrective action to his operations to prevent any further occurrence of section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num segregation .
num inspections by the consultant i inspections during construction the consultant shall inspect the lower lifts of pavement to identify any instances of pavement segregation .
if segregation is evident the consultant shall immediately notify the contractor so that corrective action can be taken to prevent further occurrence of segregation .
the consultant shall also inspect the top lift of pavement .
typically each pavement lot would be inspected as soon as possible after the lot is placed .
during the inspections of the top lift the consultant will identify and record any areas of moderate and severe segregation and any areas of centerofpaver streak .
areas requiring repair in accordance with subsection num repairing pavement segregation shall be marked .
the consultant will provide the contractor with a written assessment location and severity of the segregated areas as soon as possible following each inspection .
ii inspection following construction the consultant shall conduct a second inspection of the top lift normally num weeks after the completion of paving work .
during this inspection the consultant will identify and record any areas of slight moderate and severe segregation and any areas of centreofpaver streak which were not identified in the inspections during construction .
the consultant will provide the contractor with a written assessment location and severity of the segregated areas as soon as possible following this inspection .
requests by the contractor to have the second inspection conducted on portions of the work prior to the completion of all paving work will be considered subject to the availability of the consultants engineering staff and seasonal weather conditions .
this is meant to apply for projects that are not anticipated to be completed prior to winter shut down or where the contractor has moved his paving operations offsite for an extended period of time .
for such inspections the contractor will be invoiced by the department at a rate of num per inspection to cover the extra mobilization and travel costs associated with this work .
num repairing pavement segregation pavement segregation identified during the inspection performed num weeks after the completion of paving operations will not require repair .
however this shall not relieve the contractor from his responsibility to repair any obvious defects deteriorated repairs or failures which become evident within the warranty period .
pavement segregation identified in the inspections performed during construction shall be repaired by the contractor at his expense and in accordance with the following moderate and severe segregation in the top lift of pavement and on entrances and intersections shall require repair .
for entrances and the portion of intersections outside the through travel lanes and shoulders areas of moderate and severe segregation shall be repaired in accordance with the methods of repair listed for moderate segregation .
intersections and entrances shall also be neatly shaped smooth and free of surface defects and depressions .
slight segregation on any lift of pavement will not require repair .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num moderate segregation on lower lifts will not require repair .
severe segregation on lower lifts will only require repair in instances where in the opinion of the consultant the segregated area will affect the long term structural integrity of the pavement structure .
such repair will not be required in instances where the consultant determines that the paver screed is dragging due to distortion of the existing surface .
only moderate and severely segregated centreofpaver streak on the top lift of pavement will require repair .
the following methods of repair are preapproved moderate segregation the contractor has the option of using a slurry patch or a hot mix patch .
severe segregation the contractor has the option of removal and replacement or overlay .
any other methods of repair proposed by the contractor will be subject to the approval of the consultant with the exception that the application of asphalt by distributor hand spraying squeegeeing etc .
shall not be permitted as a method of repair under any circumstances .
repairs for segregation using an overlay shall be for the entire pavement width .
repairs for segregation using removal and replacement shall be for the full lane width full lane width and shoulder or the shoulder only as applicable depending on the extent of the segregated area .
the full depth of the asphalt lift shall be removed and replaced with new acp using an appropriate paver and cold milling equipment .
all acp material used for overlay and removal and replacement repairs shall have a tack coat applied prior to placement and will be subject to the requirements of subsection num end product rejection .
the consultant will mark out the area of repair .
the marked area shall extend a minimum of num m beyond the segregated area .
for centreofpaver streak the marked area shall extend a minimum of num mm laterally and num m longitudinally beyond the streak .
all repairs shall be regular in shape and finished using good workmanship practices to provide an appearance suitable to the consultant .
traffic shall be kept off all repairs for a sufficient period of time to ensure that tracking does not occur .
all hot mix and other repairs for which compaction is normally required shall be properly compacted .
in the event repairs cover existing roadway lines or markings the contractor shall reinstate the lines and markings at his expense and to the satisfaction of the consultant .
repairing pavement segregation will not affect the assessment of segregation payment adjustments .
repairs shall be completed during construction or shortly after construction except when prevented by inclement weather or seasonal shutdown .
in these cases the contractor shall complete the repairs prior to june num of the following year .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num num appeal of acceptance test results and appeal testing num density asphalt content and gradation appeal testing will be done using attnum .
the contractor may appeal the results of acceptance testing of density asphalt content or gradation for any rejected or penalized lot only once .
appeals will only be considered if cause can be shown .
quality control test results for density which are provided to the consultant subsequent to the contractors receipt of the quality assurance test results for that lot will not be considered when evaluating cause for an appeal .
the appeal shall be for all tests within the lot and there will be no appeal allowed for single tests within a lot .
any attempt to improve density on the appealed lot after the consultant has tested the lot for acceptance shall void the appeal and the original test results will apply .
the following procedures will apply for an appeal i for gradation and asphalt content appeals the contractor shall serve notice of appeal to the consultant in writing within num hours of receipt of the test results .
for all other appeals notice shall be served to the consultant in writing within num hours of receipt of the test results .
ii the consultant will arrange and pay for an independent testing laboratory certified to operate in the province of alberta to perform the appeal testing .
the personnel employed or testing laboratory retained by the contractor for quality control testing on the project will not be used for appeal testing .
iii the consultant will determine the number and location of the new tests for each segment in accordance with subsection num acceptance sampling and testing procedures .
the contractor shall sample the pavement at such locations and provide the samples to the consultant .
iv for appeals other than gradation appeals the single high and single low test results from the old lot will be rejected and the remaining test results will be added to the results of the new tests .
a new lot mean for the test results will be determined and used for acceptance and unit price adjustment .
for gradation appeals all tests from the old lot will be retained and averaged with the new appeal tests .
a new lot mean and range for all tests will be determined and used for acceptance and unit price adjustment .
the new values thus determined in all cases will be binding on the contractor and the department .
num smoothness the contractor may appeal acceptance test results of smoothness of any rejected or penalized sublot once .
the appeal shall be in writing and submitted within num hours of receipt of the test results .
any attempt to improve smoothness on the appealed sublot after the consultant has tested the lot for acceptance shall void the appeal and the original test results will apply .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num the appeal testing will be performed by a firm that is prequalified by the department for qa smoothness testing .
the new results will be binding on the contractor and the department .
num segregation rating the contractor may appeal the rating of segregated areas classified as moderate or severe in any portion of the work or the entire project for lane.kms that are not in bonus .
the following procedures will apply for an appeal i the contractor must serve written notice of the appeal to the consultant within num days of receipt of the final segregation assessment .
the written notice shall detail the locations and nature of the appeal .
ii the consultant will determine a representative sample of the portion of the work appealed and will reassess this area .
generally this reassessment will be completed within num weeks of the consultants receipt of the written notice of appeal .
based on the reassessment of the representative sample the consultant will determine whether or not a reassessment of the entire appealed work is necessary .
num payment of appeal testing costs for asphalt content smoothness or gradation if the new results show that a penalty no longer applies then sampling and testing costs for the appeal procedures for that lot will be the responsibility of the department .
furthermore in such cases the contractor shall be reimbursed sampling costs at the rate of num per location .
if the new results verify that any unit price reduction or rejection remains valid for that lot then the contractor will be invoiced by the department for the testing costs for the appeal procedures at the following rates asphalt content num for the first appeal lot and num for all subsequent lots if an asphalt correction factor is not required .
gradation num per appeal .
profilograph num per hour travel time testing time and standby time .
num payment of appeal testing costs for density if the new results indicate that the new lot mean for density is no longer in a penalty situation and that the lot mean has increased by more than num then the costs of sampling and testing for the appeal procedures shall be the responsibility of the department .
furthermore in such cases the contractor shall be reimbursed sampling costs at the rate of num per location .
if the new results indicate that the lot mean for density is either in a penalty situation or has not increased by more than num then the contractor shall be invoiced by the department for the sampling and testing costs for the appeal procedures at a rate of num per lot appealed .
num payment of appeal testing costs for segregation rating if a reassessment of the appealed work results in a change in the original rating the revised rating will apply .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num if the overall payment adjustment for segregation is reduced as a result of an appeal the cost of the reassessment will be borne by the department .
if there is no change to the overall payment adjustment for segregation or if the overall payment adjustment is increased the contractor will be charged an amount of num .
num construction num equipment num general equipment shall be designed and operated to produce an end product complying with the requirements of this specification .
num mixing plant mixing plants shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and shall be calibrated prior to commencing production of the specified mix .
the contractor shall provide the consultant with a certificate of calibration which certifies that the plant has been calibrated to produce a uniform mixture in accordance with the job mix formula .
when asphalt concrete pavement contains reclaimed asphalt pavement the mixing plant shall be capable of thoroughly separating and heating the rap particles and blending the rap with virgin aggregate and any required asphalt cement to create a homogeneous mix at the plant discharge .
the plant shall also contain specialized mixing equipment that will prevent the rap from coming into direct contact with the flame thus minimizing blue smoke and oxidation of the asphalt in the rap .
all equipment used for producing wma shall be calibrated .
wma additive products which include separate pumping and metering systems shall be electronically interlocked with the operating controls of the mixing plant .
the contractor shall provide the consultant with copies of all invoices or bills of lading for wma products added to the asphalt cement or mix in the field .
plants using an injection foaming system shall be calibrated and operated according to recommendations from the plant manufacturer or equipment supplier .
asphalt binders used for water injection foaming shall not include antifoaming additives .
num mix production aggregate and asphalt shall be combined to produce a uniform mixture of specified gradation at an asphalt content in accordance with the approved job mix formula and in which all particles of aggregate are uniformly coated .
unless otherwise specified the maximum mixing temperature for all grades of asphalt shall be num c or for performance grade specified asphalt as recommended in writing by the asphalt supplier .
plant emissions shall not exceed the limits set by alberta environment .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num num preparation of existing surface num general failed areas in existing surfaces shall be repaired in accordance with specification num subgrade preparation or as directed by the consultant .
areas requiring repair will be identified by the consultant in consultation with the contractor .
before the asphalt mix is placed dirt and other objectionable material shall be removed from the surface to be paved by brooming or other methods and a tack coat or prime coat shall be applied in accordance with specification num prime tack and fog coats .
existing fillets and ramps at approaches to railway crossings and bridge structures or adjacent to paved surfaces or other structures shall be removed to the depths shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
the removed material shall be disposed of and the exposed surfaces shall be prepared as directed by the consultant .
contact edges of existing mats and contact faces of curbs gutters manholes sidewalks and bridge structures shall be coated with a thin film of liquid asphalt material before placing the asphalt mix .
num preliminary leveling areas that require preliminary leveling will be as shown on the drawings or as identified in the field by the consultant .
generally areas that show depressions rutting or other deformations to a depth of num mm or greater will be designated by the consultant for preliminary leveling .
pavement lifts that are specified or shown on the drawings with designated lift thickness less than num mm shall be considered as preliminary leveling and shall be placed using a paver .
preliminary leveling not specified to be placed using a paver lift shall be spread using a motor grader or other methods approved by the consultant .
all of the following shall apply for acceptance i if the material type for preliminary leveling is not specified or shown on the drawings it shall be the same designation and class as specified for the subsequent lift of asphalt concrete pavement ii regardless of how the asphalt mix is spread a minimum of one pneumatic tired roller shall be used for compaction and a minimum density of num of the marshall density as determined by the consultant is required iii preliminary leveling is intended to be a separate operation and shall not be done as part of the construction of the subsequent lift of asphalt concrete pavement .
for the purposes of determining the unit price adjustments listed in table num a and lump sum sublot assessments listed in table num c preliminary leveling is not considered to be a lift .
num transverse pavement joints transverse joints between existing pavement and acp placed under this contract shall be of a vertical butt type well bonded sealed and finished to provide a continuous smooth profile across the joint .
this shall include tieins to all paved road allowances median crossovers and approaches to bridges and railway crossings .
tieins to streets parking lots and other urban approaches shall be as specified in the special provisions .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num to accomplish this the existing pavement shall be coldmilled to expose a vertical surface against which new acp may be placed .
the depth of the cold milling shall be equal to the thickness of the final lift .
in longitudinal section the minimum slope of the milled area shall be num horizontal to num vertical all in general conformance with drawing cbnum mnum .
in plan the contractor shall cut the joint in the following manners i the joint may be cut at num to the centreline of the roadway across the full width of each mat or ii the joint may be cut at num to the roadway centreline across the travel lanes and contiguously at num to the roadway centreline elsewhere .
iii for median crossovers bridges and railway crossings the joint shall be cut parallel to the crossing .
when the existing pavement has been removed in advance of paving the joint area the contractor shall construct a smooth taper at the joint area to a slope of at least num horizontal to num vertical .
the taper may be placed on tar paper and shall be removed when paving is resumed as directed by the consultant .
the transverse joint shall be straight and have a vertical face when the taper is removed .
unless otherwise noted in the special provisions the contractor shall assume ownership of all rap resulting from cold milling operations and dispose of the material in an approved manner .
num transporting the asphalt mix the mix shall be transported in accordance with specification num hauling .
trucks used for transportation of the mix shall be compatible with the size and capacity of the spreading equipment .
truck boxes shall be clean free from accumulations of asphalt mix and foreign material .
excess truck box lubricants such as light oil detergent or lime solutions shall not be allowed to contaminate the mix and shall be disposed of in an environmentally acceptable manner .
petroleum based truck box lubricants shall not be used .
during transport the mix shall be completely covered to protect it from precipitation and excessive heat loss by securely fastened waterproofed tarpaulins unless otherwise approved by the consultant .
num placing the mix asphalt mix shall be placed only on dry surfaces .
unless otherwise shown on the plans the asphalt mix shall be placed in the following lift thicknesses i in a single lift when the design compacted total thickness is num mm or less .
ii in two or more lifts when the design compacted total thickness is greater than num mm .
the lift thickness selection shall be determined by the contractor except that a the maximum thickness of any lift shall be num mm .
b the minimum thickness of a top lift shall be num mm .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num c when a total acp thickness of num mm is specified the thickness of the first lift shall be num mm and the final lift shall be num mm .
d when a total acp thickness of num mm or more is specified the minimum thickness of all lifts except the top lift shall be num mm or greater .
lift thickness will normally be designed and expressed in increments of num mm .
longitudinal joints will not be permitted between the edges of driving lanes in the final lift of acp .
longitudinal joints shall be offset a minimum of num mm from one lift to the next .
longitudinal and transverse joints shall be vertical butt type well bonded and sealed and finished to provide a continuous smooth profile across the joints .
surplus material at longitudinal joints shall be disposed of in a manner acceptable to the consultant .
broadcasting surplus material across the mat will not be permitted .
all longitudinal joints shall be straight and uniform with no lateral waviness .
any mat contact that is not straight or uniform as determined by the consultant shall be trimmed by sawcutting or using some other method acceptable to the consultant prior to placing the adjacent mat .
the material removed shall be disposed of to the satisfaction of the consultant .
any mat with a contact edge that has deteriorated cracked or slumped due to improper rolling or vehicle traffic shall be trimmed by sawcutting or some other method acceptable to the consultant prior to placing the adjacent mat .
the length of contact edge to be trimmed removed and disposed of will be as determined by the consultant .
if required by the consultant the contact edge of any mat placed by the contractor shall be coated with a thin film of liquid asphalt before placing the adjacent mat .
when paving is discontinued in any lane the mat shall be tapered to a slope of num horizontal to num vertical .
the taper may be placed on tar paper and shall be removed when paving is resumed .
the transverse joint shall be straight and have a vertical face when the taper is removed .
transverse construction joints from one lift to the next shall be separated by at least num m. where the construction of a top lift of pavement next to a concrete curb section or curb and gutter section will be delayed the contractor shall construct a temporary asphalt concrete fillet next to the concrete section in accordance with the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
these fillets shall be removed when paving is resumed .
placement of acp adjacent to guardrail shall conform with typical barrier drawing no .
teb num .
num road intersections and entrances road intersections and entrances shall be paved in accordance with the drawings or as herein described in these specifications .
on all road intersections median crossovers and residential farm entrances the asphalt mix shall be spread by means of a paver .
no grader laying will be permitted except for bottom lift or preliminary leveling .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num on all other entrances the asphalt mix shall be spread by means determined by the contractor and in a manner acceptable to the consultant .
num compacting the mix all asphalt mix including those areas of the mat which are excluded from testing as noted in subsection num shall be thoroughly compacted and after final rolling the finished surface of the mat shall be free from segregation waves hairline cracks and other obvious defects .
the rollers or drums shall be kept moist with water or nonpetroleum based release agents to prevent adhesion .
excess water or release agents shall not be used .
after final rolling is complete the contractor shall ensure that the finished mat has cooled for a minimum period of num hours before opening the section to traffic .
num asphalt mix for others the contractor shall make available on request additional asphalt mix for the use of the department .
the estimated quantity of additional mix is shown in the unit price schedule as asphalt mix for others .
this additional mix will be picked up at the mixing plant by other forces at times that are mutually agreeable to the contractor and the consultant .
num interim lane markings the contractor shall provide interim lane markings on all newly constructed acp surfaces or on tacked surfaces that are to be exposed to traffic overnight .
when paint is used the paint shall be the same colour as the permanent markings designed for the work .
all paint spots shall be num mm wide and num mm long shall be applied lengthwise to the road surface shall be spaced num m apart on centre in tangent sections and num m apart on curves and shall be completely covered with glass beads at the time of painting .
when selfadhesive reflectorized pavement marking tape is used the spacing shall be the same as is used for paint spots .
tape on lower lifts does not need to be removed prior to placement of the next lift of pavement .
if tape is used on the upper lift it shall be removed immediately prior to painting the permanent lane markings .
when temporary pavement markers are used they shall be placed at num m intervals on tangent sections and at num m intervals on curves .
markers used on the upper lift must remain in place until the permanent markings are applied .
markers used on lower lifts shall be removed immediately prior to placement of the next lift of pavement .
num grooved rumble strips when specified in the special provisions the contractor shall construct grooved rumble strips as shown on drawing cbnummnum .
no grooving will be done across intersections or accesses nor at any other locations specified by the consultant .
the grooving shall be applied only to the top lift of the pavement and may be formed by any section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num means which the contractor may propose and which are acceptable to the consultant .
the contractor shall remove and repair any grooving placed beyond the limits outlined at his own expense .
num end product acceptance or rejection num general the contractor shall provide an end product conforming in quality and accuracy of detail to the dimensional and tolerance requirements of the specifications and drawings .
where no tolerances are specified the standard of workmanship shall be in accordance with normally accepted good practice .
num end product acceptance num acceptance at full or increased payment acceptance of any lot at full or increased payment will occur if it contains no obvious defects and if i the lot mean for density of the compacted mix in the lot is not in penalty or reject according to the criteria outlined in table num a. ii the lot mean for actual asphalt content of the mix is within num of the approved asphalt content .
on qc acceptance lots where quality assurance test results for asphalt content are not available the contractors quality control test results shall be used .
quality assurance test results when available shall replace any corresponding quality control test results .
iii for smoothness full payment will occur if the profile index of all sublots in the lot in the top lift of pavement are not in penalty or reject according to the criteria outlined in table num c. increased payment will occur if the profile index of all sublots in the lot in the top lift of pavement is num. iv individual bumps and dips in the top lift of pavement do not exceed num mm .
v for gradation in qa acceptance lots only full payment will occur if there are no lot mean adjustments for gradation and increased payment will occur if there are no lot mean adjustments and the maximum range as shown in table num d is not exceeded for any sieve size in the lot .
for gradation in qc acceptance lots consideration is only given to acceptance at full payment .
no increased payment will be applied using quality control test results .
num acceptance at reduced or adjusted payment acceptance of any lot at reduced payment will occur if it contains no obvious defects and if i the quality assurance test results are such that the lot or sublot meets with requirements for acceptance at a reduced payment .
for asphalt content and aggregate gradation no decreased payment will be applied using quality control test results .
ii the lot or sublot is approved in respect of all other requirements .
iii the contractor has not notified the consultant in writing that he will exercise his option to repair or remove and replace the work at his own cost with work meeting the requirements section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num for acceptance at full or increased payment .
iv individual bumps and dips measuring num mm or greater have been repaired .
v individual bumps and dips exceeding num mm and less than num mm which have been designated by the consultant as unacceptable have been repaired .
both bonus and penalty adjustments may be made for any lot in accordance with section num measurement and payment .
num end product rejection if the lot mean for density or actual asphalt content are outside the applicable acceptance limits then the lot is rejected automatically regardless of the values of the other control characteristics .
if the smoothness of the top lift of any sublot is outside the acceptance limit then the sublot is rejected automatically regardless of the values of the other control characteristics .
the finished surface of any lift shall have a uniform close texture and be free of visible signs of poor workmanship .
any obvious defects as determined by the consultant such as but not limited to the following will be cause for automatic rejection of asphalt concrete pavement regardless of the values of any other control characteristic .
i individual bumps and dips num mm or greater .
the consultant may reject asphalt concrete pavement with individual bumps and dips exceeding num mm and less than num mm .
ii segregated areas not already covered in subsection num pavement segregation requirements .
iii areas of excess or insufficient asphalt .
iv improper matching of longitudinal and transverse joints .
v roller marks .
vi tire marks .
vii cracking or tearing .
viii sampling locations not properly reinstated .
ix improperly constructed patches .
x top lift surfaces which are torn due to the dragging of the paver screed .
xi any final lift surface with a variation greater than num mm from the edge of a num m straightedge placed in any direction on the surface .
when acp is rejected by reason of obvious defects the minimum area of rejection will be sublot size as defined in subsection num of this specification .
rejected work shall be promptly repaired remedied overlayed or removed and replaced all in a manner acceptable to the consultant .
the contractor shall be responsible for all costs including materials .
no payment will be made for work in any lot or sublot which has been rejected until the defects have been remedied .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num if an overlay is used as a corrective measure on a defective lot or sublot the overlay thickness will be subject to the approval of the consultant .
where an overlay is used as a corrective measure in any lane adjacent lanes shall also be overlayed to the same thickness and length regardless of whether the adjacent lanes were acceptable or not .
the overlay will be subject to the same specifications as the original pavement except that the minimum thickness of an overlay shall be the lesser of num mm or the design lift thickness of the defective material .
num measurement and payment num general the unit prices for the following items of work will be full compensation for all labour material tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work in accordance with these specifications .
num asphalt concrete pavement superpave accepted asphalt concrete pavement will be measured in tonnes and will be paid for at the unit price bid per tonne for asphalt concrete pavement superpave for the applicable asphalt mix type subject to the unit price adjustments and assessments hereinafter specified .
this payment will be full compensation for supplying applying and maintaining tack coat supplying the asphalt binder processing hauling and placing the mix interim lane marking and quality control .
num payment for acceptable work the following end product properties of asphalt concrete pavement superpave will be measured for acceptance in accordance with subsection num acceptance sampling and testing .
i density ii actual asphalt content iii smoothness iv aggregate gradation for the density actual asphalt content of a lot to be acceptable the lot means must be within the acceptance limits shown in tables num a and num b respectively .
for each lot the unit price adjustments for density and actual asphalt content will be the amounts shown in tables num a and num b for the sample mean of the test results for that lot .
for each lot the unit price adjustment for gradation will be as defined in subsection num aggregate gradation requirements .
the unit price applicable to each lot quantity of asphalt concrete pavement superpave will be calculated as follows lot unit price per tonne contract unit price bid per tonne the sum of the unit price adjustment for pad and paa and pag section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num where pad unit price adjustment for density bonus or penalty paa unit price adjustment for asphalt content penalty only qa acceptance lots only pag unit price adjustment for gradation bonus or penalty qa acceptance lots only if the lot mean for density actual asphalt content or gradation for any lot is outside the acceptance limit the lot is rejected and no payment will be made for the quantity of asphalt concrete pavement in that lot until the defect has been remedied .
for the smoothness of any sublot in the top lift of acp to be acceptable the pri must be within the limits shown in table num c. for each sublot in the top lift of acp the penalty assessment for smoothness will be the amounts shown in table num c for the pri of that sublot .
all of these penalty assessments so determined will be deducted from the payment made for asphalt concrete pavementsuperpave .
every sublot in the top lift of acp that is outside the acceptance limit for smoothness will be rejected and payment will not be made for the quantity of asphalt concrete pavement in these sublots until they have been made acceptable .
payment for the remainder of the lot will be made in accordance with the above formula using pad paa and pag as determined for the lot from which will be subtracted any penalty assessment for smoothness .
no payment will be made for any material equipment or manpower used to improve acceptable work that is or was subject to unit price adjustment or penalty assessment .
num segregation payment adjustments payment adjustments for pavement segregation shall apply to the top lift of acp only and in accordance with the following segregated areas centreofpaver streak and any repaired segregated areas identified by the consultant either during construction or during the inspection conducted num weeks after the completion of paving work will be used to determine payment adjustments .
payment adjustments will not apply to segregated areas num mnum or less or on centreofpaver streaks num m or less in length .
segregated areas excluding centreofpaver streaks separated by less than num m shall be considered a single area for the determination of payment adjustments .
for centreofpaver streak each area will be measured separately for payment adjustments .
payment adjustments for segregation will not apply to entrances or the portion of an intersection outside the through travel lanes and shoulders .
if a segregated area is identified by the contractor and repaired prior to inspection by the consultant it will be classified as moderate for the purpose of determining payment adjustments .
payment adjustments will apply regardless of the year the pavement is placed and the year the pavement is inspected .
payment adjustments will not apply to instances where the consultant determines that the paver screed is dragging .
the total payment adjustment for segregation is determined as follows section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num each lane.km of the completed pavement is inspected separately by the consultant .
a lane includes the adjoining shoulder .
measurement of lane.kms will be made in num kilometre or partial kilometre long segments num lane wide as shown on the contract drawing .
acceleration and deceleration lanes and interchange ramps are considered separate lanes .
for each lane.km the consultant will determine the following i the total number of slight segregated areas and ii the total number of moderate and severe segregated areas and iii the total length of centreofpaver streak determined by adding each instance of streak that is in excess of num m in length these values will be used for the segregation frequencies and length of centreofpaver streak in tables a b c as applicable with the exception that for partial lanekms the segregation frequency for slight segregation will be calculated by dividing the actual number of slight segregated areas by length of the segment assessed expressed in kilometres and rounding to the nearest whole number .
table a payment adjustment for slight segregation segregation frequency of slight areas per lanekm payment adjustment per lanekm num num num or num num greater than num number of areas num x num table b payment adjustment for moderate and severe segregation segregation frequency of moderate and severe areas per lanekm payment adjustment per lanekm num num greater than num number of areas x num table c payment adjustment for centreofpaver streak length of centreofpaver streak per lanekm payment adjustment per lanekm num metre or less num greater than num metre num per linear metre num total payment adjustment per lanekm for segregation will be the sum of tables a b and c. num for partial lane kilometres the payment adjustments for table a will be prorated based upon the actual length of segment assessed .
num lane kilometres with no areas of segregation of any type or severity or any centreofpaver streaks will be assigned a bonus payment of num per lane.km .
for partial lane.kms the bonus will be prorated based upon the actual length of the segment assessed .
num lane kilometres with num or num areas of slight segregation no moderate or severely segregated areas and no centreofpaver streak will be assigned a bonus payment of num per lane.km .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num for partial lane.kms the bonus will be prorated based upon the actual length of the segment assessed .
num the maximum penalty adjustment for segregation shall be limited to num per lanekm .
for partial lanekms this adjustment will be prorated based upon the actual length of segment assessed .
num payment for work that had been rejected but was made acceptable when defects have been remedied in lots or sublots which had been rejected payment for the original quantity of material in those lots or sublots will be made subject to unit price adjustments and penalty assessments determined as follows i penalty or bonus assessments will be made for smoothness as follows penalty or bonus assessments for pri will be the amounts shown in the applicable section of table num c and will be based on profilograph tests following the contractors corrective efforts for any bumps and dips .
the penalty assessment for each bump or dip over num mm will be num for multilift pavements and num for singlelift or curb and gutter applications .
penalty assessments for bumps and dips will be based on initial profilograph testing conducted by the consultant .
repairs carried out by the contractor will not affect the penalty assessment for bumps and dips .
if bumps or dips are treated by the contractor prior to profilograph tests by the consultant such defects will be considered greater than num mm and will be assessed at the applicable penalty assessment rates .
ii the unit price adjustment for asphalt content density and gradation will be based on testing of the replacement or overlay material where applicable .
where replacement or overlay material does not cover the entire lot or sublot prior tests on the uncovered area will be averaged with new tests on the corrective work .
the unit price adjustment determined through retesting of the corrective work will be applied to that quantity of material in the lot or sublot which was originally rejected to determine payment .
no payment will be made for any material used to replace repair or overlay rejected work and all corrective work shall be performed entirely at the contractors expense .
num repair of failed areas in existing surfaces repair of failed areas in existing surfaces as identified under subsection num will be paid for at the contract unit prices bid for the work .
unit price adjustment will not apply to material used to repair failed areas in existing surfaces .
num removal and disposal of fillet and ramp material the removal and disposal of fillet andor ramp material will be considered incidental to the work and will not be paid for separately .
num transverse pavement joints constructing transverse pavement joints including any required coldmilling will be considered incidental to the work and will not be paid for separately .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num num preliminary leveling accepted material used for preliminary leveling will be measured and paid for at the unit price bid for asphalt concrete pavement superpave where applicable .
unit price adjustments will not apply to material used for leveling .
no payment will be made for unacceptable material .
num asphalt mix for others accepted additional asphalt concrete mixture will be measured in tonnes and paid for at the unit price bid for asphalt mix for others .
unit price adjustment will not apply to additional asphalt concrete received at the plant by other forces .
num grooved rumble strips measurement of shoulder grooving will be made parallel to the road centreline to the nearest num km of through highway chainage for each side of the road where accepted grooving is performed .
payment for shoulder grooving will be made at the unit price bid per kilometre for grooved rumble strips .
this payment will be full compensation for all labour equipment tools materials and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
table num a unit price adjustment for density of maximum specific gravity unit price adjustment dollars per tonne design lift thickness lot mean num mm or greater lower lifts less than num mm and greater than num mm lower lifts num mm lower lifts num mm or greater top lift only num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num table num a unit price adjustment for density of maximum specific gravity unit price adjustment dollars per tonne design lift thickness lot mean num mm or greater lower lifts less than num mm and greater than num mm lower lifts num mm lower lifts num mm or greater top lift only num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num table num a unit price adjustment for density of maximum specific gravity unit price adjustment dollars per tonne design lift thickness lot mean num mm or greater lower lifts less than num mm and greater than num mm lower lifts num mm lower lifts num mm or greater top lift only num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num of unit price num num overlay or rm.rp .
num num of unit price num num remove replace num num of unit price num num remove replace num num of unit price num num remove replace num num of unit price num num remove replace num num of unit price num num remove replace num num of unit price num num remove replace num num of unit price num num remove replace num num of unit price num num remove replace num num of unit price num num remove replace num remove replace num num remove replace num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num remove replace num of unit price num remove replace num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num table num a unit price adjustment for density of maximum specific gravity unit price adjustment dollars per tonne design lift thickness lot mean num mm or greater lower lifts less than num mm and greater than num mm lower lifts num mm lower lifts num mm or greater top lift only num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace num remove replace remove replace num of unit price remove replace num remove replace remove replace remove replace remove replace notes single lifts only are considered top lifts preliminary leveling is not considered a lift .
table num b unit price adjustment for asphalt content unit price adjustment for asphalt content paa per tonne top lift lower lift deviation of the actual asphalt content from the approved asphalt content below above below above from num to num num num num num from num to num num num num num from num to num num num num num from num to num num num num num from num to num num num num num from num to num num num from num to num num num from num to num num num for top lift deviations of more than num the contractor shall either overlay or remove and replace the previously placed mix .
for lower lift deviations of more than num the department will determine whether removal and replacement is necessary .
for material that is allowed to stay in place payment will be at num of the unit price bid .
section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num table num c lump sum sublot assessment for smoothness pri assessment for smoothness of top lift per sublot lump sum cnum cnum cnum num num num num num and num or less num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num reject reject num num num num num num num num num num num num num greater than num reject num num sublot may be accepted subject to approval of the department with an assessment of num .
pavement smoothness will be assessed based upon the type of construction as follows .
type of construction table num c assessment column two or more paver laid lifts minimum design lift thickness of num mm .
cnum single lift with design lift thickness greater than or equal to num mm cnum hot inplace recycling or mill and inlay cnum curb and gutter cnum single lift with design lift thickness less than num mm .
cnum penalty assessments for bumps and dips will be applied to all applicable top lifts of pavements section num specification num asphalt concrete pavement superpave august num num table num d tolerances for the lot mean from the job mix formula and maximum range between individual test results in a lot characteristics sieve size m num num num num num tolerances for the lot mean from the job mix formula num num num num num maximum range between individual test results in a lot num num num num num num include all sieves num num num num num num num num num num num num up to nominal maximum size .
table num e adjustment points for deviations beyond the requirements in table num d sieve size m mean num num for each num deviation num num num num for each num deviation num num for each num deviation num num for each num deviation num deviation num num deviation num num for each num deviation num for each additional num deviation num include all sieve sizes num num num num num num num num num num up to nominal maximum size .
lot mean adjustment points will be calculated for each lot .
a lot gradation price adjustment per tonne will be applied based upon on the following formula pag a num b num bonus where pag unit price adjustment for gradation bonus or penalty qa acceptance lots only a mean adjustment points assessed within the gradation limits specified in table numa excluding the requirements of table numb .
b mean adjustment points assessed outside the gradation limits specified in table numa excluding the requirements of table numb .
bonus num when there are no mean adjustment points and the maximum range as shown in table num d is not exceeded for any sieve size in the lot .
section num specification num sideslope improvement august num table of contents num sideslope improvement num num general num num materialsnum num department supply num num contractor supply num num construction num num measurement and payment num section num specification num sideslope improvement august num num num sideslope improvement num general this specification covers the reconstruction and improvement of the sideslopes in the areas as shown on the drawings as described in the special provisions and as determined by the consultant .
num materials the consultant will estimate the amount of embankment material required to perform the work and will determine possible availability within the rightofway .
when possible sources of sideslope material are indicated in the special provisions the material will be considered department supply .
otherwise all required sideslope embankment material will be considered contractor supply .
the amount of excavation or fill amount required will vary according to the typical cross sections shown on the drawings .
indication of the availability of material by the department does not guarantee the quantity or suitability of the material and bidders are advised that only material approved by the consultant at the time of construction may be used .
department supply material which is found unsuitable at the time of construction shall be replaced with approved material by the contractor and this will not be considered as a basis for claim .
borrow excavation shall be in accordance with subsection num borrow excavation of specification num grading .
num department supply generally department supply materials shall be obtained from reshaping ditches and backslopes or from designated borrow sources .
unless otherwise indicated in the special provisions all suitable material from within the rightofway shall be used prior to obtaining material from borrow sources .
num contractor supply when the contract does not specify that material is available from a department source the contractor shall supply all embankment material required for the sidesloping work from sources of his own choosing .
only material approved by the consultant may be used .
num construction the consultant may adjust ditch elevations and sideslope ratio to ensure positive drainage .
prior to modifying the existing sideslopes the contractor shall denude the sideslopes of all vegetation and topsoil and windrow this material .
to ensure a proper bond between the existing and new material the denuded sideslopes shall be scarified to a depth of num mm or as approved by the consultant .
embankment material as required shall be added and compacted to the satisfaction of the consultant .
typical compaction equipment eg .
packers will not normally be required .
section num specification num sideslope improvement august num num the contractor shall perform the sidesloping work so that there is sufficient width available to construct base course andor asphalt concrete pavement to the depths indicated on the drawings and to maintain a consistent finished pavement width with uniform sideslope configuration for the full height of the highway grade all as shown on the drawings .
existing guardrail shall be removed and then reinstalled after the completion of the work .
the work shall be carried out in accordance with specification num guardrail and guide posts .
existing culverts shall be extended or shortened or grouted as noted on the drawings or as determined by the consultant and in accordance with specification num culverts .
the contractor shall keep the roadway surface free of dirt and debris during sidesloping work .
equipment shall not be driven over culvert ends .
material placement and trimming shall be carried out using methods acceptable to the consultant .
the contractor shall remove and dispose of all rocks and debris within the sidesloping area that are larger than num mm in dimension .
any sign posts that are damaged as a result of this work shall be replaced at the contractors expense .
upon completion of the sidesloping work the contractor shall uniformly redistribute the windrowed vegetation and topsoil material on the finished sideslopes .
all disturbed areas shall be seeded in accordance with specification num seeding .
num measurement and payment sideslope improvement work will be measured in kilometres per side to the nearest num km as determined by the consultant .
payment for sideslope improvement work will be made at the unit price bid for sideslope improvement and will be full compensation for denuding the sideslopes of vegetation and topsoil the supply of borrow material as required excavating loading hauling placing finishing redistribution of denuded topsoil seeding and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
all other work including but not limited to extending existing culverts and the removal and reinstallation of existing signs guide posts and guardrail as required will be paid for at the applicable unit prices bid for the types of work incorporated .
section num specification num asphalt curb medians traffic islands and flumes august num table of contents num asphalt curb medians traffic islands and flumesnum num general num num description num num materials num num general num num aggregatenum num asphalt num num asphalt mix design num num constructionnum num preparation of surface for asphalt curbsnum num mixing and placing asphalt curb materialnum num gravel fill for asphalt curb medians and traffic islands num num median surfacing num num asphalt flumes num num protection num num cleanupnum num measurement and paymentnum num repair and leveling patches num num asphalt curbsnum num gravel for median fill num num median surfacing num num asphalt flume outlet drains num num supply of aggregatenum section num specification num asphalt curb medians traffic islands and flumes august num num num asphalt curb medians traffic islands and flumes num general num description this work shall consist of the construction of asphalt curbs medians traffic islands and flumes using well graded crushed aggregate and asphalt cement combined as hereinafter specified placed and compacted on a prepared base in conformity with lines grade and crosssection as shown on the drawings at specified locations or as directed by the consultant .
num materials num general all materials necessary for the construction of the works described herein shall be supplied by the contractor .
num aggregate the contractor shall produce crushed aggregate in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling .
unless otherwise specified or directed by the consultant aggregate shall meet the requirements for designation num class num material .
the contractor shall supply aggregate in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate and haul aggregate in accordance with specification num hauling .
num asphalt the contractor shall supply asphalt in accordance with specification num supply of asphalt .
the type and grade of asphalt shall be as specified in subsection num asphalt mix design .
asphalt used for tack coats shall be of the type and grade designated by the consultant .
num asphalt mix design the asphalt mix design shall be prepared and submitted according to the requirements of section num asphalt mix design and job mix formula .
unless otherwise specified a mix type lnum shall be used in accordance with the following design requirements i asphalt cement grade shall be either numa numa or numa the stiffest asphalt cement grade shall be used on projects that specify more than one grade .
ii design air voids shall be num .
num construction num preparation of surface for asphalt curbs before placing asphalt curbs the existing surface in the curb locations shall be cleaned of all foreign loose or deleterious material .
all broken or defective areas in the locations shall be repaired by removing the broken and defective material and replacing it with asphalt concrete patching material as directed by the consultant .
section num specification num asphalt curb medians traffic islands and flumes august num num an asphalt tack coat shall be uniformly applied at the location rate temperature and to the dimensions as approved by the consultant .
the surface to be tacked shall be dry and free from loose or deleterious material when the tack coat is applied .
following the curing of the asphalt tack coat depressions shall be eliminated by placing asphalt concrete leveling patches at the locations and to the dimensions designated by the consultant .
the asphalt concrete material used for patching and leveling shall conform to and be placed in accordance with the requirements of specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps using the designation and class of aggregate specified or directed by the consultant .
the patching and leveling shall be performed in such a way as to result in a surface which is tight neat uniform and well bonded to the underlying surface .
the patched and leveled areas shall be fully compacted so that the final surface is flush with the surrounding surface and does not pond water when asphalt curb construction is complete .
an asphalt tack coat shall be applied to leveled and patched areas as directed by the consultant .
num mixing and placing asphalt curb material the bituminous mixture shall be produced transported and placed in accordance with the requirements of specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps .
mix temperatures shall be sufficiently high to enable adequate mixing and compaction but shall not be so high as to cause asphalt damage or curb instability .
the placing compacting and finishing of asphalt curbs shall be accomplished by use of a mechanical curb machine of a type approved by the consultant .
the bituminous mixture shall be laid only upon a dry clean surface on which the tack coat has fully cured and under weather conditions acceptable to the consultant .
curb shall be placed in a continuous one step operation in one direction with a minimum number of joints .
where joints are absolutely necessary they shall be constructed so that they are virtually indistinguishable from the adjacent curb .
cold joints shall be tacked before new material is placed against them .
the finished asphalt curb shall be true to alignment and crosssection thoroughly compacted and shall have a smooth tight uniform surface texture which is free from segregation defects blemishes or other irregularities .
num gravel fill for asphalt curb medians and traffic islands median fill gravel shall be placed within the asphalt curbs forming the outside perimeter of medians and traffic islands and shall be thoroughly compacted in layers not exceeding num mm in depth to a tight smooth surface within num mm of the top of the curbs or as otherwise specified .
num median surfacing the compacted gravel fill within medians and traffic islands shall be surfaced with asphalt concrete material in accordance with the requirements of specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps using the designation and class of aggregate specified or directed by the consultant .
the finished surface shall be true to crosssection and grade thoroughly compacted and shall have a smooth tight uniform surface texture .
section num specification num asphalt curb medians traffic islands and flumes august num num num asphalt flumes where asphalt flume outlet drains are specified they shall be constructed in accordance with the typical plans and the requirements of specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps using the designation and class of aggregate specified or directed by the consultant .
the finished surface shall be true to the lines grades and crosssections established by the consultant and shall be smooth tight and compact over its entire length .
the excavated material from the flume trench shall be spread uniformly over the adjacent sideslope as directed by the consultant .
the flume bedding material shall be select pitrun gravel or crushed aggregate of the designation and class specified or as otherwise directed by the consultant .
bedding material shall be placed and thoroughly compacted to the depths and widths specified or as directed by the consultant .
hand laid rock forms shall be produced and placed in a neat manner in accordance with the typical plans .
num protection care shall be taken to prevent damage to the work during subsequent construction operations forming part of this contract .
all means and materials required to protect the work from damage shall be provided by the contractor at his expense .
works damaged by traffic construction operations weather conditions or any other cause for the duration of the contract shall be repaired or removed and replaced as directed by the consultant at the contractors expense .
num cleanup all construction materials and other debris resulting from the execution of the work covered by these specifications shall be removed and disposed of to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num measurement and payment num repair and leveling patches measurement and payment for asphalt concrete material for repair and leveling patches will be made in accordance with specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps .
num asphalt curbs measurement of asphalt curbs will be by the length in metres along the centreline of the curb .
payment will be made at the unit price bid for asphalt curb and will be full compensation for preparing the original surface supplying and applying the tack coat supplying asphalt binder and processing hauling and placing the bituminous mixture .
num gravel for median fill measurement of gravel fill material for medians and traffic islands will be in tonnes .
payment will be made at the unit price bid for median fill gravel and will be full compensation for producing hauling and placing the fill material .
section num specification num asphalt curb medians traffic islands and flumes august num num num median surfacing measurement of median surfacing will be in tonnes .
payment will be made at the unit price bid for median surfacing and will be full compensation for producing hauling and placing the asphalt concrete material .
num asphalt flume outlet drains measurement of asphalt flume outlet drains will be by length in metres along the flow line of the flume .
payment will be made at the unit price bid for asphalt flume outlet drains and will be full compensation for excavating and disposing of earth materials for the flume trench producing hauling and placing of handlaid rock forms bedding aggregate and asphalt concrete materials .
num supply of aggregate aggregate materials incorporated into the work will be paid for in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate .
section num specification num concrete curbs gutters sidewalks medians and traffic islands august num table of contents num concrete curbs gutters sidewalks medians and traffic islandsnum num general num num materials num num general num num aggregatenum num portland cement concretenum num expansion joint fillers num num curing and sealing compounds num num reinforcing bars and wiresnum num median fill materials num num sampling and testingnum num constructionnum num general num num preparation of base and bedding num num adjusting catch basins and manholesnum num forms num num extrusion num num steel reinforcementnum num wire mesh reinforcementnum num placing concretenum num crossings num num precast sectionsnum num joints num num finishing num num identification of work num num curing sealing and protection num num backfill num num fill for medians sign islands and traffic islandsnum num median surfacingnum num measurement and paymentnum num general num num excavation base preparation and gravel or sand beddingnum num concrete structures num num median fillnum num median surfacing num num backfilling num num supply of aggregatenum section num specification num concrete curbs gutters sidewalks medians and traffic islands august num num num concrete curbs gutters sidewalks medians and traffic islands num general the work shall include construction of the following items a curbs gutters and combination curb and gutter sections b curbs for medians and traffic islands which have concrete asphalt or topsoil surfacing c solid concrete medians traffic islands and sign islands d separate sidewalks e monolithic sidewalk curb and gutter sections f concrete swales g outlet gutters and h concrete barriers .
these castinplace extruded or precast structures shall consist of air entrained portland cement concrete with or without reinforcing steel prepared in accordance with the specifications and to the lines grades and typical crosssections as shown on the drawings or as designated by the consultant .
curbs shall include mountable semimountable and barrier types .
num materials num general the contractor shall supply all materials including forms for the construction of the work .
num aggregate the contractor shall produce aggregate materials in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling .
gravel or sand bedding material shall be select and shall consist of well graded sand or a well graded mixture of natural sand gravel andor crushed rock all of which shall pass a num mm sieve opening .
any processing required to meet this gradation requirement shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor shall supply aggregate in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate and haul aggregate in accordance with specification num hauling .
num portland cement concrete portland cement concrete shall comply with the requirements of specification num supply of portland cement concrete for class c concrete .
for precast ftype barrier curbs the compressive strength of the concrete at num days shall be num mpa .
num expansion joint fillers preformed expansion joint fillers shall conform to the requirements in the most recent edition of a.s.t.m .
designation dnum and shall be of adequate dimensions to fill the joint fully and continuously throughout its entire depth .
num curing and sealing compounds curing compound shall conform to the most recent edition of a.s.t.m .
designation cnum and shall contain white fugitive dye .
the contractor shall not add any material to the curing section num specification num concrete curbs gutters sidewalks medians and traffic islands august num num compound as delivered by the manufacturer .
sealing compounds are not normally required for this work .
when use of a sealer is specified the contractor shall select one of the approved type numb bridge concrete sealers identified on the alberta transportation products list .
num reinforcing bars and wires steel reinforcing bars shall be deformed bars in accordance with the most recent edition of csa gnum m billet steel bars for concrete reinforcement .
for f type barrier curbs the bars shall also be epoxy coated .
cold drawn wire or welded wire fabric for concrete reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of the latest edition of csa gnum .
num median fill materials fill material for medians to be surfaced with portland cement concrete or asphalt concrete shall be crushed aggregate of the designation and class specified .
the contractor shall process the material by crushing if required to meet the specifications .
fill material for medians to be topsoiled shall be clayey soil free of stones clods sticks roots concrete and other debris .
asphalt concrete for median surfacing shall be supplied produced and placed in accordance with the requirements of specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps .
unless otherwise specified in the special provisions the mix type shall be as used elsewhere on the project .
gradation of the median surfacing asphalt concrete aggregate shall be in accordance with the requirements for the designation and class specified or directed by the consultant .
topsoil for medians shall meet the requirements of specification num topsoil placement .
num sampling and testing sampling and testing shall meet the requirements of specification num supply of portland cement concrete .
num construction num general the contractor shall be responsible for the proper adjustment and calibration of his equipment .
num preparation of base and bedding soft yielding or unsuitable base material shall be removed and disposed of as directed by the consultant and replaced with approved material .
the base material shall be thoroughly compacted to num of standard proctor density at optimum moisture to a depth of num mm and finished to a smooth uniform surface true to established line and grade .
base preparation shall extend sufficiently beyond the edges of the structure to enable forming and construction of the work .
the contractor shall place and compact gravel or sand bedding course upon the prepared base to a minimum compacted depth of num mm or as otherwise specified or directed by the section num specification num concrete curbs gutters sidewalks medians and traffic islands august num num consultant .
gravel or sand bedding shall be placed to the widths as specified or as directed by the consultant and shall be thoroughly compacted to a smooth uniform surface true to established lines and grade .
bedding material shall extend sufficiently beyond the edges of the structure to enable support forming and construction of the work .
num adjusting catch basins and manholes raising or lowering catch basin or manhole frames when necessary to match sidewalk or curb and gutter grades shall be in accordance with specification num manholes inlets and catch basins .
num forms steel or wood forms shall conform to the shape lines and dimensions of the concrete shown on the drawings .
lumber used in forms for exposed surfaces shall be dressed to a uniform thickness and shall be free from loose knots or other defects .
forms shall extend the full depth of the section being formed and shall be secure and sufficiently tight to prevent leakage of mortar .
forms shall be properly braced or tied together to maintain position and shape and shall be thoroughly cleaned and coated with a nonstaining formrelease oil before concrete is placed therein .
forms shall not be disturbed until the concrete has hardened sufficiently to prevent damage .
where form ties are used they shall be cut off inside the surface of the concrete and the holes shall be patched .
num extrusion where slipform paving machines or concrete extruding machines are used for placing concrete they shall meet the following requirements a the machines shall be approved by the consultant prior to commencement of the work .
b the vibrators on the equipment shall be adequate to produce a dense mass free of voids with a smooth surface free of honeycombing .
c the equipment shall have automatic grade and line control .
d the equipment shall in a single pass provide the specified shape and crosssection for the concrete items to be constructed .
num steel reinforcement steel reinforcement dowels or tie bars when specified shall be properly spaced aligned and held in correct position during the placement of the concrete by the use of bar chairs or other approved devices .
longitudinal bars shall extend through all contraction joints and shall terminate a minimum of num mm from any expansion or construction joint .
bars shall overlap at splices by at least num mm .
num wire mesh reinforcement wire mesh reinforcement when specified shall be properly placed and held in position during the placement of the concrete by use of chairs or other approved devices .
joints in the wire mesh shall be overlapped num mm .
wire mesh reinforcement shall terminate a minimum of num mm from any expansion or construction joint .
section num specification num concrete curbs gutters sidewalks medians and traffic islands august num num num placing concrete the bedding shall be in a moist condition immediately prior to the time the concrete is placed .
the concrete shall be spread uniformly to the required crosssection without segregation and thoroughly consolidated to eliminate excess air voids and to bring sufficient mortar to the surface for proper finishing .
before final finishing surfaces shall be tested with a num m straightedge and any irregularities of more than num mm in num m shall be corrected .
concrete placement between construction joints shall be continuous .
where there is a delay of more than num minutes in the placement of concrete a construction joint shall be formed .
concrete shall not be placed during rain or during other adverse weather conditions .
concrete shall not be placed on frozen base or frozen bedding .
num crossings lane commercial and private crossings shall be constructed on prepared bases at locations and to the depths and widths as indicated on the drawings and as directed by the consultant .
when specified crossings shall be reinforced with steel wire mesh .
num precast sections precast sections shall be placed on a prepared base to the line and grade specified as shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
num joints num general joints shall be perpendicular to the subgrade and at right angles to the longitudinal axis of the structure .
joints shall be formed and edged with a num mm radius so as to leave a neat finished appearance .
num contraction joints for barriers curbs combination curb and gutter sections separate sidewalks and monolithic sidewalk curb and gutter sections contraction joints shall be formed every num m except where shorter spacing is necessary for closures but no section shall be less than num m in length .
contraction joints shall be made by the use of one of the following methods i sawing a joint num mm deep with a concrete saw early enough after the concrete has set to prevent uncontrolled cracking but not so soon as to displace the aggregate from the edges of the cut .
the timing of sawing shall be the contractors responsibility .
ii forming a joint num mm deep by inserting into the plastic concrete a metal or fibre strip or a polyethylene film finishing the edges to a num mm radius and removing the insert as soon as initial set of the concrete has taken place .
iii forming a joint num mm deep with a jointing tool with a thin metal blade to impress a permanent plane of weakness into the plastic concrete .
section num specification num concrete curbs gutters sidewalks medians and traffic islands august num num for sidewalk construction a surface joint num mm in depth shall be constructed alternating with and halfway between contraction joints .
this joint shall not extend into the curb and gutter section .
an additional surface joint num mm in depth shall be constructed longitudinally in monolithic curb gutter and sidewalk for the purposes of delineating the back of the curb .
this joint shall be located at the distance from the back of sidewalk as shown on the drawings and shall be continuous for the entire length of the structure including driveway and lane crossings .
num expansion joints expansion joints shall be constructed with a preformed expansion joint filler to the full depth of the concrete at the following locations i where the concrete structure abuts a building pole or other permanent structure ii at construction joints iii where shown on the drawings and iv where directed by the consultant .
num construction joints construction joints shall be formed using steel divider plates at specified locations or as otherwise designated by the consultant .
should concrete placing operations be unavoidably interrupted construction joints shall be formed at the last fully completed panel .
construction joint divider plates shall be left in place until the concrete has set sufficiently to hold its shape and shall be removed without damaging the concrete .
steel dowels greased on one end shall be incorporated into construction joints where specified or as directed by the consultant .
num finishing exposed concrete surfaces shall have a brush finish .
the brush grooves shall be transverse on the sidewalk and longitudinal on the curb and gutter .
exposed edges on sidewalks including contraction and surface joints shall be tooled for a width of num mm and rounded to a radius of num mm or as otherwise specified .
the finished concrete shall be true to crosssection line and grade and the surface shall be tight smooth and free of honeycombing and irregularities .
concrete with honeycombing or other irregularities shall be removed and replaced as directed by the consultant .
num identification of work identification marks showing the name of the contractor and the year constructed shall be placed at the end of each block or at the terminal points of the work in each block in a neat easily legible form as approved by the consultant .
section num specification num concrete curbs gutters sidewalks medians and traffic islands august num num num curing sealing and protection num curing immediately after finishing the concrete shall be protected against moisture loss by the application of an approved curing compound .
the application rate and method of application shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
curing compounds shall be applied by spraying with pressure equipment .
to ensure complete coverage approximately onehalf the quantity for a given area shall be applied in one direction and the remainder applied at right angles to this direction .
curing compounds shall not be used on a surface where a bond is required with additional concrete to be placed later or where a sealing compound is specified to be used .
in such cases the concrete surface shall be moist cured by using wet burlap or polyethylene film .
num sealing when sealing is specified sealing compounds shall not be applied until a minimum of num days following placement of the concrete .
the concrete shall be dry and swept clean prior to application of sealing solution as directed by the consultant .
the minimum application rate and method of application shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num protection concrete shall be protected against damage in accordance with specification num supply of portland cement concrete .
num backfill for outlet gutters sidewalks and monolithic curb gutter and sidewalks the contractor shall backfill as soon as possible after the removal of forms .
the backfill shall be mechanically tamped and trimmed .
for curb and gutter the contractor shall backfill behind the curb with suitable material after the seven day curing and protection period has elapsed .
the backfill shall extend to at least num mm behind the curb and shall be compacted in two lifts .
the densities shall be obtained by means of a hand operated mechanical tamper or other equipment as approved by the consultant .
organic soils shall not be permitted for backfilling except where topsoil is specified for the top num mm of fill .
num fill for medians sign islands and traffic islands num topsoiled medians fill for medians to be topsoiled shall be placed and moderately compacted to a smooth surface num mm below the top of the median curb .
the material shall be classified in accordance with specification num grading .
section num specification num concrete curbs gutters sidewalks medians and traffic islands august num num num other medians fill for medians to be asphalt concrete surfaced or concrete surfaced shall be crushed aggregate placed and compacted as shown on the drawings and as directed by the consultant .
num median surfacing num topsoil surfacing topsoil surfacing of medians shall be placed in accordance with specification num topsoil placement num asphalt concrete surfacing asphalt concrete material for median surfacing shall be supplied and placed in accordance with specification num asphalt concrete pavement eps except that the density requirements will not apply .
the finished surface shall be true to crosssection and grade shall be compacted and shall have a smooth tight uniform surface .
num concrete surfacing concrete material for median surfacing shall be supplied in accordance with the requirements of specification num supply of portland cement concrete and placed finished cured and sealed in accordance with the appropriate sections of this specification .
num measurement and payment num general the quantities determined as specified will be paid for at the contract unit prices which shall be compensation in full for base preparation and the furnishing of labour materials equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work in accordance with the drawings and specifications .
num excavation base preparation and gravel or sand bedding where the excavation and base preparation is done as part of road construction which is part of the work payment for the excavation and base preparation will be made in accordance with the appropriate unit prices bid for this work .
otherwise excavation base preparation and bedding will not be measured and paid for separately but will be included in the contract unit price for the concrete structure .
num concrete structures num solid concrete medians and islands solid concrete medians and solid concrete islands will be measured in square metres of completed top surface area and payment will be made at the applicable unit price bid per square metre for solid concrete medians or solid concrete islands .
these payments will be full compensation for supplying and installing any curbing or curb and gutter forming part of the solid concrete median or island .
section num specification num concrete curbs gutters sidewalks medians and traffic islands august num num num curbs gutters combination curb and gutter sections sidewalks monolithic sidewalk curb and gutter sections concrete barriers and swales or combinations thereof measurement will be made in linear metres to the nearest num metre and payment will be made at the applicable unit price bid for i concrete curb measured along the length of the curb with separate payment for each type of curb .
ii gutters and outlet gutter measured along the length of the gutter .
iii curb and gutter measured along the length of the curb face .
iv concrete sidewalk measured along the length with separate payment for each specified width .
v monolithic sidewalk curb and gutter measured along the length with separate payment for each specified width .
vi concrete swale measured along the flow line .
vii concrete barrier measured along the length .
num riprap for outlet gutters contrary to specification num riprap riprap for outlet gutters will be measured in square metres and payment will be made at the unit price bid for rock riprap handlaid .
this payment will be full compensation for supplying and installing the riprap .
num median fill granular fill material for asphalt concrete or portland cement concrete surfaced medians will be measured in tones .
payment will be made at the unit price bid for granular fill for medians .
earth fill material will be measured and paid for separately at the applicable unit prices bid for the classification of excavation used in accordance with specification num grading .
num median surfacing median asphalt concrete surfacing will be measured in tonnes .
payment will be made at the contract unit price for median asphalt concrete surfacing for the quantity incorporated into the work .
median portland cement concrete surfacing will be measured in square metres based on the width excluding the curbs and will be paid for at the unit price per square metre for median concrete surfacing .
separate payment will be made for the curb or curb and gutter section forming the perimeter of the median .
median topsoiling will measured and paid for in accordance with specification num topsoil placement .
section num specification num concrete curbs gutters sidewalks medians and traffic islands august num num num backfilling all costs associated with backfilling behind structures shall be included in the unit price or prices bid for constructing each respective structure .
no separate or additional payment will be made .
num supply of aggregate payment for the supply of aggregate for median fill and median surfacing will be made in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate .
section num specification num hauling august num table of contents num hauling num num general num num description num num definitions num num identification of haul routes num num hauling num num vehicle requirements num num hauling restrictions num num construction initial conditioning and maintenance of haul roads num num haul computationsnum num contracts with bid unit prices for haulnum num measurement and paymentnum num haulnum num haul roads num section num specification num hauling august num num num hauling num general num description this specification applies to the hauling of all granular materials produced under specification num aggregate production and stockpiling including blend sand and the hauling of all mixtures of granular material with asphalt or cement produced under the applicable specification as required by the drawings special provisions or as designated by the consultant .
this specification covers the following a the administration of haul roads from all aggregate sources b hauling granular materials and mixtures of granular material with asphalt or cement bid by unit weight or volume c hauling granular materials and mixtures of granular material with asphalt or cement bid inplace .
num definitions for purposes of this specification the following definitions will apply num aggregate sources the categories of aggregate sources are as specified in specification num supply of aggregate .
num hauling the process of transporting material from its point of loading to its designated delivery point .
num haul road a route over which materials are hauled for the performance of the contract with the exception of any portion of the highway or road within the contract construction limits .
num conversion factors where the application of conversion factors is necessary the following standard values shall be used num tmnum for gravel pitrun and crushed regardless of class and num tmnum for sand .
num identification of haul routes at the time of contract execution the contractor shall provide land title or public land standing reports and shall state the location of his proposed aggregate sources and haul routes .
the contractor shall be responsible for obtaining authority to haul over the proposed haul routes from the agency having jurisdiction .
the use of provincial highways as haul routes is subject to prior approval by the department .
section num specification num hauling august num num the contractor shall abide by all road restrictions established by the road or bridge authority having jurisdiction including all roads and portions of the highway or road within the contract construction limits .
num hauling num vehicle requirements haul vehicles shall comply with the alberta traffic safety act and shall have alberta class num registration .
each truck used for hauling shall have current registration with the alberta sand and gravel association asga registry or equivalent registry system designed to allow the public to lodge haul related complaints .
each haul truck shall display signs on three sides of the vehicle indicating the name of the registry system and displaying a clearly visible tollfree telephone contact number and unique truck identifier .
the truck identifier shall have no more than num characters with a minimum height of num mm per character .
the registry system used shall forward all complaints received to the contractor shall record the nature of the complaint and shall be able to provide the department with summary statistics when requested .
all complaints received by the contractor shall be handled in accordance with section num due care claim settlement and hold harmless of specification num general .
prior to a haul truck being used the contractor shall provide the consultant with identification information including the haul truck number truck registration identifier allowable gross vehicle weight and tare vehicle weight for vehicles hauling on a cubic metre basis the approved capacity will be the struck measure of the box as calculated by the consultant to the closest num mnum .
num hauling restrictions the consultant may direct that hauling operations will not be permitted if excessive damage to highways or public roads will occur or when hauling operations cause serious hazards or difficulties to the travelling public .
the conditions when this may occur will generally be a when spring thaw is taking place b during or after heavy rainfall c during periods of exceptionally heavy traffic .
the contractor shall abide by all load restrictions established by the road or bridge authority having jurisdiction .
if work must be carried over from one construction season to the next the consultant may order that when work closes down for the season the contractor shall repair any damage to public roads caused by his hauling operations .
section num specification num hauling august num num num construction initial conditioning and maintenance of haul roads the contractor shall initially condition maintain and restore roads used as haul roads to the satisfaction of the agency having jurisdiction and in the case of provincially owned or controlled roads to the satisfaction of the consultant .
the contractor shall also be responsible for construction of new haul roads where necessary .
all costs incurred in such work shall be borne by the contractor except that the department will share in the cost of the asphalt mixes required for the repair of paved surfaces on roads maintained by the department in accordance with the following a on contracts with unit prices for asphalt mixes the contractor shall supply and place the asphalt mix and the department will pay for the quantity of mix used at num ninety percent of the applicable unit prices .
the contractor shall at his own expense spread and compact the asphalt mixes .
b on contracts that do not include unit prices for asphalt mixes the department will select the material source and pay for the asphalt mix required including haul .
the contractor shall at his own expense spread and compact the asphalt mixes .
num haul computations num contracts with bid unit prices for haul the haul distance will be the measured distance in kilometres and hundredths of a kilometre along the designated route between the point of loading to trucks and the designated delivery point .
haul will not be calculated for blend sand material obtained within num m of a mixing plant or of the point of blending .
for the purpose of this specification the designated delivery point shall be considered as the centre of the project kilometre except a if a section is shorter than one kilometre the designated delivery point will be the centre of the section .
b if a dead haul road splits a project kilometre into two sections the designated delivery point will be the centre of each section .
num measurement and payment num haul the haul distance will be measured in kilometres and hundredths of a kilometre along the designated route between the point of loading and the designated delivery point and will be measured for record purposes and to enable computation of the average actual haul distance .
section num specification num hauling august num num num haul roads except for the supply of asphalt mixes for the repair of paved surfaces on haul roads as defined in subsection num construction initial conditioning and maintenance of haul roads the cost of new construction initial conditioning maintenance and final restoration of haul roads shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor shall carry out initial conditioning maintenance and restoration of roads used as haul roads to the satisfaction of the agency having jurisdiction or in the case of provincially owned or controlled roads to the satisfaction of the consultant .
the contractor shall control dust on haul roads using water or other dust abatement materials approved for use by the consultant .
the contractor shall supply and apply the materials on an as required basis or when directed to do so by the consultant .
all costs associated with dust control will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
section num specification num supply of aggregate august num table of contents num supply of aggregate num num general num num aggregate categoriesnum num aggregate sources controlled by the departmentnum num aggregate sources not controlled by the departmentnum num general requirements for the use of all aggregate sources num num pit operations num num general num num pit operations in aggregate sources controlled by the departmentnum num pit operations in aggregate sources not controlled by the department num num measurement and payment num num general num num designated sourcesnum num supply of aggregate bid item num num payment num section num specification num supply of aggregate august num num num supply of aggregate num general this specification covers the general requirements for the supply of aggregate materials by the contractor .
aggregate materials are considered the total of the granular portion of construction materials consisting of the coarse and fine gravel splits blend sand and manufactured fines when required .
num aggregate categories for the purposes of administering the operational and payment conditions concerning the supply of aggregate for the work aggregate sources are categorized as follows num aggregate sources controlled by the department the following are deemed to be aggregate sources controlled by the department i a source owned by the department or ii a crown source for which the department has a reservation or iii a private source for which the department has a royalty agreement and holds an approval under the environmental protection and enhancement act .
num designated sources when it is specified in the contract that the contractor shall only use the department sources pits stockpiles or quarry sites for the production of crushed or uncrushed aggregate these sources shall be termed designated sources .
num aggregate sources not controlled by the department the following are deemed to be aggregate sources not controlled by the department i a crown source on undeeded land operated primarily under lease or license and for which the department does not have a reservation .
ii a private source for which the department does not have a royalty agreement and does not hold an approval under the environmental protection and enhancement act .
num general requirements for the use of all aggregate sources when supplying aggregate from any source the contractor shall i ensure a conservation and reclamation approval or registration from alberta environment or a lease or license to extract from alberta sustainable resource development and a clearance from the archaeological survey of alberta are in place prior to commencement of the work ii assume full responsibility for the quantity and quality of the material in the aggregate source iii specify the location of the proposed aggregate sources and haul routes prior to contract award iv acquire the necessary rights to remove materials from all aggregate sources except sources controlled by the department section num specification num supply of aggregate august num num v explore and develop the aggregate sources and vi save the department harmless from any and all claims resulting from the use of the aggregate sources .
the department will not consider the use of aggregates from existing stockpiles unless the contractor can satisfy the department that the aggregate in question meets all required specifications .
agreement by the department that such preprepared aggregates can be used will not constitute acceptance of the material in stockpile .
acceptance of such material will be based on testing done by the consultant as the material is incorporated into the work .
num pit operations num general in all aggregate sources the contractor shall comply with the conditions set by alberta environment or alberta sustainable resource development when removing topsoil subsoil and inorganic overburden including material in a frozen condition .
the standards and conditions for appropriate development and reclamation as required by alberta environment or alberta sustainable resource development shall apply to all sources .
num pit operations in aggregate sources controlled by the department num general operating requirements except where modified by the special provisions the contractors operations in an aggregate source controlled by the department shall be in accordance with the following requirements .
all reject material produced in an aggregate source controlled by the department shall be disposed of as directed by the consultant and the contractor shall have no claim to the material .
when aggregate is to be produced from a source which has been partially excavated previously the new excavation shall proceed as an extension of the previous excavation provided that suitable material is obtainable .
if required stockpiled materials from previous operations shall be removed and deposited as indicated on the plans and in the special provisions unless otherwise directed by the consultant .
the aggregate exposed shall be processed and used .
normally the cleared area shall extend beyond the final position of an open face by a minimum distance of four times the expected depth of excavation .
clearing and timber salvage if required shall be carried out in accordance with specification num clearing .
the contractor shall erect and maintain any temporary fences and livestock guards that may be required to prevent livestock from straying into the aggregate source .
inorganic overburden shall be removed to a minimum num m beyond the top of the backsloped aggregate face .
topsoil and subsoil shall be stripped to a minimum distance of num m beyond the top of the backsloped overburden face .
the stripped buffers shall be maintained throughout the project .
prior to the placement of excavated inorganic overburden the contractor shall remove the full depth of both topsoil and subsoil layers and stockpile the materials in separate stockpiles .
in addition unless otherwise directed by the consultant the contractor shall remove and section num specification num supply of aggregate august num num separately stockpile the full depth of both topsoil and subsoil layers from all temporary work sites including but not limited to the crusher plant camp parking areas and all access roads .
prior to the placement of excavated subsoil the contractor shall remove and stockpile the full depth of topsoil layer .
the aggregate area to be used shall be stripped in stages as follows .
the first stage shall be the removal and stockpiling of topsoil .
the second stage shall be the removal and stockpiling of the subsoil .
the final stage shall be the removal and deposition of the inorganic overburden as indicated on the plans or in the special provisions or as directed by the consultant .
the contractor shall remove all materials in a manner that prevents contamination of one material with another .
dozers shall not be used for the removal topsoil or subsoil unless specifically authorized by the consultant in writing .
topsoil subsoil and inorganic overburden shall be stockpiled uniformly and compactly in separate piles in the areas designated by the consultant .
stockpiling of all stripped materials shall be completed in a manner that will minimize surface damage and interruption of natural drainage .
unless otherwise directed by the consultant where stockpiles of topsoil subsoil and inorganic overburden exist from previous pit operations the contractor shall utilize the same stockpile locations for the deposit of excavated topsoil subsoil and inorganic overburden .
during the term of the contract the contractor shall prevent erosion of all topsoil subsoil and inorganic overburden stockpiles resulting from his operations .
in the event such piles remain at the completion of construction they shall be seeded by the contractor .
all materials required for seeding shall be supplied by the contractor .
grass seed shall conform to specification num seeding .
the composition and application rate of the grass seed mixture will be determined by the consultant at the time of construction .
the excavation of aggregate shall advance uniformly to obtain maximum yield from the deposit .
under no circumstances will waste of useable material be permitted and excavations shall be continued to depths below water level if suitable material is available .
the contractor shall cleanup the areas of pits affected by operations performed under this contract in accordance with the following i all faces with potential future use for the removal of aggregate shall be sloped at a ratio of at least two horizontal to one vertical .
ii faces designated to be abandoned in a deposit shall be sloped at a ratio of at least four horizontal to one vertical .
iii at boundaries of authorization or property lines sloping shall be at a ratio of at least four horizontal to one vertical with the top of slopes terminating at a minimum distance of num m from the boundary .
iv upon completion of the work the site shall be left in a neat and presentable condition .
all fences removed for purposes of entry shall be replaced in a condition equal to or better than they were before being removed and all debris including construction materials and garbage resulting from the contractors operations shall be removed and disposed of as required by the consultant .
the contractor shall not drain spill or bury at this site any garbage sewage outhouse waste fluids oils fuels mechanical parts or equipment .
v all asphalt material produced by the contractor shall be removed from the site unless otherwise outlined in the special provisions .
all reject asphalt material produced by the contractor shall be disposed of in accordance with environment regulations .
section num specification num supply of aggregate august num num in addition to the foregoing sloping operations where practical the consultant may order that flatter slopes be constructed on selected areas using stockpiled overburden material .
the quantity of overburden material available will determine the amount of sloping to be done .
this operation may require some site preparation such as ripping of the compacted earth floor .
num supply installation and maintenance of pit signage the contractor shall be responsible for maintaining signage in department controlled pits in accordance with the requirements of drawings teb num and teb num as applicable .
this shall include the removal salvage and reinstallation of existing signs as required to accommodate the contractors operations and the replacement of previously damaged signs with new ones .
warning signs removed to accommodate the contractors operations shall be reinstalled as soon as practicable .
at the completion of all pit operations the contractor shall supply and install any additional signage required in the pit .
signs supplied by the contractor shall be new and shall meet the requirements of specification num supply of permanent highway signs posts and bases .
num pit operations in aggregate sources not controlled by the department all aspects of clearing removal of overburden protection and safety of livestock general pit management and cleanup shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
num measurement and payment num general payment for the supply of aggregate will not be made separately when the applicable specification states that the cost of supplying aggregate is considered incidental to the work or is included in the unit price bid for the work for which the aggregate is being produced .
if this is the case for all applicable specifications for the work the contract will not contain a bid item for the supply of aggregate .
in contracts that contain a bid item for supplying aggregate payments made for the supply of aggregate will be considered full compensation for the cost of the aggregate material .
all other costs incurred by the contractor including but not limited to the cost of obtaining approvals and rights to use a source exploration development reclamation clearing removal and stockpiling of topsoil subsoil and inorganic overburden erosion protection seeding and the erection and removal of temporary fences will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
for the purpose of payment for the supply of aggregate contractor owned reclaimed asphalt pavement rap material used in the production of recycled asphalt concrete pavement racp will be considered to be aggregate supplied from a private source not controlled by the department .
rap material used for any other purpose will not be paid for .
payment for all costs associated with the supply and installation of new pit signage if required will be made in accordance with section num extra work of specification num general .
signs damaged as the result of the contractors operations shall be replaced by the contractor at his expense .
all costs associated with the removal salvage and reinstallation of existing signs to accommodate the contractors operations will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
section num specification num supply of aggregate august num num num designated sources unless otherwise specified the aggregate in designated sources will be supplied free of cost to the contractor .
num supply of aggregate bid item the specification amendment table contained in the special provisions will indicate whether or not the contractor has the option of using a specific aggregate source controlled by the department for the supply of aggregate for the work .
if the table indicates that the contractor has the option of using a specific aggregate source controlled by the department the tender will contain a bid item for supply of aggregate with option .
in such cases the department will establish the unit price for this work and insert the amount in the unit price schedule .
if the table indicates that the contractor may not use an aggregate source controlled by the department for the supply of aggregate for the work the tender will contain a bid item for supply of aggregate no option and the contractor shall bid a unit price for this work .
num payment the payment conditions for supplying aggregate vary depending on the category of the aggregate source used .
categories of aggregate sources are listed in section num aggregate categories .
further it is possible that more than one aggregate source may be used for the supply of aggregate for the work e.g .
portions or all of the pitrun gravel andor the blend sand components of the aggregate may be obtained from separate aggregate sources of different categories .
the payment conditions for the various categories of aggregate sources are as follows no payment will be made for the quantity of aggregate material obtained from a source controlled by the department .
payment for the quantity of aggregate obtained from a source not controlled by the department will be made in accordance with the following i for material obtained from crown sources not controlled by the department payment will be made at the unit price per tonne established by the department or bid by the contractor as applicable for the item supply of aggregate minus num per tonne .
the num reduction recognizes that royalty payments to alberta sustainable resource development are not applicable to public works projects .
ii for material obtained from private sources not controlled by the department payment will be made at the unit price per tonne established by the department or bid by the contractor as applicable for the item supply of aggregate .
iii the quantity for payment will be determined by the consultant by measuring the material containing the aggregate which has been incorporated into the accepted work and calculating the quantity of aggregate obtained from sources not controlled by the department .
in the event the material containing the aggregate contains asphalt no deduction will be made for the asphalt material .
section num specification num supply of aggregate august num num iv when the material measurement is by volume a conversion factor of num tonnes per cubic metre will be used to determine the weight of a gravel component and num tonnes per cubic metre will be used for a blend sand component .
section num specification num supply of portland cement concrete august num table of contents num supply of portland cement concretenum num descriptionnum num general num num class of concretenum num materials num num portland cement num num waternum num aggregatesnum num airentraining admixtures num num other admixtures num num fly ash num num constructionnum num care and storage of materials num num aggregate tests and concrete mix designnum num consistencynum num concrete production num num delivery num num protection num num sampling and testingnum num quality control testingnum num acceptance sampling and testingnum num test methods num num requirements for acceptance num num general num num payment scales num num payment num section num specification num supply of portland cement concrete august num num num supply of portland cement concrete num description num general portland cement concrete shall consist of a mixture of portland cement fine aggregate coarse aggregate water and admixtures where required combined in proportions to meet the specifications contained herein .
num class of concrete the contractor shall supply portland cement concrete in accordance with the following requirements for the class of concrete specified or designated by the consultant class of concrete minimum compressive strength num days mpa size of coarse aggregate mm range of slump mm entrained air cont .
maximum water cement ratio a num num num to num num to num num num num b num num to num num to num num num num c num num to num num to num num num num d num num to num num to num num num num pile num num to num num to num num num num num the contractor will be permitted to supply class b concrete where class a has been specified payment will be as if class a had been supplied .
all properties shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of the latest version of csa standards anum concrete materials and methods of concrete construction and anum methods of test and standard practices for concrete .
num materials num portland cement the contractor shall supply portland cement conforming to the requirements of specification num supply of portland cement and concrete products in accordance with anum unless otherwise specified directed or approved by the consultant normal type gu portland cement shall be used .
num water mixing and curing water shall be supplied by the contractor .
water shall conform to the requirements of the latest version of csa standard anum .
water used in portland cement concrete construction shall be subject to the prior approval of the consultant .
section num specification num supply of portland cement concrete august num num num aggregates the contractor shall supply aggregates conforming to the requirements of the latest version of csa standard anum .
aggregates used in portland cement concrete shall be subject to the prior approval of the consultant .
num airentraining admixtures airentraining admixtures shall be supplied by the contractor .
airentraining admixtures shall conform to the requirements astm cnum .
num other admixtures all approved admixtures such as water reducing agents and super plasticizers shall conform to astm cnum and be compatible with all other constituents .
the addition of calcium chloride accelerators and airreducing agents will not be permitted except when approved by the departmentconsultant .
retarders or set controlling admixtures may be used for concrete specified with corrosion inhibitor .
num fly ash fly ash may only be used in concrete mixes where the aggregate is assessed to be potentially alkalisilica reactive .
fly ash when approved by the consultant shall not exceed num by mass of cementing materials .
all fly ash shall conform to the requirements of csaanum cementitious material compendium for type f or ci fly ash .
characteristic data for fly ash is required to assure conformance to the standards .
only approved compatible super plasticizing admixtures and air entraining agents shall be used with fly ash .
num construction num care and storage of materials all portland cement concrete materials shall be handled and protected in such a way as to prevent segregation damage and contamination .
all cement aggregate and other concrete construction materials shall be stored in accordance with the requirements of the latest version of csa standards anum anum cementitious materials for use in concrete and anum .
any segregated damaged or contaminated materials shall be rejected .
num aggregate tests and concrete mix design the contractor shall be responsible for providing the concrete mix designs and shall submit the mix design for class of concrete to the consultant for review a minimum of one week prior to the scheduled placing of concrete .
for each concrete mix design the following aggregate analysis shall be provided fine and coarse aggregate sieve csa anuma section num specification num supply of portland cement concrete august num num amount of material finer than num fm in aggregate csa anuma organic impurities in sands for concrete assessment of potential for deleterious alkaliaggregate reactivity aar csa anum numa sources of proposed aggregate the analysis of the aggregates shall fully represent the material to be used in production .
if the fine aggregate consists of a blend from more than one source the fine aggregate sieve analysis shall show the gradation of the blended fine aggregates .
similarly in the case of blended coarse aggregates the coarse aggregate sieve analysis shall indicate the gradation of the blended coarse aggregates .
aggregate gradations for the coarse and fine aggregate shall meet the criteria outlined in tables num and num of csa anum .
fine aggregate tested in accordance with csa test method anuma organic impurities in sands for concrete shall produce a colour not darker than the standard colour organic plate number num .
aggregate producing a colour darker than the standard colour will be rejected in the absence of a satisfactory record of performance of a similar class of concrete minimum num tests over the last num months provisions num a b of csa standard cannumanum shall not apply .
the potential for deleterious alkaliaggregate reactivity shall be assessed in accordance with csa anuma .
this assessment shall include the risk level associated with structure size and environment the level of prevention related to service life requirements and the determination of the appropriate preventative measures .
unless otherwise indicated the service life is considered to be num years .
test data less than nummonths old evaluating the potential alkalisilica reactivity of aggregates tested in accordance with csa anuma or csa anuma shall be provided by the contractor for the consultants review .
in the absence of current test data and outside of areas of known highly reactive aggregate the aggregate shall be presumed to be moderately reactive .
for all concrete mixes the minimum cement content excluding supplementary cementing materials shall be num kgmnum .
concrete mixes that will be placed by concrete pump shall be designed for pumping .
the sampling and testing of aggregates and the concrete mix design shall be completed by a csa certified and qualified concrete testing laboratory that has a permit to practice in the province of alberta .
the testing laboratory shall provide an engineering opinion that concrete aggregate and mix designs are suitable for the intended use and are expected to perform to specified standards .
if during the progress of the work it is determined that the concrete has inadequate workability or does not meet the requirements of the specification the contractor shall provide a new mix design for the consultants approval in accordance with the foregoing requirements .
all concrete shall be proportioned in accordance with the approved mix designs .
all costs associated with aggregate testing and providing the mix designs shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
section num specification num supply of portland cement concrete august num num num consistency the slump shall be in accordance with the specifications contained herein however the slump for slipformed concrete shall be limited to a maximum of num mm or to such other value as may be necessary to enable the material to be slipformed without subsequent distortion .
generally mass and mechanically vibrated concrete shall have slumps in the lower portion of the specified range and heavily reinforced andor inaccessible sections shall have slumps in the higher end of the range .
num concrete production portland cement concrete shall be produced in accordance with the requirements of the latest version of csa standard anum unless otherwise approved by the consultant .
num delivery delivery of portland cement concrete shall be regulated so as to enable continuous deposition until the placement of each concrete section is completed .
num protection curing and protection of the placed concrete shall be in accordance with section num curing and protection of csa anum for a curing type num concrete surface .
concrete shall be protected against damage from freezing rain dust rapid temperature change or other adverse weather effects .
for a minimum of num days after finishing or until the concrete has attained num of the specified concrete strength whichever is greater concrete shall be protected against damage by any form of traffic .
the contractor may block off areas containing fresh concrete to safeguard the work from traffic .
hotweather curing requirements shall apply when the concrete is placed with an air temperature of numc or higher or when the air temperature is forecast to exceed this value during the num day curing period .
during periods of hotweather curing the contractor shall use a water spray or saturated absorptive fabric to achieve cooling by evaporation .
methods and materials used for protecting concrete from damage shall be the responsibility of the contractor and will be subject to prior approval of the consultant .
concrete damaged by moisture loss freezing rain traffic construction operations or any other cause shall be repaired or removed and replaced to the satisfaction of the consultant at the contractors expense .
num sampling and testing num quality control testing quality control testing will be the responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor shall determine the type and frequency of testing required and shall provide and pay for all equipment and personnel necessary to complete such testing .
results of all quality control testing shall be submitted to the consultant as they become available .
section num specification num supply of portland cement concrete august num num num acceptance sampling and testing acceptance testing is the responsibility of the consultant .
the consultant will take samples and carry out quality assurance testing and inspection of materials incorporated or being incorporated into the work .
the contractor shall cooperate with the consultant during the sampling testing and inspection .
such inspection shall not relieve the contractor from any obligation to perform all the work strictly in accordance with the requirements of the contract .
locations for routine quality assurance testing shall be randomly selected as far as it is practical to do so .
this will not limit the consultant from testing at any additional locations as he deems necessary .
results of the quality assurance tests will be made available to the contractor for his information .
the contractor shall be responsible for interpretation of test results and alter his operation if necessary so that the product meets the specifications .
num test methods unless otherwise specified the most recent editions of the following standard test methods and frequencies will be used to determine the material characteristics .
test description method no .
frequency sampling concrete csa anumc minimum of one per day num slump csaanumc minimum of one per day num entrained air csaanumc minimum of one per day num making and curing compressive strength specimens csaanumc minimum of one per day num compressive strength csaanumc minimum of one per day num num on larger pours a strength test will be taken on approximately each num mnum portion of the concrete pour .
a compressive strength test will consist of four standard test specimens .
one cylinder will be tested at seven days .
the num day test result will be the average of the remaining three specimens .
num for each compressive strength test a slump test will be performed and the amount of entrained air measured .
num slump and air content in the event that slump andor air content test results are outside the specified tolerance range as determined by the consultants testing the consultant may accept adjustments of the deficient condition as an alternate to rejection provided adjustments are made within num minutes from batching of the concrete .
concrete that does not meet this requirement is subject to rejection .
onsite addition of water to a concrete batch will only be permitted by the consultant provided the specified watertocement ratio is not exceeded .
the consultant reserves the right to reject any batch in the event of confirmed unacceptability and to require immediate removal of any concrete from this batch that may have already been placed .
section num specification num supply of portland cement concrete august num num placed concrete that does not meet the specified air content criteria will not be accepted by the consultant unless core sample testing conducted by the contractor indicates that the air content and airvoid system parameters of the suspect material is considered satisfactory in accordance with the latest version of csaanum clauses num and num .
sampling and testing costs associated with verifying the suitability of suspect concrete will be the responsibility of the contractor .
num requirements for acceptance num general the department reserves the right to reject any concrete whatsoever that does not meet all the requirements for the specified class of concrete .
the department may however accept concrete the strength of which falls below the specified strength requirements .
in such cases payment will be made in accordance with subsection num .
the bid price can either be unit price or lump sum .
num payment scales minimum compressive strength requirement num days mpa strength test result num num num num num mpa and over full payment full payment full payment full payment num mpa to num mpa full payment full payment full payment num mnum penalty num mpa to num mpa full payment full payment full payment num mnum penalty num mpa to num mpa full payment full payment full payment num mnum penalty num mpa to num mpa full payment full payment full payment num mnum penalty num mpa to num mpa full payment full payment full payment num mnum penalty num mpa to num mpa full payment full payment num mnum penalty num mnum penalty num mpa to num mpa full payment full payment num mnum penalty num mnum penalty num mpa to num mpa full payment full payment num mnum penalty reject num mpa to num mpa full payment full payment num mnum penalty reject num mpa to num mpa full payment full payment num mnum penalty reject num mpa to num mpa full payment num mnum penalty reject reject num mpa to num mpa full payment num mnum penalty reject reject num mpa to num mpa full payment num mnum penalty reject reject num mpa to num mpa full payment num mnum penalty reject reject num mpa to num mpa full payment num mnum penalty reject reject num mpa to num mpa num mnum penalty reject reject reject num mpa to num mpa num mnum penalty reject reject reject num mpa to num mpa num mnum penalty reject reject reject num mpa to num mpa num mnum penalty reject reject reject section num specification num supply of portland cement concrete august num num minimum compressive strength requirement num days mpa strength test result num num num num num mpa to num mpa num mnum penalty reject reject reject less than num mpa reject reject reject reject the reduced payment shall apply to the volume of concrete as determined by the consultant .
removing and replacing of rejected concrete construction shall be done at the contractors expense .
any work deemed by the consultant as defective or damaged by weather traffic or other causes shall be repaired or removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
num payment all costs associated with the supply and production of accepted portland cement concrete shall be included in the unit price bid for the respective structure for which the concrete is being used no separate or additional payment will be made .
section num specification num supply of asphalt august num table of contents num supply of asphaltnum num generalnum num materials num num sampling and testing num num generalnum num quality assurancenum num acceptancenum num measurement and paymentnum tables and charts asphnum asphalt cements asphnum asphalt cements asphnum asphalt cements asphnum liquid asphalts slow curing asphnum liquid asphalts medium curing asphnum liquid asphalts rapid curing asphnum emulsified asphalts anionic asphnuma emulsified asphalts cationic asphnumb emulsified asphalts polymer modified cationic rapid setting figure num crsnum asphnum emulsified asphalts high float asphnum emulsified asphalts high float cont .
asphnum emulsified asphalt primer asphnum emulsified dust suppressants asphnum cold pour rubber filled emulsified bituminous crack sealant asphnum hot pour bituminous crack sealant section num specification num supply of asphalt august num num num supply of asphalt num general the work consists of supplying asphalt materials including ordering scheduling delivering supplying storage facilities handling storing sampling testing and other related work .
for purposes of this specification the term asphalt supplier shall mean the party awarded an order by the contractor for the supply of asphalt .
num materials num general the contractor shall supply the types and grades of asphalt specified in the contract .
asphalt suppliers materials must be prequalified by the department .
prequalified suppliers are listed in the alberta transportation products list .
all asphalt binders shall be prepared from petroleum oils .
they shall be free from impurities .
solvents used in the manufacture of cutback asphalts shall be derived from petroleum oils .
emulsifiers used to stabilize asphalt emulsions shall not be harmful to the performance of the asphalt in service .
the contractor shall ensure that the asphalt supplied meets all requirements for the types and grades specified .
the contractor may be required to use more than one type or grade of asphalt for a particular purpose .
any change in asphalt type or grade must be approved by the consultant .
the contractor shall notify the consultant of any changes in asphalt material suppliers .
performance grade asphalt cements pgac shall meet the requirements of aashto mnum standard specification for performance graded asphalt binder table num with modifications for certain grades as outlined within the specification .
suppliers of the following pg asphalts will be required to meet the following additional quality stipulations prior to receiving approval for listing on the products list .
for the pg num designation the department will not prequalify an asphalt product which grades to a low temperature warmer than numc when tested according to aashto tnum determining the flexural creep stiffness of asphalt binder using the bending beam rheometer bbr .
for the pg num designation the department will not prequalify an asphalt product which grades to a low temperature warmer than numc when tested according to aashto tnum .
for the pg num designation only an acceptance tolerance of numc will be allowed for either the high temperature rating or the low temperature rating but not both tolerances together .
no tolerance will be allowed for other designated grades .
for asphalts designated as a pg num table num performance graded asphalt binder specification contained in aashto mnum shall be modified in accordance with the following criteria the test temperature for creep stiffness and direct tension shall be numoc section num specification num supply of asphalt august num num dynamic shear criteria on the pav residue shall be met at a temperature of numc or lower .
for asphalts designated as a pg num table num performance graded asphalt binder specification contained in aashto mnum are modified in accordance with the following criteria the test temperature for creep stiffness and direct tension shall be numoc .
dynamic shear criteria on the pav residue shall be met at a temperature of numc or lower .
performance grade asphalts with a letter p suffix shall be modified through the use of polymer additives .
asphalt cements which have been enhanced to meet aashto mnum specifications through the use of polymer additives or other chemical means shall be referred to as modified asphalts .
liquid antistrip additives listed on the alberta transportation products list may be added to the asphalt product at a rate not to exceed num by weight of liquid asphalt .
the antistrip additive shall be heat stable and shall have no injurious effect on the asphalt product .
the antistrip additiveasphalt combination shall meet the aashto mnum requirements with modifications as outlined within this specification .
the type and percentage of antistrip additive used shall be listed on the delivery weighbills by the asphalt supplier .
the department reserves the right to discontinue the use of any asphalt product that fails to perform to the expectation or satisfaction of the consultant or department regardless of its compliance with the specifications .
num delivery handling and storage when requested by the consultant the contractor shall supply the consultant with the asphalt suppliers weighbills and records of all asphalt received andor returned on a daily basis .
the contractor shall provide maintain and reclaim asphalt storage facilities .
storage facilities for asphalt cement shall be capable of heating the material under effective and positive control at all times and shall contain provision for measuring and sampling .
the contractor shall follow the suppliers specified handling and storage requirements for each grade of pgac .
no asphalt type or grade shall be diluted or mixed with a different type or grade or with any other material without the specific approval of the consultant .
modified asphalts from different suppliers shall not be mixed regardless of grade .
the contractor shall prevent contamination of the asphalt by asphalt of another type or grade by solvent or by any other material .
asphalt storage tanks shall be emptied of one type or grade of asphalt and cleaned as necessary to prevent detrimental contamination of the asphalt before placing another type or grade of asphalt therein .
asphalt emulsions shall be protected from freezing .
section num specification num supply of asphalt august num num num sampling and testing num general the contractor shall obtain representative uncontaminated samples of all asphalt materials delivered to the project for quality assurance testing in accordance with attnum sampling asphalt and table num .
the consultant may require increases in the minimum frequencies specified for quality assurance sampling .
in addition all asphalt shall be subject to inspection sampling and testing by the department or its designated agents .
the contractor shall provide safe convenient access acceptable to the consultant for inspection and sampling of the asphalt and shall cooperate in the inspection and sampling process when requested to do so .
the contractor shall ensure that all asphalt delivery tanks are equipped with sampling valves maintained in good operating condition which are designed and located to enable safe representative sampling into the appropriate one or two litre containers .
if the contractor adds a liquid antistrip additive to the asphalt product asphalt samples shall be taken after the addition of the additive .
the contractor shall have the necessary procedures in place to safely sample the treated asphalt including where applicable an inline valve and sampling system .
num quality control quality control and quality control testing is the responsibility of the contractor .
quality control testing shall be carried out by a qualified suppliers laboratory or a qualified testing laboratory licensed to practice in the province of alberta .
num quality assurance the contractor shall deliver all quality assurance samples to the consultant on the day they were sampled .
the consultant will forward the samples to the departments designated quality assurance laboratory for testing and will accept or reject asphalt material based on the test results .
quality assurance testing for pgac will be in accordance with aashto rnum grading or verifying the performance grade of an asphalt binder .
table num sampling frequency for quality assurance material minimum frequency num for each asphalt type asphalt cement all grades one per five lots liquid asphalt asbc one per day prime tack curing seal and fog coat one for each num tonnes seal coats slurry seals one per day num minimum of one sample for each asphalt type or as listed above whichever is greater .
num acceptance asphalt materials supplied and incorporated into the work will be considered for acceptance provided the specified quality assurance samples have been provided to the consultant within the time frame specified and where both the work and the asphalt material meet specifications .
in the event quality assurance test results are not available to the consultant at the time he prepares the monthly progress payment estimates the consultant may request payment for section num specification num supply of asphalt august num num asphalt material which has not been accepted .
however should the contractor fail to supply the required samples or the asphalt material fails to meet the specification requirements the consultant may deduct such payments from the subsequent monthly progress payment estimates .
in the case where the contract does not contain a bid item for the particular asphalt material the deducted payment will be determined by the consultant and will be equal to the estimated value of the asphalt material that fails to meet the specification requirements .
if in the opinion of the department the failure to meet specification is significant enough to result in the probable unsatisfactory performance of the asphalt concrete pavement the contractor shall remove and replace all asphalt concrete pavement containing the rejected asphalt material .
removal and replacement of rejected asphalt concrete pavement shall be at the contractors expense and no separate or additional payment will be made .
asphalt materials which pass aashto m num specifications yet fail to meet the quality stipulations outlined in subsection num materials will be accepted however products from approved suppliers with a history of frequent test results indicating noncompliance to these quality stipulations as determined by the department will be removed from the products list .
num measurement and payment where the contract contains bid items for the supply of asphalt measurement will be based on the suppliers weigh bills however the consultant may check quantities delivered by weighing the delivery vehicles before and after unloading .
where the contract does not otherwise require the installation of a weigh scale for weighing materials the consultant will determine quantities by measuring the liquid level in the tank truck or storage tank at his discretion .
when asphalt quantities are determined by this method the contractor shall calibrate the distributor trucks and storage tanks .
if there is a variance between quantities measured by the consultant and the suppliers weigh bills the consultant will determine the quantity on which payment will be based .
where the contract contains bid items for the supply of asphalt payment for accepted asphalt material will be made at the applicable unit price bid per tonne .
where the contract does not contain bid items for the supply of asphalt accepted asphalt material will not be paid for separately .
payment will be considered included in the unit price bid for the contract item for which the asphalt material is used .
payment will be full compensation for supplying asphalt material to the project storing the material sampling and quality control .
num asphnum specifications for asphalt cements asphalt cements shall conform to the requirements specified in the following table premium grades of asphalt cements test characteristics a.s.t.m .
test methods numa numa numa numa absolute viscosity numoc pa.s penetration numoc num g num s dmm dnum dnum the viscosity and penetration values must fall within the area bounded by mnbam plotted as straight lines on a full logarithmic plot loglog with the coordinates of the points as follows the viscosity and penetration values must fall within the area bounded by abcda plotted as straight lines on a full logarithmic plot loglog with the coordinates of the points as follows the viscosity and penetration values must fall within the area bounded by cdefc plotted as straight lines on a full logarithmic plot loglog with the coordinates of the points as follows the viscosity and penetration values must fall within the area bounded by efghe plotted as straight lines on a full logarithmic plot loglog with the coordinates of the points as follows pt .
abs .
visc .
pen .
pt .
abs .
visc .
pen .
pt .
abs.visc .
pen .
pt .
abs .
visc .
pen .
m n b a num num num num num num num num a b c d num num num num num num num num c d e f num num num num num num num num e f g h num num num num num num num num kinematic viscosity numoc mmnums penetration numoc numg nums dmm dnum dnum the viscosity and penetration values must fall within the area bounded by mnbam plotted as straight lines on a full logarithmic plot loglog with the coordinates of the points as follows the viscosity and penetration values must fall within the area bounded by abcda plotted as straight lines on a full logarithmic plot loglog with the coordinates of the points as follows the viscosity and penetration values must fall within the area bounded by cdefc plotted as straight lines on a full logarithmic plot loglog with the coordinates of the points as follows the viscosity and penetration values must fall within the area bounded by efghe plotted as straight lines on a full logarithmic plot loglog with the coordinates of the points as follows pt .
kin.visc .
pen pt .
kin.visc .
pen .
pt .
kin.visc pen .
pt .
kin.visc .
pen .
m n b a num num num num num num num num a b c d num num num num num num num num c d e f num num num num num num num num e f g h num num num num num num num num flash point cleveland open cup oc minimum dnum num num num num solubility in trichloroethylene minimum dnum num num num num tests on residue from thinfilm oven test ratio of absolute viscosity of residue from thinfilm oven test to original absolute viscosity maximum dnum dnum num num num num ductility numoc cm minimum dnum num num ductility numoc cm min .
num num general requirements the asphalt shall be prepared by the refining of petroleum .
it shall be uniform in character and shall not foam when heated to numc .
the temperature at delivery to the site shall be between numc and numc .
section num specification num supply of asphalt august num num section num specification num supply of asphalt august num num august num num asphnum specifications for slow curing liquid asphalts slow curing liquid asphalts shall conform to the requirements specified in the following table for the grade designated by the consultant asphalt grade scnum scnum scnum scnum requirements min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
a.s.t.m .
test method flash point cleveland open cup c num num num num dnum kinematic viscosity at numec mmnum s num num num num num num num num num num num dnum distillation test total distillate to numc by volume num num num num num num num num tltnum distillation residue kinematic viscosity at numc mmnums num num num num num num num num num num num num num num dnum asphalt residue residue of num penetration by mass num num num num dnum ductility of num penetration residue at numc cmnum num num num num dnum solubility of distillation residue to numc in trichloroethylene by mass num num num num dnum water by mass or volume num num num num dnum delivery temperature c num num num num num num num num num if the ductility at numc is less than num the material will be acceptable if its ductility at numc is more than num .
num alberta transportation laboratory test .
general requirements the asphalt shall not foam when heated to the application temperature range recommended by the asphalt institute .
the asphalt shall be uniform in character .
august num num asphnum specifications for mediumcuring liquid asphalts medium curing liquid asphalts shall conform to the requirements specified in the following table for the grade designated by the consultant asphalt grade mcnum mcnum mcnum mcnum requirements min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
a.s.t.m .
test method flash point open tag c num num num num dnum kinematic viscosity at numc mmnum s num num num num num num num num num dnum distillation test by volume of total distillate to numc to numc to numc to numc residue from distillation to numc volume by difference num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num tltnum test on residue from distillation a penetration at numc num g num s dmm b ductility at numc cm num c solubility in trichloroethylene by mass num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num dnum dnum dnum water by mass or volume num num num num dnum delivery temperature c num num num num num num num num num if the ductility at numc is less than num the material will be acceptable if its ductility at numc is more than num .
num alberta transportation laboratory test .
general requirements the asphalt shall not foam when heated to the application temperature range recommended by the asphalt institute .
the asphalt shall be produced by the refining of petroleum and shall be uniform in character .
august num num asphnum specifications for rapidcuring liquid asphalts rapid curing liquid asphalts shall conform to the requirements specified in the following table for the grade designated by consultant asphalt grade rcnum rcnum rcnum requirements min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
a.s.t.m .
test method flash point open tag c num dnum kinematic viscosity at numc mmnum s num num num num num num dnum distillation test by volume of total distillate to numc to numc to numc to numc to numc residue from distillation to numc volume by difference num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num tltnum tests on residue from distillation a penetration at numc num g num s dmm b ductility at numc cm num c solubility in trichloroethylene by mass num num num num num num num num num num num num dnum dnum dnum water by mass or volume num num num dnum delivery temperature c num num num num num num num if the ductility at numc is less than num the material will be acceptable if its ductility at numc is more than num .
num alberta transportation laboratory test .
general requirements the asphalt shall not foam when heated to the application temperature range recommended by the asphalt institute .
the asphalt shall be produced by the refining of petroleum and shall be uniform in character .
august num num asphnum specifications for anionic emulsified asphalts anionic emulsified asphalts shall conform to the requirements specified in the following table for the grade designated by the consultant asphalt type rapid setting rs medium setting ms slow setting ss asphalt grade rsnum rsnum msnum ssnum ssnumh requirements min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
a.s.t.m .
test method viscosity at numc sf s viscosity at numc sf s num num num num num num num num num num dnum residue by distillation by mass num num num num num num num num num num dnum settlement in num d difference by mass num num num num num num dnum storage stability test num h by mass num num num num num num dnum sieve test retained on a no .
num sieve by mass num num num num num num dnum demulsibility num ml of num gl caclnum by mass num num dnum cement mixing test by mass num num dnum particle charge num negative negative negative dnum tests on residue from distillation a penetration at numc num g num s dmm b ductility at numc and num cmmin .
cm c solubility in trichloroethylene by mass num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num dnum dnum dnum delivery temperature c num num num num num num num num num num num upper limit on residue is governed by the consistency limits .
num the test requirement for settlement may be waived when the emulsified asphalt is used in less than num days time .
num the num hour storage stability test may be used instead of the num day settlement test .
in case of dispute the num day storage settlement test shall govern .
num cgsb numgpnumm sieves testing woven wire metric num particle charge test qualitative the rapid setting grades will be tested for particle charge according to the procedure described in astm d num with the modification that the asphalt deposit will for anionic emulsions be found on the anode positive electrode and shall be continuous and opaque .
in the event of dispute the test will be repeated using freshly distilled water as the wash water for the electrodes before evaluating the asphalt deposit .
general requirements all tests shall be performed within num days of date of delivery .
the asphalt shall be uniform in character and shall have a refined petroleum base .
august num num asphnuma specifications for cationic emulsified asphalts cationic emulsified asphalts shall conform to the requirements specified in the following table for the grade designated by the consultant asphalt type and grade rsnumk rsnumk crsnum qskh requirements min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
a.s.t.m .
test method viscosity at numc sf s viscosity at numc sf s num num num num num num num num dnum residue by distillation by mass num num num num num num num dnum settlement in num d difference by mass num num num num dnum storage stability test num h by mass num num num num num num dnum demulsibility .
num ml of num by weight solution of sodium dioctyl sulphosuccinate by mass num dnum oil portion of distillate by volume of emulsion num num num dnum sieve test retained on no .
num num sieve num by mass num num num num num dnum particle charge num positive positive positive positive dnum tests on residue from distillation a penetration at numc num g num s dmm num num num num num num num num dnum b apparent viscosity at numc pa.s see figure num c ductility at numcnum and num cmmin .
cm num num num num num dnum d solubility in trichloroethylene by mass num num num num dnum delivery temperature c num num num num num upper limit on residue is governed by the consistency limits .
num the test requirement for settlement may be waived when the emulsified asphalt is used in less than num days time .
num the num hour storage stability test may be used instead of the num day settlement test however in case of dispute the num day storage settlement test shall govern .
num cgsb numgpnumm sieves testing woven wire metric num replace sodium oleate solution num with distilled water use distilled water in all operations including wetting and subsequent washing of wire cloth sieves .
num particle charge test qualitative the emulsion will be tested for particle charge according to the procedure described in astm d num and it is required that the layer of asphalt deposited be continuous and opaque .
in the event of dispute the test will be repeated using freshly distilled water as the wash water for the electrodes before evaluating the asphalt deposit .
num ductility ductility will be measured at numc for num penetration asphalts and at numc for num penetration asphalts .
num requirements for storage stability and sieve test are waived if emulsion performs satisfactorily during application .
general requirements all tests shall be performed within num days of date of delivery the asphalt shall be uniform in character and shall have a refined petroleum base .
section num specification num supply of asphalt august num num asphnumb specifications for polymermodified cationic rapidsetting emulsified asphalt asphalt type and grade crsnump requirements min .
max .
a.s.t.m .
test method viscosity at numc sfs num num dnum residue by distillation by massnum num dnum oil portion of distillate by volume of emulsion num dnum storage stability test num h by massnum num dnum demulsibility num ml of num by weight solution of sodium dioctyl sulphosuccinate by mass num dnum sieve test retained on a num num m sieve by massnum num dnum particle charge test dnum test on residue from distillationnum penetration at numc num g num s dmm num num dnum elastic recovery at numc by ductilometer num dnum test b solubility in trichloroethylene by massnum num dnum ash content by mass of residuenum num tltnum notes num follow astm d num except that the final temperature shall be numc and shall be maintained for num minutes .
the ring burner shall be dropped when the temperature reaches numc .
after distillation and weighing the still shall be placed on a hot plate and uncovered .
the contents shall be stirred with a preheated spatula for num seconds approx .
num times .
num requirements for storage stability and sieve test are waived if emulsion performs satisfactorily during application .
num the ash content shall be determined when the manufacturer indicates that the polymer additive is not soluble in trichloroethylene .
general requirements all tests shall be performed within num days of date of delivery the asphalt shall be uniform in character and shall have a refined petroleum base .
section num specification num supply of asphalt august num num august num num asphnum specifications for high float emulsified asphalts high float emulsified asphalt shall conform to the requirements specified in the following table for the grade designated by the consultant grade hfnums hfnums hfnums hfnums hfnumm hfnumm hfnumm requirements min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
test num methods residue by distillation by mass num num num num num num num num num num num num num num par .
num oil portion of distillate by volume of emulsion num num num num num num num num num num num num num num a.s.t.m .
dnum par .
num viscosity at numc sf s num num num num num num num num num num num astm dnum sieve test retained on no .
num sieve by mass num num num num num num num num par .
num coating test see notes num num num num num num num num num astm dnum workability at numc pass par .
num storage stability test numh by mass num num num num num num num astm dnum demulsibility num ml num gl caclnum by mass num num astm dnum tests on residue from distillation a penetration at numc num g num s dmm num num num num num num num num num num par .
num b apparent viscosity at numc pa.s requirements outlined on the chart beneath figure num num num num num num num par .
num a c float test at numc s num num num num num num num par.anum d solubility in trichloroethylene by mass num num num num num num num astm dnum delivery temperature c num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num test methods are as outlined in cgsb cannummnum .
num upper limit on residue is governed by the viscosity limits .
num cgsb numgpnumm sieves testing woven wire metric num follow astm dnum except that the mixture of limestone and emulsified asphalt shall be capable of being mixed vigorously for num min .
at the end of which period the stone shall be thoroughly and uniformly coated .
the mixture shall then be completely immersed in tap water and the water poured off .
the stone shall then not be less than num coated .
num follow astm dnum except that the mixture of limestone and emulsified asphalt shall be mixed vigorously for num min .
then allowed to stand for numh after which the mixture shall be capable of being mixed an additional num min .
the mixture shall then be rinsed twice with approximately its own volume of tap water without showing appreciable loss of bituminous film .
after the second mixing the aggregate shall be at least num coated .
section num specification num supply of asphalt august num august num num asphnum specifications for emulsified asphalt primer emulsified asphalt primers shall conform to the requirements specified in the following table for the grade designated by the consultant asphalt grade sepnum sepnum requirements min .
max .
min .
max .
a.s.t.m .
test method viscosity at numc sf s num num dnum viscosity at numc sf s num num dnum flash point open tag c num num dnum residue by distillation by mass num num num num dnum oil portion of distillate by volume of emulsion num num num num dnum settlement in num d no visible separation num dnum miscibility with water num is not miscible with water pass dnum tests on residue from distillation a penetration at numc num g num s dmm b solubility in trichloroethylene by mass num num num num num num dnum dnum num upper limit on residue is governed by the consistency limits .
num follow astm dnum except add the emulsified primer to the water .
after two hours the water should be clear .
section num specification num supply of asphalt august num num asphnum specification for emulsified dust suppressants emulsified dust suppressants shall conform to the requirements specified in the following table grade edsnum edsnum requirements minimum maximum minimum maximum astm test method viscosity numc sfs numc sfs num num num num dnum residue by distillation to numc by mass num num dnum oil portion of distillate by volume of emulsion num num dnum settlement num days no visible separation dnum storage stability num hours no visible separation num dnum workability num pass pass flash point open tag c num dnum miscibility with water pass pass num dnum kinematic viscosity of residue from distillation numc mmnums num num num num dnum num if edsnum is retained in storage for an extended period of time it should be circulated prior to use .
num when num grams of sand and num g of emulsion are mixed for num minutes at ambient temperature the sand shall be num coated .
the mixture shall be oven dried at numc to remove all the moisture .
after cooling to room temperature the mix shall be easily workable for the next num hours .
num follow astm dnum except add the edsnum to water .
after num hours the water should be clear .
section num specification num supply of asphalt august num num asphnum specification for cold pour rubber filled emulsified bituminous crack sealant cold pout rubber filled emulsified bituminous crack sealants shall conform to the requirements specified in the following table type ecnum requirements minimum maximum test method uniformity num hours pass tltnum stormer viscosity at numc krebs num num tltnum solids content num astm dnum residue by evaporation procedure a ash content num tltnum rate of curing loss num num hrs .
num num days tltnum low temperature flexibility numc nums pass no cracks tltnum elastic recovery recovered num tltnum tlt refers to alberta transportation laboratory test section num specification num supply of asphalt august num asphnum specification for hot pour bituminous crack sealant hot pour bituminous crack sealants shall conform to the requirements specified in the following table type hcnum requirements minimum maximum test method softening point c num num astm dnum flash point cleveland open cup c num astm dnum penetration numc numg nums dmm numc numg nums dmm numc numg nums dmm num num num num astm dnum ductility numc cm num astm dnum solubility in trichloroethylene num astm dnum kinematic viscosity at numc mmnums num astm dnum section num specification num supply of portland cement august num table of contents num supply of portland cement num num general num num materials num num measurement and payment num section num specification num supply of portland cement august num num num supply of portland cement num general this specification covers the supply of portland cement .
num materials the contractor shall supply cement meeting the requirements of the latest version of canadian standards association anum cementitious materials for use in concrete for the type of cement specified .
unless otherwise approved by the consultant the specification requirements shall apply to the cement in the delivery vehicle at the cement storage site .
the contractor shall at his expense and to the satisfaction of the consultant prevent contamination of the cement by cement of another type or by any other material maintain records of times of receipt of cement delivery orders cement departure from the source arrival at the cement storage site and start and completion of unloading and provide this information to the consultant upon request .
the contractor shall provide the consultant with a certificate of compliance acceptable to the consultant for the portland cement to be used in the work .
the consultant may verify the quality of the material at any time .
sampling and testing for verification purposes will be in accordance with the latest version of canadian standards association anum .
num measurement and payment where the contract contains bid items for the supply of portland cement measurement will be based on the suppliers weigh bills however the consultant may check quantities delivered by weighing the delivery vehicles before and after unloading .
if there is a variance between quantities measured by the consultant and the suppliers weighbills the consultant will determine the quantity on which payment will be based .
where the contract contains bid items for the supply of portland cement payment for accepted portland cement material will be made at the applicable unit price bid per tonne .
where the contract does not contain bid items for the supply of portland cement accepted cement material will not be paid for separately .
payment will be considered included in the unit price bid for the contract item for which the portland cement is used .
section num specification num supply of fence material august num table of contents num supply of fence material num num general num num descriptionnum num abbreviations and definitions num num materialsnum num general for wood postsnum num split cedar posts num num pressure treated wood posts and bracesnum num metal stays and keeper wire num num two strand barbed wirenum num single strand barbed wire num num woven wire paige wire num num brace wire num num staplesnum num chain link fence materialsnum num pipe materialnum num fence fabricnum num gates num num concrete num num inspection sampling and testingnum num measurement and payment num section num specification num supply of fence material august num num num supply of fence material num general num description the work consists of supplying all required materials for the construction of fence including but not limited to a split cedar posts b pressure treated wood posts and braces c two strand barbed wire d single strand barbed wire e woven wire paige wire f brace wire g staples h metal stays i chain link fence num abbreviations and definitions wherever in these specifications the following abbreviations are used the intent and meaning shall be as follows a.s.t.m .
the american society for testing materials c.s.a .
the canadian standards association num materials num general for wood posts posts shall be of sound quality free from all decay shakes splits multiple crooks or any other defects which would render them structurally unsuitable for the purpose intended .
all posts shall comply with the minimummaximum top diameter as specified .
the top of the post shall mean the small end of the post .
the ends of the posts shall be cut square and the length of individual posts shall not vary by more than plus or minus num mm from the length required for the applicable installation .
num split cedar posts untreated split cedar posts shall be cut from sound timber and shall have an allowable taper from end to end not exceeding num mm in perimeter .
num pressure treated wood posts and braces pressure treated wood posts and braces shall be fir or pine timber as specified .
knots that are sound well spaced smoothly trimmed and which do not impair the strength of the posts or braces will be permitted providing they do not exceed num mm in diameter on any face .
posts shall be naturally round and shall have all bark peeled or otherwise removed .
allowable taper from end to end of posts shall not exceed num mm in diameter .
braces shall be sawn square or rectangular to the standard nominal dimensions as specified .
section num specification num supply of fence material august num num posts and braces shall be treated by pressure methods with num creosotepetroleum solution or a chromated copper arsenate solution .
the preservative agent shall conform to the requirements of the current edition of c.s.a .
standard num .
the minimum retention of preservative in the wood as determined by assay shall be as specified in the following table round posts sawn braces sample zone for assay mm from surface num num minimum net retention kgmnum creosote petroleum num num chromated copper arsenate cca num num requirements for the preservative treatment of round posts and sawn braces shall conform to the current requirements of c.s.a .
standard num with specific attention to num num and num .
num metal stays and keeper wire num metal stays metal stays shall be fabricated from high tensile steel sheet conforming to the requirements of the current standard specification for weight mass of coating on iron and steel articles with zinc or zinc alloy coatings a.s.t.m .
designation anum with additions as described in this specification .
metal stays shall conform to the following minimum requirements length num mm yield strength num num kg high tensile steel breaking strength num num kg barbed wire slot sized num mm x num mm reflective sheeting for metal stays shall meet or exceed the requirements as specified in astm dnum performance requirements type iii high intensity retroreflective sheeting .
num keeper wire high tensile galvanized keeper wire shall conform to the requirements of the current standard specification for steel wire colddrawn for mechanical springs a.s.t.m .
designation anum with additions as described in this specification .
keeper wire shall conform to the following minimum requirements length num mm yield strength num num kg high tensile wire breaking strength num num kg section num specification num supply of fence material august num num num two strand barbed wire two strand barbed wire shall conform to the requirements of the current standard specifications for zinccoated galvanized steel barbed wire a.s.t.m .
designation anum class num or better and shall consist of two strands of num mm thickness wire twisted with four point num mm thickness round barbs spaced not more than num mm apart .
each spool delivered to the job site shall be legibly marked showing the mass linear measure thickness and name or mark and address of the manufacturer .
num single strand barbed wire single strand barbed wire shall conform to the requirements of the current edition a.s.t.m .
designation anum standard specifications for zinccoated galvanized steel barbed wire .
the requirements regarding uniform twisting of strands will be waived .
single strand barbed wire shall conform to the following minimum requirements measure of wire per spool num m minimum mass per spool num kg wire thickness num mm minimum tensile breaking strength of wire num kg barb spacing num mm number of points per barb num the barbs shall be firmly and securely fixed in position .
num woven wire paige wire woven wire shall conform to the requirements of the current standard specification for zinc coated galvanized iron or steel farmfield and railroad rightofway wire fencing a.s.t.m .
designation anum class num or better except that section num of the a.s.t.m .
specification shall be deleted and replaced with the requirements pertaining to size and style of the woven wire mesh as hereinafter provided .
each roll delivered to the job site shall be legibly marked showing the length name or mark and address of the manufacturer .
all wire of a specified class for use on a particular project shall be of identical design unless otherwise specified by the consultant .
the woven wire mesh design shall conform with one of the following classes as specified num class c woven wire num mm overall height with not lighter than num mm thickness top and bottom wires and not lighter than num mm thickness filler wires .
vertical stay wires shall be spaced at intervals not greater than num mm .
there shall be a minimum of eight num horizontal line wires forming vertical spaces graduated from num mm at the bottom of the mesh to num mm at the top .
joints or knots between vertical stay wires and horizontal line wires shall be of a rigid hingelocking design which will prevent slippage of the wires .
the minimum weight of class c woven wire shall be num kg per metre .
section num specification num supply of fence material august num num num class d woven wire num mm overall height with not lighter than num mm thickness top and bottom wires and not lighter than num mm thickness filler wires .
vertical stay wires shall be spaced at intervals not greater than num mm .
there shall be a minimum of nine num horizontal line wires forming vertical spaces graduated from num mm at the bottom of the mesh and num mm at the top .
joints or knots between vertical stay wires and horizontal line wires shall be of a rigid hingelocking design which will prevent slippage of the wires .
the minimum weight of class d woven wire shall be num kg per metre .
num class e woven wire num num mm overall height with not lighter than num mm thickness wire throughout .
vertical stay wires shall be spaced at num mm intervals .
there shall be a minimum of eight num horizontal line wires forming vertical spaces graduated from num mm at the bottom of the mesh to num mm at the top of the mesh .
joints or knots between vertical stay wires and horizontal line wires shall be of a rigid tightlock design which will prevent slippage of the wires .
the minimum weight of class e woven wire shall be num kg per metre .
num class f woven wire num num mm overall height with not lighter than num mm thickness wire throughout .
vertical stay wires shall be spaced at num mm intervals .
horizontal wires shall be spaced at num mm intervals top to bottom .
joints or knots between vertical stay wires and horizontal line wires shall be of a rigid tightlock design which will prevent slippage of the wires .
the minimum weight of class f woven wire shall be num kg per metre .
num brace wire brace wire shall be num mm thickness soft galvanized wire and the weight of num m of wire shall not be less than num kg .
num staples wire staples shall be standard num mm long staples manufactured from num mm thick galvanized wire .
there shall be approximately num staples per kilogram .
num chain link fence materials num pipe material all pipe shall be seamless steel pipe fabricated in accordance with astm anum and cancgsb num butt welded hot dipped zinc coated with not less than num gmnum of total surface area .
line posts that support the fence where the fabric is continuous shall be num mm o.d .
pipes with num mm wall thickness terminal posts end posts corner posts straining posts gate posts and posts where fencing or fabric is discontinuous shall be num mm o.d .
pipes with num mm wall thickness top rails shall be continuous joined with couplings and shall be num mm o.d .
pipes with num mm wall thickness braces that extend from the terminal posts to the nearest line post along fabric attached to the terminal post shall be num mm o.d .
pipes with num mm wall thickness section num specification num supply of fence material august num num galvanized steel or aluminum post tops that permit the passage of the top rail with one cap for each post except where a combination post top cap and barbed wire supporting arm is required num fence fabric chain link fence fabric shall be zinccoated steel wire fabric in accordance with astm anum .
the fabric wire shall be num mm diameter woven into a num mm diamond mesh .
steel clamps bands clips tension bars and bolts shall all be hot dipped galvanized in accordance with astm anumm and of sufficient strength to maintain the integrity of the fence .
tension bars shall be num mm by num mm with lengths equal to the height of the fabric .
tension bands shall be num mm in width and num mm in thickness .
tension wire shall be num mm in diameter single strand galvanized with zinc coating of num gm .
num gates gates shall be fabricated from galvanized steel pipe in accordance with cancgsbnum consisting of num mm o.d .
pipes with num mm wall thickness for the frames and num mm o.d .
pipes with num mm wall thickness for the interior bracing .
welded joints shall be complete with galvanizing malleable iron hinges latch and latch catch with provisions for a padlock that can be attached and operated from either side of the installed gate .
suitable hinges to permit a numo swing both in and out .
double gates shall be equipped with a drop bar locking device and a hasp for locking with a padlock .
num concrete the concrete used for anchoring posts shall be class s concrete supplied in accordance with specification num supply of portland cement concrete of the standard specifications for highway construction .
num inspection sampling and testing at the time of shipment the contractor shall provide certification indicating the specification number according to which the material being supplied was produced and tested .
all materials shall be subject to inspection sampling and quality assurance testing by the consultant and the contractor shall provide safe convenient access acceptable to the consultant for inspection and sampling of the materials and shall cooperate in the inspection and sampling process when requested to do so .
the contractor shall be responsible for any costs resulting from such inspections including the cost of replacing any fence materials damaged by such inspection sampling or testing .
any material found unacceptable by the consultant shall be immediately removed and replaced with acceptable material by the contractor at the contractors expense .
num measurement and payment no separate payment will be made for the supply of fencing materials .
the costs of supplying and delivering fence materials to the job site will be included in the unit price bid for the section num specification num supply of fence material august num num applicable fence installation .
section num specification num supply of reinforced concrete culvert august num table of contents num supply of reinforced concrete culvertnum num general num num materials num num reinforced concrete pipe num num reinforced concrete box culverts num num joints fittings and bends num num precast reinforced concrete manhole risers and tops num num concrete masonry units for construction of catch basins and manholes num num rubber gasket joints num num cement mortar num num inspection sampling and testingnum num measurement and payment num section num specification num supply of reinforced concrete culvert august num num num supply of reinforced concrete culvert num general this specification covers the supply and fabrication of the following material by the contractor num reinforced concrete pipe num reinforced concrete box culvert num joints and fittings num precast reinforced concrete manhole risers and tops num concrete masonry units for construction of catch basins and manhole num rubber gasket joints and num cement mortar all references to standards or specifications refer to the latest edition at the time of tender .
num materials num reinforced concrete pipe num round and elliptical pipe reinforced concrete pipe shall conform to the material and fabrication requirements of the a.s.t.m .
specification c numm .
the following information shall be clearly marked on each section of pipe num the pipe class num the date of manufacture and num the name or trademark of the manufacturer .
this information shall be marked on the outside for pipe sizes up to and including num mm diameter and on the inside for pipe sizes over num mm diameter .
end sections shall be supplied with either square or sloped ends as required by the order .
the dimensions of the sloped ends shall conform to details shown on the drawings .
num curved pipe sections curved pipe sections shall conform to all the specification requirements of round and elliptical pipe as described in subsection num .
the ends of the pipe sections shall be beveled to the degree corresponding to the desired radius of curvature and shall be so formed that when the pipe sections are laid together they will form a continuous and uniform curved line .
num reinforced concrete box culverts reinforced concrete box culvert shall conform to the material and fabrication requirements of a.s.t.m .
specification c numm .
the following information shall be clearly marked on each concrete box section num box section span rise table number maximum and minimum design earth cover section num specification num supply of reinforced concrete culvert august num num num the date of manufacture and num name or trademark of the manufacturer .
each box section shall be marked by indentation on either the inner or outer surface .
in addition the word top shall be lettered with waterproof paint on the inside top surface .
end sections shall be supplied either square or beveled as required by the order .
the dimensions of the beveled ends shall conform to details shown on the drawings .
num joints fittings and bends the reinforced concrete box sections shall be produced with tongue and groove ends conforming to the fabrication requirements of astm specification cnumm section num joints .
fittings shall include special sections fabricated for the purpose of connecting manholes and branch lines to the main conduit .
the pipe sections utilized in forming the joint fitting or bend shall conform to all the specification requirements of round and elliptical pipe as specified in subsection num .
the sections shall be fabricated to form an integral unit and the class of pipe shall be not less than specified on the detail drawing for the unit .
the connection at the joint shall permit the utilization and development of the same degree of beam and circumferential strength as the main section of the conduit adjacent thereto .
num precast reinforced concrete manhole risers and tops precast reinforced concrete manhole risers and tops shall conform to all the material and fabrication requirements of a.s.t.m .
specification c num .
num concrete masonry units for construction of catch basins and manholes concrete masonry units for construction of catch basins and manholes shall conform to all the material and fabrication requirements of the a.s.t.m .
specification c num .
num rubber gasket joints joints for circular concrete sewer and culvert pipe using flexible watertight rubbertype gaskets shall conform to all the material and fabrication requirements of a.s.t.m .
specification c num .
num cement mortar the cement mortar mixture shall be composed of one part portland cement and two parts sand by volume .
the quantity of water in the mixture shall be sufficient to produce a stiff workable mortar .
the sand shall conform to the requirements of a.a.s.h.t.o .
specification m num or shall be an equivalent subject to approval by the consultant .
the cement shall conform to the requirements of a.a.s.h.t.o .
specification mnum .
num inspection sampling and testing all materials shall be subject to inspection sampling and quality assurance testing by the consultant and the contractor shall provide safe convenient access acceptable to the consultant for inspection and sampling of the materials and shall cooperate in the inspection and sampling process when requested to do so .
inspection sampling and testing of reinforced concrete pipe reinforced concrete box culvert and related joints and fittings shall be in accordance with the methods prescribed in a.s.t.m .
specification c numm and cnumm .
in section num specification num supply of reinforced concrete culvert august num num particular acceptance shall be on the basis of load bearing tests material tests and inspection of the completed product .
inspection sampling and testing of precast reinforced concrete manhole risers and tops shall be in accordance with the methods prescribed in a.s.t.m .
specification c num .
inspection sampling and testing of concrete masonry units for construction of catch basins and manholes shall be in accordance with the methods prescribed in a.s.t.m .
specification c num .
all materials which do not meet requirements of the specifications shall be rejected .
no rejected material the defects of which have subsequently been corrected shall be used unless approval in writing has been given by the consultant .
stocked materials even though accepted in delivery shall be subject to test and shall meet requirements of the specifications at the time they are to be used in the work .
num measurement and payment payment for the supply of reinforced concrete pipe and reinforced concrete box culvert including couplers related junctions fittings and appurtenances will be included in the unit price bid per metre for the applicable types and sizes specified .
section num specification num supply of polyvinyl chloride pipe august num table of contents num supply of polyvinyl chloride pipe num num general num num applicable specifications num num materials num num requirementsnum num lengthnum num dimensions for type psm pvc drainage pipenum num dimensions for ribbed pvc drainage pipenum num jointsnum num hydraulics num num markings num num inspection sampling and testingnum num measurement and payment num section num specification num supply of polyvinyl chloride pipe august num num num supply of polyvinyl chloride pipe num general the work consists of supplying polyvinyl chloride pipe of the following types type psm polyvinyl chloride drainage pipe ribbed polyvinyl chloride drainage pipe polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe for culvert liners nominal sizes include num num num num num num num num num num num and num mm diameter .
num applicable specifications all references to standards or specifications refer to the latest edition at the time of tender .
csa bnum largediameter type psm pvc sewer pipe and fittings csa bnum largediameter ribbed pvc sewer pipe and fittings astm dnum definition of terms relating to plastics astm dnum standard specification for pvc and cpvc compounds astm dnum standard method of determining dimensions of thermoplastic pipe and fittings astm dnum standard test method for quality of extruded pvc pipe by acetone immersion astm dnum test for external loading properties of plastic pipe by parallelplate loading astm dnum standard test method for impact resistance of thermoplastic pipe and fittings by means of a tup falling weight astm dnum standard specification for type psm pvc sewer pipe and fittings astm dnum standard specification for joints for drain and sewer plastic pipes using flexible elastomeric seals astm fnum definition of terms relating to plastic piping systems astm fnum standard specification for elastomeric seals for joining plastic pipe astm fnum standard specification for pvc largediameter ribbed gravity sewer pipe and fittings based on controlled inside diameter num materials all pipe and fittings shall be made of virgin pvc plastic as defined in astm standard dnum .
elastomeric seals gaskets shall conform to the requirements of astm standard fnum .
num requirements num length standard pipe length shall be num m or as requested by the consultant .
a tolerance of num mm on the nominal laying length will be permitted .
section num specification num supply of polyvinyl chloride pipe august num num num dimensions for type psm pvc drainage pipe nominal pipe size mm average inside diameter mm average outside diameter mm minimum wall thickness mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num dimensions for ribbed pvc drainage pipe nominal pipe size mm average inside diameter mm average outside diameter mm over ribs minimum wall thickness mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num joints all sizes of pipe shall be supplied with elastomeric gasket joints providing a watertight seal meeting the requirements of the latest version of csa bnum and astm fnum .
the joints shall be able to withstand num kpa hydrostatic pressure .
num hydraulics the manufacturer will provide the tested mannings n value that will be used to calculate pipe flow capacity .
section num specification num supply of polyvinyl chloride pipe august num num num markings all pipe supplied shall be clearly marked with the following information at intervals of not more than num m with num mm or larger letters .
manufacturers name or trademark nominal diameter material designation and cell class the applicable specification designation date of manufacture and plant designation num inspection sampling and testing all materials shall be subject to inspection sampling and quality assurance testing by the consultant and the contractor shall provide safe convenient access acceptable to the consultant for inspection and sampling of the materials and shall cooperate in the inspection and sampling process when requested to do so .
the contractor shall contact the consultant at least num hours prior to shipping the materials to coordinate any inspection sampling or testing at the manufacturing location and the delivery site that the consultant deems necessary .
any material found unacceptable by the consultant shall be replaced with acceptable material by the contractor at his expense .
num measurement and payment no separate payment will be made for the supply of polyvinyl chloride pipe .
the cost for the supply and delivery of all materials including gaskets and appurtenances to the job site will be included in the unit price bid for the applicable installation .
section num specification num supply of permanent highway signs posts and bases august num table of contents num supply of permanent highway signs posts and basesnum num general num num materials num num general num num signsnum num wooden postsnum num cluster frames num num concrete bases num num breakaway steel sign postsnum num mounting hardware num num material specificationsnum num measurement and payment num num wooden postsnum num cluster frames num num concrete bases num num breakaway steel postsnum num mounting hardware num num signsnum section num specification num supply of permanent highway signs posts and bases august num num num supply of permanent highway signs posts and bases num general the work shall consist of supplying concrete bases steel breakaway posts as applicable cluster frames wooden posts and designated highway signs as indicated in the special provisions as shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
num materials num general all materials shall be supplied by the contractor .
the contractor shall supply the consultant with certification from the supplier that the signs conform with the specifications and shall only purchase signs that are certified by the supplier to meet the specifications of the sheeting manufacturer .
num signs all signs supplied by the contractor shall be clearly marked with the following information manufacturers name or trade mark date of manufacture type of sheeting material the information shall be provided on a weatherproof label or some other form of permanent marking fixed to the back of the sign near the bottom righthand corner .
the label shall be smaller than num mm x num mm in size .
sign patterns shall conform to the uniform traffic control devices of canada sign pattern manual or to the alberta transportation sign pattern manual .
all other signs shall be as specified by the consultant .
all lettering on signs shall conform to the series type highway font from the standard alphabet for highway signs available from the federal highway administration chtonum washington d.c. num unless otherwise specified by the uniform traffic control devices of canada sign pattern manual or the alberta transportation sign pattern manual .
when signs not included in the schedule of signs are required the consultant will provide the following information dimensions of the sign dimensions of the lettering colours of the sign material specifications .
num wooden posts posts shall be pine or spruce structural framing no .
num or better as per nlga num rules par .
num c. posts are to be cca copper chromate arsenate pressure treated in accordance with csa num and csa num .
material supplied shall be free from wane and shall be clean and dry .
section num specification num supply of permanent highway signs posts and bases august num num post sizes to be supplied shall be num mm x num mm num mm x num mm and num mm x num mm dimension lumber in lengths ranging from num cm to num cm .
num cluster frames the contractor shall supply cluster frames suitable for the installation of multiple signs of up to num mnum in accordance with drawing teb numa ccluster frame .
the frames shall be painted with rust resistant aluminum paint or a metal primer and aluminum paint suitable to the consultant .
num concrete bases the contractor shall supply bases in accordance with drawing teb num .
the contractor shall provide the consultant with the manufacturers certification indicating that the base has been manufactured to specified requirements .
the contractor shall supply all material necessary to install the base including suitable backfill material .
cementitious and organic materials are not acceptable backfill .
num breakaway steel sign posts the contractor shall supply steel posts as shown on drawing teb num .
the contractor shall provide the consultant with the material manufacturers certification that the material meets the departments specifications .
the contractor shall supply zincrich paint i.e .
galvicon or equivalent for repairs to any damaged galvanized surfaces .
num mounting hardware the contractor shall supply all bolts and other hardware required to mount signs to posts or to frames and the frames to the posts .
all bolts and hardware shall be galvanized .
num material specifications num reflective sheeting reflective sheeting shall meet or exceed the minimum requirements as specified in astm dnum performance requirements type iii or type iv high intensity retroreflective sheeting .
num reflective sheeting for specialized application permanent highway signs the reflective sheeting supplied by the contractor for the following signs shall meet or exceed the performance requirements specified in astmdnum for type ix or type xi unmetallized cube corner microprismatic retroreflective element material .
products meeting these requirements are listed on the alberta transportation products list under the specialized applications category .
ranum stop ranum yield rbnum wrong way rbnum do not enter overhead guide signs without sign illumination section num specification num supply of permanent highway signs posts and bases august num num the reflective sheeting supplied by the contractor for the following signs shall meet or exceed the performance requirements specified in astmdnum for type ix or type xi fluorescent yellow sheeting .
products meeting these requirements are listed on the alberta transportation products list under the warning signs category .
wanum wanum wanum wanum wanum and wanum curve signs l r wanum chevron wanum low clearance wanum low clearance wanum hazard marker centre wanuml hazard marker object on left wanumr hazard marker object on right wbnum stop ahead wbnum yield ahead wbnum twoway traffic ahead wbnumt two way traffic ahead tab wbnum signals ahead wbnum prepare to stop wbnuma prepare to stop wbnumt prepare to stop tab wbnum railway crossing ahead wbnuma railway crossing ahead wcnuml left side pedestrian crossing ahead wcnumr right side pedestrian crossing ahead wcnumt pedestrian tab wcnuma watch for pedestrians on highway wcnum playground ahead wcnumt playground tab wcnumat num kmh tab wcnum school bus stop ahead wcnumt school bus stop ahead tab num backing plywood sanded one side  num or num hidensity  num or num hidensity aluminum extruded aluminum panels for major signs shall be alcan shape num with anodize treatment and shall conform to astm bnumm specification for aluminum and aluminumalloy extruded bars rods wire shapes and tubes alloys numtnum or numtnum .
aluminum for standard signs shall be a minimum of num mm flat sheet tension leveled sign grade aluminum and shall conform to the requirements of astm bnumm specification for aluminum and aluminumalloy sheet and plate alloys numtnum or numhnum .
section num specification num supply of permanent highway signs posts and bases august num num num measurement and payment num wooden posts no separate payment will be made for the supply of sign posts .
the cost of supplying and delivering sign posts to the jobsite will be included in the applicable unit price bid for the sign post installation .
num cluster frames no separate payment will be made for the supply of cluster frames .
the cost of supplying and delivering cluster frames to the jobsite will be included in the unit price bid for the cluster frame installation .
num concrete bases no separate payment will be made for the supply of concrete bases .
the cost of supplying and delivering concrete bases to the jobsite will be included in the unit price bid for the concrete base installation .
num breakaway steel posts no separate payment will be made for the supply of breakaway steel posts .
the cost of supplying and delivering breakaway steel posts to the jobsite will be included in the applicable unit price bid for the steel post installation .
num mounting hardware no separate payment will be made for the supply of bolts nuts washers or any other hardware required for breakaway post assembly or the mounting of signs cluster frames or other assemblies necessary to complete the work .
num signs measurement for the supply of reflective sheeting and backing will be made in square metres of the actual surface area of each sign .
the actual area calculations for the various types and sizes of signs are as shown in the departments sign catalogue and images found on the departments web site .
payment for signs will be made at the applicable unit price bid per square metre for supply of signs  plywood supply of signs  plywood supply of signs aluminum or supply of signs extruded aluminum .
this payment will be full compensation for the manufacture and supply of the signs to the worksite and all labour materials equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num specification num supply of line painting and message marking materials august num table of contents num supply of line painting and message marking materialsnum num general num num materialsnum num sampling and testingnum num supply handling and storage num num paymentnum section num specification num supply of line painting and message marking materials august num num num supply of line painting and message marking materials num general this specification applies to contracts that require the contractor to supply line painting and pavement message marking materials .
num materials the contractor shall choose the glass beads paint and durable marking materials to be supplied from the alberta transportation products list found on the departments website .
the contractor shall be responsible for ensuring that the quality of the paint and beads supplied meet the requirements specified .
the contractor shall advise the consultant of any change in paint formulation .
the contractor shall provide the consultant with the following information prior to commencing the work names and mailing addresses of the suppliers and manufacturers formulation to be supplied written confirmation from the manufacturer that the materials to be supplied meet all specified requirements .
the contractor shall verify that all materials delivered and used in the work are the type ordered .
num sampling and testing the contractor shall supply the consultant with quality assurance samples and the manufacturers quality control test results .
quality control results shall include a minimum of specific gravity hiding power dry to traffic and viscosity results .
a minimum of one quality assurance sample per batch shall be taken for glass beads as per tltnum sampling glass beads .
a minimum of one quality assurance sample per colour per batch shall be taken for paint as per tltnum sampling traffic paint .
the consultant will forward the samples to the departments designated quality assurance testing firm .
all materials shall be subject to further inspection and sampling by the consultant and the contractor shall provide safe convenient access acceptable to the consultant for inspection and sampling of the materials and shall cooperate in the inspection and sampling process when requested to do so .
num supply handling and storage the contractor shall make all arrangements for the supply and delivery of paint durable marking materials and glass beads and shall provide the consultant with records of all materials received andor returned on a daily basis .
the contractor shall provide maintain and reclaim all material storage sites .
storage of materials at department facilities will not be permitted .
no paint formulation shall be diluted or mixed with a different formulation or with any other material without the specific approval of the consultant .
section num specification num supply of line painting and message marking materials august num num the contractor shall take all necessary steps to prevent contamination of the materials .
materials shall be protected from freezing .
the contractor shall be responsible for the proper cleanup of waste or spilled material and the proper disposal of containers .
num payment all costs associated with the supply of required roadway line and message marking materials including but not limited to paint durable marking material glass beads and cleaning solvents shall be included in the unit prices bid for the work incorporating the materials .
no separate or additional payment will be made .
section num specification num supply of livestock guards august num table of contents num supply of livestock guards num num general num num descriptionnum num design standards num num materialsnum num general num num types of livestock guard num num load requirements num num equipmentnum num construction num num general num num sill and frame constructionnum num deck construction num num inspection sampling and testingnum num measurement and payment num section num specification num supply of livestock guards august num num num supply of livestock guards num general num description the work consists of supplying livestock guards designed for safe passage of motor vehicles while safely prohibiting the passage of livestock .
num design standards the contractor shall provide full shop drawings showing all materials including specification and grade of steel all material sizes andor dimensions and all connections including grades and sizes of bolts and sizes of weld .
drawings shall be fully dimensioned in metric units .
designs shall be certified by a professional engineer registered in the province of alberta that they meet the specified load capacity for each type of livestock guard outlined herein .
in cases in which standards are quoted such as the canadian standards association csa or the canadian welding bureau cwb the latest edition shall be used .
the contractor shall indicate patent information and ownership if applicable .
ownership of the registered design will remain with the vendor .
cbnum drawings referred to in this specification are found in the latest edition of the manual entitled cbnum highway standard plates .
num materials num general the contractor shall supply all materials required to complete the work to the standards shown on the drawings .
livestock guards shall be fabricated using new or used quality material as specified be painted with one coat of oil alkyd type primer and shall meet the requirements of the canadian general standards board cgsb spec .
numgpnumm .
weathering steel which does not require paint is also acceptable .
finished products shall be identified with a trademark and the date of manufacture stamped or welded in an area of the guard that can be easily read after installation .
fencing detail shown on the drawings is for information only and with the exception of the applicable fence post sleeves shall not apply to this specification .
num types of livestock guard the various types of livestock guards are as follows num standard highway type standard highway livestock guards are used on all paved and unpaved roads and are designed to carry legal highway vehicles at various speeds .
details are shown on drawings cbnum num mnum mnum mnum and mnum .
section num specification num supply of livestock guards august num num num range type range type livestock guards are designed to be used on lightly or seldom travelled roads with no more than standard farm or ranch vehicles .
details are shown on drawing cbnum num mnum .
num offhighway type offhighway type guards are used on logging or mining access roads where the load of the vehicles can exceed the legal highway limit .
there may also be frequent light or average truckcar traffic .
these guards shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable drawing for the required size with the increased load ratings detailed herein .
num load requirements in all load applications the load shall be placed on the livestock guard in a location causing the greatest stress to the member in question .
num live load requirements range type and standard highway type livestock guards shall meet the live load capacity requirements of csa bridge design code snum for design truck normal loading csnum truck num kn axle .
offhighway livestock guards shall meet the live load capacity requirements of csa bridge design code snum for design truck log haul loading csnum truck num kn axle .
num impact loading an impact load shall be applied concurrently with the live load .
the impact load for all livestock guard types shall be a vertical load equal to num of the live load or a vertical load equal to num of the live load combined with a horizontal load equal to num of the live load .
num equipment the contractor shall supply all equipment necessary to complete the work .
num construction num general all livestock guards shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable drawings .
welding shall be performed by a company approved by the canadian welding bureau to csa standard wnum with work performed to csa standard wnum .
num sill and frame construction the frame shall be designed to allow even distribution of live loads to the sills .
the ends of the frame which contact the road surfaces shall include a fill guard to prevent road material from falling between the deck and sills .
the fill guard shall be welded to the side of the livestock guard .
section num specification num supply of livestock guards august num num no splices are permitted in supporting members .
num deck construction deck construction shall consist of round structural tubing with dimensions as shown on the drawings arranged perpendicular to traffic .
a gusset reinforcement shall be used between each member .
this reinforcement shall not permit the buildup of gravel or snow which may allow livestock to cross .
fence post sleeves designed to accept a num mm outside diameter o.d .
post shall be connected through the deck and attached to the frame at an outward numdegree slant .
the top of the sleeve shall not protrude above the deck .
deck members shall be continuous over the length of the guard .
any splices shall develop the full strength of the member and shall be detailed on the drawings .
num inspection sampling and testing the contractor shall contact the consultant for coordination of inspection during production .
inspection sampling and testing of livestock guard materials may be carried out by the consultant in accordance with the latest editions of the applicable specifications and standards .
in particular acceptance shall be on the basis of load bearing tests material tests and inspection of the completed product .
where shop or plant inspections are made the contractor shall ensure the consultant has free access to all parts of the shop or plant as involved in the manufacture or production of the material ordered and shall furnish all such facilities as to provide a safe and adequate inspection of the production of the material .
all materials which do not meet the specifications shall be rejected .
no rejected material the defects of which have subsequently been corrected shall be used unless approval in writing has been given by the consultant .
stocked materials even though accepted in delivery shall be subject to testing and shall meet the specifications at the time they are to be used in the work .
the contractor shall supply to the consultant the material manufacturers certification that the material meets the departments specifications .
num measurement and payment payment for the supply of livestock guards will be included in the unit price bid per livestock guard for the applicable type and size as supplied and installed .
section num specification num supply and install smooth wall steel pipes august num table of contents num supply and install smooth wall steel pipesnum num general num num materialsnum num culvert materialnum num material for bedding backfill and sealing num num construction num num length of pipe required for installationnum num weldingnum num coring and pushing num num coring num num installation by trench or open cut method num num handlaid riprapnum num cleanup num num final acceptance inspectionnum num measurement and payment num section num specification num supply and install smooth wall steel pipes august num num num supply and install smooth wall steel pipes num general the contractor shall supply and install smooth wall steel pipe culvert through the existing highway without disturbing the existing surfacing structure as shown on the drawings and as directed by the consultant .
centerline steel pipe culvert installation shall consist of augering of the steel pipe through the existing highway embankment and installing the remainder of the steel pipe culvert by the trenched or open cut method as shown on the drawings cbnummnum .
the abbreviation for smooth wall steel pipe when indicated on the plans or used in the specifications is s.w.s.p .
num materials num culvert material smooth wall steel pipe num mm wall thickness shall be supplied by the contractor and shall meet astm specification anum gradenum .
any variation from the specified requirements for the smooth wall steel pipe shall be subject to the approval of the consultant .
the consultant has the sole right to reject material that in his opinion will not adequately meet the expected longevity of this new culvert installation .
the contractor shall have no claim against the department for all or part of material rejected and shall remove and dispose of rejected material at his own expense .
num material for bedding backfill and sealing the contractor shall either use approved native material or produce granular material for bedding and backfill in trenched areas in accordance with specification num aggregate production and stockpiling for the designation and class of materials specified .
the contractor shall supply aggregate in accordance with specification num supply of aggregate .
the contractor shall supply the required clay material for the clay seals at both ends of the installation .
num construction num length of pipe required for installation the contractor shall determine the total length of smooth wall steel pipe required for both the coring and trenched or open cut installations based on the design crosssections available from the consultant .
prior to commencing the installation the contractor shall liaise with the consultant to determine the exact length of pipe required depending on landowner requirements and onsite inspection .
num welding welding of smooth wall steel pipe shall only be performed by journeyman welders .
all welders qualifications shall be current and shall be available for examination by the consultant .
section num specification num supply and install smooth wall steel pipes august num num smooth wall steel pipe sections shall be joined together with a full strength and continuous butt weld which forms a watertight seal in accordance with csa standard wnum welded steel construction .
welding procedures shall be prepared and stamped by a professional engineer and shall be submitted to the consultant for review prior to welding .
when the ambient air temperature is between numoc and numoc the contractor shall preheat the smooth wall steel pipe to a minimum of numoc for a distance of num mm beyond the weld in each direction and shall shelter the section being welded from the wind .
when the ambient air temperature is below numoc the contractor shall provide suitable hoarding and heating of the sections being welded .
the consultant has the right to require the contractor to modify or cease his welding operation if in the opinion of the consultant adequate shelter and heating is not being provided during cold weather welding .
at the discretion of the consultant nondestructive examinations such as radiography and ultrasonic testing may be required to verify quality and strength of the welds .
nondestructive examinations shall only be done by qualified technicians and the results shall be provided to the consultant for review .
the contractor shall arrange and provide nondestructive testing when required by the consultant .
any defects found by such testing shall be repaired at the contractors expense .
num coring and pushing the installation shall be carried out by coring and pushing a steel pipe through the highway embankment without disturbing the existing pavement structure and in a manner approved by the consultant .
the invert elevations pipe length and pipe diameter shall be as shown on the drawings or as determined in consultation with the project consultant .
the contractor shall cut sections and join sections with a continuous butt weld to provide the necessary overall length as part of the coring and pushing operations .
the contractor shall be responsible for correcting and repairing at his own expense any roadway slides or failures that occur as a result of activities associated with the coring operations .
the coring machine shall be capable of excavating to a diameter not greater than num mm of the outside diameter of the pipe .
in the event that adverse soil conditions are encountered during coring operations which necessitate a change in construction methods the method of construction for the affected portion shall be approved by the consultant prior to proceeding with further construction .
num coring the consultant will provide line and grade at each end of the pipe from which the contractor shall accurately control the coring .
the contractor shall block shim or construct rails as required to ensure that the finished pipe meets the tolerance requirements for alignment and grade .
line and grade shall be continuously checked by the contractor using a laser .
the laser must be sufficiently capable of shooting the entire length of each operation and have a beam deviation not greater than num mm .
if the laser does not meet the requirements of the project the contractor shall replace it with a unit approved by the consultant at the expense of the contractor .
section num specification num supply and install smooth wall steel pipes august num num the consultant may also monitor the installation by performing quality assurance testing of the line and grade .
the contractor shall cooperate by making the workings available for checking at suitable intervals during regular working hours as required by the consultant .
discrepancies found by the consultant shall be corrected by the contractor immediately .
the return to established line or grade shall be at a rate not exceeding num mm per num m. such checks or lack of them shall not relieve the contractor of full responsibility for constructing the pipe to the line and grade as specified by the consultant .
num installation by trench or open cut method the pipe shall be installed on the prepared base true to the designed lines and grades unless otherwise established by the consultant .
separate sections shall be securely joined together with a continuous butt weld .
the contractor shall cut beveled end sections num or num slope as applicable as directed by the consultant .
the contractor shall use due care when installing pipe to avoid damaging the pipe .
damaged pipe shall be removed and replaced by the contractor at his own expense .
num bedding and backfill bedding and backfill material shall be placed as shown on the drawings and shall consist of approved suitable native material or imported select gravel or soil material as directed by the consultant .
all bedding and backfill material shall be free from frozen lumps and organic material .
backfill within num mm of the pipe wall shall be free from stones of diameter larger than num mm .
num handlaid riprap immediately following completion of the pipe installation handlaid riprap shall be placed in accordance with specification num riprap .
num cleanup after the installation has been completed the contractor shall cleanup the site to a condition similar to the surrounding area or as directed by the consultant .
this includes but is not limited to removal and disposal of all discarded utility lines tracks coring equipment and unused construction materials and debris from the pipe and construction area .
the contractor shall leave the pipe in a clean reasonably dry condition suitable for inspection by the consultant .
num final acceptance inspection the final installation shall be subject to the consultants inspection .
all damages such as bent or deformed edges or undulations of the pipe shall be corrected at the contractors expense .
the finished pipe culvert installation shall not deviate from grade and alignment by more than num mm .
any pipe placed which does not comply with these requirements shall be corrected to the satisfaction of the consultant at the contractors expense .
section num specification num supply and install smooth wall steel pipes august num num num measurement and payment measurement for the supply and installation of smooth wall steel pipes will be made in metres based on the total invert length of pipe installed including sloped end sections .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per metre for smooth wall steel pipe supply and install for the applicable size of pipe specified .
this payment will be full compensation for supplying and installing the s.w.s.p .
by coring and open trench methods welding preparing the culvert bed in the trenched sections supplying and placing of bedding and backfill materials supply and construction of clay seals and the supply and placement of handlaid riprap and all materials labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
when the contract contains a bid item for channel excavation excavation for the open cut of the trenched portion of the culvert installation as determined by the consultant will be paid for as channel excavation in accordance with specification num grading .
when the contract does not contain a bid item for channel excavation all excavation will be considered included in the unit price bid for smooth wall steel pipe supply and install .
costs associated with nondestructive testing of welds as directed by the consultant will be paid for as extra work in accordance with specification num general .
when the non destructive testing determines a weld is defective the initial nondestructive test for that weld will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
section num specification num supply of corrugated metal pipe and pipe arches august num table of contents num supply of corrugated metal pipe and pipe archesnum num general num num materialsnum num sloped end sections num num cut ends num num couplers num num coupler bands num num termination of lock seams num num recorrugated endsnum num perforated pipenum num polymer coated c.s.pnum num inspection sampling and testingnum num paymentnum section num specification num supply of corrugated metal pipe and pipe arches august num num num supply of corrugated metal pipe and pipe arches num general this specification covers the requirements for the supply of corrugated metal pipe and pipe arches up to num mm equivalent diameter by the contractor .
abbreviations for the various types of metal pipe are as follows c.s.p .
corrugated steel pipe c.s.p .
arch corrugated steel pipe arch c.a.p .
corrugated aluminum pipe c.a.p .
arch corrugated aluminum pipe arch num materials the contractor shall ensure that the supply and fabrication of all galvanized polymer coated and aluminum coated corrugated steel pipe csp and pipe arches including couplers and appurtenances are in accordance with the latest edition of canadian standards association csa gnum specification and the supply and fabrication of corrugated aluminum pipe cap and pipe arches including couplers and appurtenances are in accordance with the latest edition of aashto designation mnum and mnum with the following modifications previously installed pipe shall not be used .
all pipe supplied shall be clearly marked with the following information at intervals of not more than num m. manufacturers name or trade mark nominal thickness and type of metal platemetal coating for nonstandard coating specification designation plant designation code date of manufacture num sloped end sections sloped end sections are required for each culvert .
when num and num sloped end sections are specified templates cbnummnum and cbnummnum will apply .
num cut ends all cut edges of a sloped or square end section shall be made smooth by grinding so that all of the burrs are removed .
any damaged protective coating shall be recoated with appropriate material in accordance with csa gnum .
num couplers annular corrugated couplers for pipe greater than num mm in diameter shall be of sufficient width to cover at least two outside crest corrugations on each recorrugated end .
num coupler bands coupler bands for pipe greater than num mm in diameter shall have a minimum of three bolts .
section num specification num supply of corrugated metal pipe and pipe arches august num num num termination of lock seams on pipes num mm diameter or larger lock seams terminating at the cut edges of sloped or square ended sections shall have a num mm length fillet weld run along the lock seam at each cut edge .
the weld and surrounding area shall be recoated with the appropriate material in accordance with csa gnum .
num recorrugated ends spirally corrugated metal pipe shall have ends recorrugated to provide annular corrugations for couplers .
num perforated pipe perforated corrugated steel pipe shall be fabricated in accordance with the latest edition of csa gnum currently section num .
num polymer coated c.s.p .
when polymer coated c.s.p .
is specified the polymer coating shall be applied to both sides of the galvanized sheet prior to corrugating in accordance with classification grade num as specified in csa gnum section num .
any pinholes blisters cracks or lack of bond shall be cause for rejection .
num inspection sampling and testing all materials shall be subject to inspection sampling and quality assurance testing by the consultant and the contractor shall provide safe convenient access acceptable to the consultant for inspection and sampling of the materials and shall cooperate in the inspection and sampling process when requested to do so .
the contractor shall contact the consultant at least num hours prior to shipping the materials to coordinate any inspection sampling or testing at the manufacturing location and the delivery site that the consultant deems necessary .
any material found unacceptable by the consultant shall be replaced with acceptable material by the contractor at his own expense .
num payment payment for the supply of corrugated metal pipe and pipe arches including couplers and appurtenances will be included in the unit price bid per metre for culverts supply and install for the various types and sizes of culvert specified .
section num specification num supply of polyethylene pipe august num table of contents num supply of polyethylene pipe num num generalnum num applicable specificationsnum num definitions num num materials num num markings num num certificatenum num requirementsnum num joints num num perforated pipe num num hydraulicsnum num inspection sampling and testing num num payment num section num specification num supply of polyethylene pipe august num num num supply of polyethylene pipe num general this specification covers the requirements for the supply of polyethylene pipe by the contractor .
the work consists of supplying polyethylene pipe of the following types closed profile pipe a pipe product that has an essentially smooth waterway braced circumferentially or spirally with corrugations that are joined integrally by an essentially smooth outer wall .
corrugated pipe a single walled pipe where the wall is formed into a series of alternating ridges and grooves .
open profile pipe a pipe product that has an essentially smooth waterway braced circumferentially or spirally with outside corrugations .
num applicable specifications all references to standards or specifications refer to the latest edition at the time of tender .
cancsa bnum corrugated polyethylene pe storm sewer and drainage pipe and fittings astm fnum corrugated polyethylene pe tubing and fittings astm fnum large diameter corrugated polyethylene tubing and fittings astm fnum polyethylene pe large diameter profile wall sewer and drain pipe .
astm dnum specification for polyethylene plastic pipe and fittings materials astm dnum specification for polyethylene plastics moulding and extrusion materials aashto mnum corrugated polyethylene drainage tubing aashto mnum corrugated polyethylene plastic pipe num definitions polyethylene plastic plastic based on polymers made with ethylene as essentially the sole monomer .
profile pipe wall construction that presents an essentially smooth surface in the waterway but includes ribs or other shapes which can be either solid or hollow that help brace the pipe against diametrical deformation .
num materials the moulding and extrusion material shall be polyethylene plastic according to the requirements of cancsa bnum astm fnum astm fnum astm fnum astm dnum astm dnum aashto mnum or aashto mnum for the appropriate type of polyethylene plastic pipe .
section num specification num supply of polyethylene pipe august num num previously installed pipe shall not be used .
num markings markings for corrugated and openend closedprofile polyethylene plastic pipe tubing and fittings shall be in accordance with the appropriate standard .
all pipe supplied shall be clearly marked with the following information at intervals of not more than num m. pipe diameter pipe stiffness standard designation manufacturer num certificate upon request the contractor shall provide a certificate of compliance from the supplier indicating that the product was produced tested and conforms to all of the requirements of the appropriate specification .
num requirements the pipe stiffness for polyethylene plastic pipe or fittings shall be no less than num kpa for corrugated pipe and num kpa for open profile pipe at num deflection .
the closed profile pipe shall have a minimum ring stiffness coefficient of rscnum or higher depending on site loading conditions .
the requirements for corrugated polyethylene plastic pipe tubing and fittings shall be according to astm fnum astm fnum aashto mnum or aashto mnum .
the requirements for open and closed profile polyethylene plastic pipe and fittings shall be according to cancsa bnum or astm fnum .
num joints joining systems shall be bell and spigot gasketed type bell and spigot extrusion weld type heat fusion plain end extrusion weld integral connectors and shall meet the requirements of the latest version of astm fnum and csa bnum .
num perforated pipe perforated corrugated polyethylene pipe shall be fabricated in accordance with the latest edition of astm fnum currently section num .
num hydraulics the manufacturer will provide the tested mannings n value that will be used to calculate pipe flow capacity .
num inspection sampling and testing all materials shall be subject to inspection sampling and quality assurance testing by the consultant and the contractor shall provide safe convenient access acceptable to the consultant for inspection and sampling of the materials and shall cooperate in the inspection and sampling process when requested to do so .
section num specification num supply of polyethylene pipe august num num the contractor shall contact the consultant at least num hours prior to shipping the materials to coordinate any inspection sampling or testing at the manufacturing location and the delivery site that the consultant deems necessary .
any material found unacceptable by the consultant shall be replaced with acceptable material by the contractor at his own expense .
num payment payment for the supply of polyethylene pipe including joining systems and appurtenances shall be included in the unit price bid for culverts supply and install for the applicable type and sizes of pipe specified no separate or additional payment will be made .
section num specification num supply of thrie beam and wbeam guardrail august num table of contents num supply of thrie beam and wbeam guardrail num num general num num standards of referencenum num materialsnum num rails and terminal elementsnum num bolts nuts and washers num num postsnum num guardrail reflectorsnum num acceptance and inspection of material num num general num num inspection of wbeam guardrail materialnum num inspection of wooden posts and blocksnum num paymentnum section num specification num supply of thrie beam and wbeam guardrail august num num num supply of thrie beam and wbeam guardrail num general the work shall consist of supplying thrie beam modified thrie beam or wbeam guardrail as specified for use as hazard avoidance barriers .
num standards of reference alberta transportation drawings alberta transportation teb and rdg drawings are contained in the following appendixes of the roadside design guide num and are listed on the departments web site appendix bnum alberta weak post and strong post wbeam guardrail appendix bnum weak post box beam guardrail appendix bnum thrie beam guardrail all materials supplied by the contractor shall be in accordance with the following standards specifications or publications .
previously installed materials may not be used .
canadian standards association csa csa gnum and gnummnum structural quality steels csa gnumm hot dip galvanizing of irregularly shaped articles csa wnumm welded steel construction metal arc welding csa numm wood preservation american society for testing and materials astm astm anum carbon steel bolts and studs num psi tensile strength astm dnum retroreflective sheeting for traffic control astm enum magnetic gauge testing of galvanizing coating american association of state highway and transportation officials aashto aashto standard designation mnum of the latest edition corrugated sheet steel beams for highway guardrail task force num report a guide to standardized highway barrier hardware american road and transportation builders association artba artba technical bulletin no .
numb national lumber grades authority nlga nlga standard grading rules for canadian lumber num materials the contractor shall supply all materials necessary to complete the work .
section num specification num supply of thrie beam and wbeam guardrail august num num num rails and terminal elements guardrail shall consist of rail sections fabricated to develop continuous beam strength with the necessary safety end feature components .
all rail sections and other components shall match the design profiles and dimensions of the aashtoartba hardware requirements for full interchangeability of similar components regardless of the manufacturer .
the name or trademark of the manufacturer the metal thickness and the year of production shall be clearly and permanently stamped on each component clear of the splicing overlap and on the face opposite the traffic side .
the rails and terminal elements shall be manufactured from open hearth electric furnace or basic oxygen semispring steel sheet and hot dip galvanized after fabrication all in general accordance with the aashto standard designation mnum of the latest edition and shall conform to the relevant teb and rdg drawings .
rails shall be punched for splice and post bolts in strict conformity with the aashto standard to the designated number and centretocentre spacing of posts .
no punching cutting or welding will be permitted on site except for special details in unforeseen and exceptional cases with the prior approval of the consultant .
if any guardrail installation requires curved wbeam rails the contractor shall form these to the radius specified by the consultant .
the rails and terminal elements shall be manufactured according to the following standards metal properties of the base metal for the rails shall conform to the following requirements minimum yield point num mpa minimum tensile strength num mpa minimum elongation num in num mm length sheet thickness shall be in accordance with table num class a type num of aashto standard mnum of the latest edition with a nominal thickness of num mm num mm minimum .
the base metal nominal thickness shall be num mm num mm minimum .
sheet width for the wbeam rail shall be num mm with a permissible tolerance of minus num mm .
sheet width for the thrie beam or modified thrie beam shall be num mm with a permissible tolerance of num mm .
welding for the fabrication of terminal elements shall conform to the requirements of csa wnumm .
only welders welding operators and tackers approved by the canadian welding bureau in the particular category may be permitted to perform weldments .
rails and terminal elements shall be hot dip galvanized after fabrication in accordance with csagnumm .
num bolts nuts and washers bolts nuts and washers shall conform to astmanum and shall be hot dip galvanized in accordance with csagnumm drawing teb num .
section num specification num supply of thrie beam and wbeam guardrail august num num hardware for barrier cable terminals shall conform to task force num report a guide to standardized highway barrier hardware and the requirements of drawings rdg bnum and rdg bnum .
num posts num wooden posts posts and offset blocks shall be either douglas fir hemlock lodgepole pine or better and shall meet the requirement of the national lumber grades authority nlga for no .
num structural posts and timbers graded conforming to the nlga standard grading rules for canadian lumber .
posts and blocks shall be rough sawn with holes drilled to the finished dimensions shown in drawing teb num .
unless otherwise specified in the special provisions the standard length of posts shall be num m for weak post wbeam installations and num m for strong post wbeam installations .
posts shall be date stamped at the top of either side of the post not used for rail attachment with the last two digits of the year of fabrication .
the stamp shall be num mm x num mm and have an indentation of num mm .
stamping and drilling shall be completed prior to treating posts .
blocks shall be pressure treated in accordance with the current requirements of csa standard num with waterborne preservative of chromated copper arsenate cca or ammoniacal copper arsenate aca to num kilograms per cubic metre .
the penetration and retention of preservatives shall conform to the requirements of csa standard num table num minimum retention of preservatives in pressure treated wood for highway construction under the headings postguardrail guide sign and sight for posts and bridge hand rails guard rails and posts not in contact with ground or water .
num plastic posts the contractor has the option of supplying plastic guardrail posts in place of wooden posts except at the following locations the transition area between a roadway guardrail system and a bridgerail system .
as part of a proprietary end treatment such as a breakaway cable terminal bct or cable attenuator terminal cat which normally use wooden posts .
in any cable barrier system .
at any other installation specifically prohibited by the consultant .
plastic guardrail posts supplied by the contractor shall be a product from the alberta transportation product list as shown on the departments web site .
plastic posts shall be stamped at the top of the post on a surface not used for rail attachment with the following information the identifying product number or code and the year of manufacture .
section num specification num supply of thrie beam and wbeam guardrail august num num these markings shall be legible throughout the normal service life of the post .
the contractor shall supply the consultant with certification from the supplier that the plastic posts confirm to the applicable specifications .
num guardrail reflectors solid guardrail reflectors shall be supplied for installation on guardrail posts .
reflectors shall have minimum dimensions of num mm x num mm .
reflective sheeting meeting the requirements of astm dnum for type ix or xi sheeting shall be installed on both sides of the reflector .
the colour of the reflector shall be either white or fluorescent yellow to match the colour of the nearest painted roadway edge line .
num acceptance and inspection of material num general prior to installing any guardrail the contractor shall provide the consultant with copies of the manufacturers certificates verifying that the supplied guardrail material conforms to section num of csa gnumm for each of the mechanical and chemical tests and the supplied reflective sheeting conforms to astm dnum for type ix or xi sheeting .
num inspection of wbeam guardrail material hot dip galvanized coating shall be smooth free of beading or sharp projections at edges .
coating adherence shall prevent the peeling of any portion of the zinc coating so as to expose the base metal by cutting or prying with a stout knife under considerable pressure bond check .
a magnetic gauge will be used for checking thickness in accordance with astm standard enumc .
warped or otherwise deformed rails and terminal elements will be rejected as will those with injurious defects or excessive roughness of the zinc coating .
when the rail is laid on a flat surface the warpage shall not be greater than num cm .
num inspection of wooden posts and blocks the consultant may verify the penetration and retention of the preservative by the assay method .
posts and blocks shall be subject to inspection by the consultant when the bundles are opened immediately prior to use .
num payment payment for the supply of guardrail including all required hardware posts and reflectors shall be included in the unit price bid for guardrail supply and install for the applicable type of guardrail to be installed in accordance with specification num guardrail and guide posts .
no separate or additional payment will be made .
section num specification num supply of box beam guardrail and posts august num table of contents num supply of box beam guardrail and posts num num general num num standards of referencenum num materialsnum num steel box beam barriers num num productionnum num equipmentnum num measurement and payment num section num specification num supply of box beam guardrail and posts august num num supply of box beam guardrail and posts num general the work consists of supplying standard box beam or median box beam guardrail and posts for use as hazard avoidance barriers .
num standards of reference all material supplied shall refer to the following standards specifications or publications society of automotive engineers sae jnum sept. num chemical composition of sae carbon steels canadian standard association cancsa gnummnum general requirements for rolled or welded structural quality steel cancsa gnummnum structural quality steel csa wnum certification of companies for fusion welding of steel structures .
csa wnummnum welded steel construction metal arc welding .
csa gnummnum hot dip galvanizing of irregularly shaped articles .
american society for testing and materials astm anuma carbon steel bolts and studs num psi tensile strength astm anummnum highstrength bolts for structural steel joints metric .
references made to teb drawings in this specification refer to drawings found in the manual entitled typical barrier drawings which is published by alberta transportation and is available on the departments web site .
num materials the contractor shall supply all materials necessary to complete the work .
previously installed material may not be used .
prior to installing any guardrail the contractor shall supply the consultant with the manufacturers certification that the material conforms to the specifications .
all materials for standard box beam or median box beam installations shall be supplied in accordance with the drawings contained in appendix bnum of the roadside design guide available on the departments web site .
num steel box beam barriers num rails rails shall be welded or seamless structural tubing num wt grade and either class c or h conforming to cancsa gnumm .
section num specification num supply of box beam guardrail and posts august num the steel shall conform to a minimum standard impact energy requirement of num joules num ft lbs for a halfsize test specimen tested at numc and shall contain a manganesecarbon ratio computed based on heat analysis values of at least num .
the above requirements and the mechanical and chemical properties shall be verified by test results certified as outlined in cancsa gnumm and verified as outlined in the quality assurance section of the road authority specification .
num posts ground plates paddles brackets base plates and splice plates .
posts shall be american standard beam section .
posts ground plates paddles brackets and splice plates shall conform to csacan gnumm grade numg .
num bolts nuts and washers .
bolts nuts and washers shall conform to astm anuma .
selfdrilling selftapping fasteners shall be num indented hex washer head cadmium plated .
bolts nuts and washers used for terminal end anchorage treatment shall conform to astm anummnum .
num production num general requirements welding shall conform to csa wnumm and wnum .
no transverse welds are permitted on the rail sections .
all components and associated hardware except for selfdrilling selftapping fasteners shall be hot dip galvanized after fabrication and shall conform to csa gnumm .
all dimensions are subject to manufacturing tolerances unless otherwise indicated .
the individual components shall be capable of being assembled to conform to the finished structure as indicated on the drawings .
num fabrication flamecutting shall not be used to create the rounded ends of the slots for the post paddles .
the slots may be fabricated in one of the following ways two holes each num mm in diameter shall be drilled at the two ends of the slot and the material between may then be removed either by flamecutting or sawcutting or the entire slot may be punched .
the distance from the end of the slot to the outside face of the nearest vertical side wall shall be no less than num mm and cuts shall not extend past these rounded ends .
failure to comply with these requirements shall constitute grounds for rejection of the product .
all slots are to be fabricated before hot dip galvanizing .
when indicated in the material requirements an expansion joint shall be provided for at one end of the rails in accordance with drawings teb num and teb num .
section num specification num supply of box beam guardrail and posts august num num marking the name brand or trademark of the steel producer the year of production and the heat number shall be stamped so as to remain legible after galvanizing .
the stamped information shall appear on the underside of each rail .
num equipment the contractor shall supply all equipment necessary to complete the work .
num measurement and payment payment for the supply of box beam guardrail including all required hardware and posts will be included in the unit price bid per metre for box beam guardrail supply and install in accordance with specification num guardrail and guide posts .
section num specification num supply of cable barrier and metal posts august num table of contents num supply of cable barrier and metal posts num num general num num standards of referencenum num materialsnum num cablesnum num fittings num num posts and fabricated steel sections for anchor blocksnum num hook bolts and nuts num num productionnum num equipmentnum num measurement and payment num section num specification num supply of cable barrier and metal posts august num num num supply of cable barrier and metal posts num general the work consists of supplying cable barrier and metal posts for use as hazard avoidance barriers .
num standards of reference all material supplied shall refer to the following standards specifications or publications alberta transportation traffic control standards manual teb drawings referenced in this specification are found in the manual entitled typical barrier drawings published by alberta transportation .
society of automotive engineers sae jnum sept. num chemical composition of sae carbon steels canadian standards association cancsa gnummnum general requirements for rolled or welded structural quality steel cancsa gnummnum structural quality steel csacan numgnummnum zinccoated steel wire strand csa wnum certification of companies for fusion welding of steel structures .
csa wnummnum welded steel construction metal arc welding .
csa gnummnum hot dip galvanizing of irregularly shaped articles .
american national standards instituteamerican society for testing and materials astm anuma carbon steel bolts and studs num num psi tensile strength astm anummnum highstrength bolts for structural steel joints metric .
ansiastm anum ductile iron castings astm anummnum ferritic malleable iron castings metric astm bnuma copperbase alloys in ingot form num materials the contractor shall supply all materials necessary to complete the work .
previously installed material may not be used .
prior to installing any cable barrier the contractor shall supply the consultant with the material manufacturers certification that the material conforms with the specifications .
the contractor shall supply the following major components in accordance with the applicable drawings posts cw ground plates teb num hook bolts cw double hex nuts teb num galvanized steel cables num m rolls teb num tension bolts and ferrous castings teb num end fittings teb num section num specification num supply of cable barrier and metal posts august num num slicers and wedges teb num pressed ferrules and cable fittings teb num fabricated steel sections for anchor blocks teb num num cables the barrier cable and the cable used for pressed ferrule and cable fittings shall conform to csacan numgnumm for grade num steel wire strand hot zinc coated galvanized or class a electrozinccoated and shall be supplied in a continuous length of num m on expendable reels .
the cable shall be a num mm diameter numwire strand weighing approximately num kg per num m with a minimum breaking strength of num kn .
num fittings ferrous castings for the end fitting and splicer shall conform to astm anumm for malleable iron grade num or astm designation anum for ductile iron type num .
the tension bolt for the end fitting shall be sae num hot rolled fine grained steel and the ferrule shall be sae num rolled steel conforming to sae jnum .
as an option the tension bolt may contain a square or hex nut welded as shown on drawing teb num conforming to low hydrocarbon classification csa wnumm .
the ferrous castings tension bolt and ferrule shall be hot dip galvanized conforming to csa gnumm .
the ferrule shall be galvanized after it has been pressed onto the cable .
wedges shall be bronze conforming to astm bnum for alloy suitable for sand casting .
all fittings shall be so designed and be of such section as to develop the full strength of a single cable or cable assemblies as the case may be .
single cable assembly minimum tensile strength of num kn three cable assembly minimum tensile strength of num kn num posts and fabricated steel sections for anchor blocks posts shall be american standard beam section .
posts ground plates brackets and splice plates shall conform to csacan gnumm grade numg .
num hook bolts and nuts hook bolts and nuts shall conform to astm anuma .
selfdrilling selftapping fasteners shall be num indented hex washer head cadmium plated .
num production num general requirements welding shall conform to csa wnumm and wnum .
all components and associated hardware except for selfdrilling selftapping fasteners shall be hot dip galvanized after fabrication and shall conform to csa gnumm .
section num specification num supply of cable barrier and metal posts august num num all dimensions are subject to manufacturing tolerances unless otherwise indicated .
the individual components shall be capable of being assembled to conform to the finished structure as indicated on the drawings .
num pressed ferrule and cable fitting the ferrules supplied are for use at the end of the fitting cable and shall be pressed onto the end of the fitting cable .
the ferrule shall not slip from the cable when tested under a tensile static load to the limit of cable breakage .
num marking coils and reels of the guardrail cable shall be identified by an attached durable tag on which the following information is indelibly recorded galvanized steel wire strand manufacturers name nominal diameter of strand grade length of strand in metres weight of strand in kilograms per coil num equipment the contractor shall supply all equipment necessary to complete the work .
num measurement and payment payment for the supply of cable barrier including all required hardware and posts will be included in the unit price bid per metre for cable barrier supply and install in accordance with specification num guardrail and guide posts .
section num specification num supply of flexible guide post traffic delineators august num table of contents num supply of flexible guide post traffic delineatorsnum num general num num materialsnum num general num num specifications dimensions colour and constructionnum num weather resistance and durabilitynum num strength and flexibility num num reflective sheetingnum num measurement and payment num section num specification num supply of flexible guide post traffic delineators august num num num supply of flexible guide post traffic delineators num general the work consists of the supply of flexible guide post traffic delineators .
num materials the contractor shall supply flexible guide posts which return to upright positions following repeated impacts and passages of vehicles over them .
such collisions shall not cause serious damage to the post or vehicle .
failure to conform to the requirements specified herein shall be cause for rejection .
num general the posts shall be of uniform high quality and workmanship and be free from defects .
prior to installation the contractor shall provide a complete report of the physical properties of the post to the consultant .
this report shall include properties such as low temperature impact resistance afterimpact recoverability and weather resistance .
num specifications dimensions colour and construction the round posts shall have a minimum outer diameter of num mm and an overall length of num m. the semiflat fiberglass posts shall have a minimum width of num mm and an overall length of num m. the top num mm of the post length shall be black and the remainder shall be white .
the post shall be straight .
straight is defined as having no point along the length of the post any more than num mm removed from a perfectly straight edge placed parallel to any side of the post .
round posts shall be open at the top and bottom .
the surface of the post shall be smooth and free from irregularities or defects .
the surface of the post shall not be affected by cleaning using scrapers detergent and water or solvent .
reflective sheeting shall be securely fastened to the black portion of the post with three stainless steel staples inserted through the overlapped portion of the reflective strip .
if one piece construction is not used then the connections between the pieces shall be at least as strong as if constructed of a single piece .
the strength shall exist at temperatures ranging from numc to numc .
the reflective portion of round posts shall be visible from all directions and shall be of sufficient size so as to be recognizable in the dark as a guide post reflector .
the reflective portion of semiflat posts shall be visible to traffic .
num weather resistance and durability the post shall not be seriously affected by ozone exhaust fumes asphalt or road oils dirt vegetation deicing salts or any other types of air contamination or materials likely to be encountered after installation .
section num specification num supply of flexible guide post traffic delineators august num num the post shall withstand without serious damage all elements likely to be encountered after installation including hot numc or cold numc temperatures rain snow hail abrasion and physical abuse .
num strength and flexibility the posts shall resist without breaking tearing shattering or other serious damage one highway vehicle impact at a speed of num kmh at a test temperature of numc .
the post shall not bend warp or distort when installed at temperatures up to numc or installed in wind velocities up to num kmh .
num reflective sheeting the reflective sheeting material shall be superhigh intensity retroreflective sheeting meeting the minimum requirements as specified in astm dnum for a type x sheeting with class i pressure sensitive adhesive backing .
each post shall have a num mm wide x num mm long strip of reflective sheeting fastened onto the black portion of the post .
the reflective sheeting shall be centered in such a manner that num mm of the black portion is exposed both above and below the attached reflective strip .
generally the colour of the reflective strip shall be either white or fluorescent yellow to match the colour of the nearest painted roadway edge line .
when marking the edges of approaches located on curves or other concealed access points as directed by the consultant the colour of the reflective sheet shall be green .
when green reflective sheeting is required white sheeting shall be screen printed green using a process recommended by the sheeting manufacturer .
num measurement and payment payment for the supply of guide posts will be included in the unit price bid per post for flexible guide postdelineators round supply and install or flexible guide postdelineators semi flat supply and install in accordance with specification num guardrail and guide posts .
section num specification num supply of reinforcement august num table of contents num supply of reinforcementnum num general num num materialsnum num handling and storagenum num placing and fastening num num splicingnum num measurement and payment num section num specification num supply of reinforcement august num num num supply of reinforcement num general this specification is for the supply fabrication handling and placing of reinforcing steel .
reinforcement bars shall be supplied in the lengths and shapes and installed as shown on the drawings .
num materials all materials shall be supplied by the contractor .
reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of the csa standard gnumm grade num .
all hooks and bends shall be bent using the pin diameters and dimensions as recommended in the reinforcing steel institute of canada rsic manual of standard practice num sparks ave willowdale ontario mnumh numwnum phone num unless specified otherwise .
reinforcing bars shall conform accurately to the dimensions shown on the drawings and within the fabricating tolerance as shown in the rsic manual of standard practice .
epoxy coated reinforcing steel shall be prepared and coated according to the requirements of astm anum and the ontario provincial standard specification opss num material specification for epoxy coated steel reinforcement for concrete .
film thickness of the coating after curing shall be num m to num m num to num mils .
the epoxy coating material shall conform to the requirements of opss num material specification for organic coatings for steel reinforcement .
mesh reinforcement shall be supplied in flat sheets only .
num handling and storage the contractor shall handle and store the reinforcement in a manner that ensures it is not damaged or contaminated with dirt or other materials .
special care shall be taken when handling epoxycoated reinforcing steel so that damage to the coating is minimized .
epoxycoated reinforcing bars shall not be dropped or dragged and shall be lifted with nonmetallic slings .
bartobar abrasion and excessive sagging of bundles must be prevented and bundles shall be handled with spreaders and nonmetallic slings .
on site storage of the epoxy coated reinforcing steel shall not exceed num days and exposure to daylight shall not exceed num days .
if the exposure time exceeds or is expected to exceed num days the reinforcing steel shall be protected by covering with opaque polyethylene sheeting or equivalent protective material .
the contractor shall repair all damages to the epoxy coating using epoxy patching material .
if damaged areas rust before being repaired the rust shall be completely removed before the areas are repaired .
num placing and fastening all steel reinforcement shall be accurately placed in the positions shown on the drawings and firmly tied and chaired before placing the concrete .
when placed in the work reinforcement shall be free from dirt detrimental rust loose scale paint oil or other foreign materials .
section num specification num supply of reinforcement august num num bars shall be tied at all intersections except where spacing is less than num mm in each direction .
at these locations alternate intersections shall be tied .
spacing from the forms shall be maintained by means of stays spacers ties hangers or other approved supports .
spacers for preventing reinforcement from contacting the forms shall be precast mortar blocks or chairs of plastic or galvanized metal .
spacers shall have shapes and dimensions acceptable to the consultant .
any metal chairs protruding through the surface of the hardened concrete shall be cut back a minimum of num mm and the holes filled with a grout material acceptable to the consultant .
metal chairs shall not be used to support reinforcement on surfaces which are to be exposed or are to be finished where possible this reinforcement shall be supported entirely from above .
layers of bars shall be separated by precast mortar blocks or by other equally suitable devices .
the use of pebbles pieces of broken stone or brick metal pipe andor wooden blocks will not be permitted .
unless otherwise shown on the drawings the minimum spacing between bars shall be num mm .
all chairs or bar supports for epoxycoated reinforcement shall be nonmetallic or epoxy coated and be approved by the consultant .
tiewire for the coated reinforcement shall be plastic coated .
where field cutting of epoxycoated reinforcing steel is necessary and is approved by the consultant it shall be cut by methods other than torchcutting .
all cut ends shall be patched with epoxy patching material .
num splicing splicing of bars unless shown on the drawings is prohibited except with the written approval of the consultant .
splices where possible shall be staggered .
for lapped splices the bars shall be placed in contact and wired together in such a manner as to maintain a clearance of not less than the required minimum clear distance to other bars and the required minimum distance to the surface of the concrete .
in general suitable lap lengths will be achieved by the placing of bars of the lengths as detailed .
where the lap length can not be determined a minimum of num bar diameters lap length shall be provided .
sheets of mesh or bar mat reinforcement shall overlap each other sufficiently to maintain a uniform strength and shall be securely fastened at the ends and edges .
the edge lap shall not be less than one mesh in width .
num measurement and payment all costs associated with the supply of plain andor epoxy coated reinforcing steel and the supply of mesh reinforcement shall be included in the unit prices bid for the applicable structures containing the reinforcing materials .
no separate or additional payment will be made .
section num specification num supply of metal bin retaining wall august num table of contents num supply of metal bin retaining wallnum num general num num applicable specifications num num materials num num requirementsnum num markingnum num inspection sampling and testingnum num measurement and payment num section num specification num supply of metal bin retaining wall august num num num supply of metal bin retaining wall num general this specification covers the supply of galvanized metal cellular bin retaining wall of various sizes depending on the retaining wall design .
num applicable specifications csa gnum hot dip galvanizing of irregularly shaped articles .
astm anumm standard specification for steel sheet zinccoated galvanized by the hotdip process .
astm bnum standard specification for coatings of zinc mechanically deposited on iron and steel .
astm anumm standard specification for steel sheet carbon and highstrength lowalloy hot rolled and coldrolled general requirements .
astm anum standard practice for repair of damaged and uncoated areas of hotdip galvanized coatings .
astm anum standard specification for structural bolts steel heat treated num ksi minimum tensile strength .
astm anumm standard specification for steel sheet zinccoated galvanized by the hotdip process .
num materials metal bin retaining wall shall be fabricated from steel galvanized sheets to the requirements of the latest edition of american society for testing and materials astm anumm and anumm specification .
the steel components shall be manufactured in accordance with the latest edition of astm anumm specification and hot dipped galvanized to the latest edition of canadian standards association csa gnum with a minimum zinc coating designation of znum .
fasteners bolts nuts shall be manufactured in accordance with astm anumm and shall be mechanically galvanized to astm bnum gr num or hot dipped galvanized to csa gnum class num .
vertical connectors shall be fabricated from a minimum num mm thick grade numw steel and hot dip galvanized after fabrication to csa gnum specification .
num requirements all steel members shall be carefully formed to the required structural shape and punched accurately in the manufacturers plant and shall be straight and true .
all members of the same type thickness and length shall be interchangeable .
minor damage to the galvanized coating shall be repaired as specified in the latest edition astm anum specification .
section num specification num supply of metal bin retaining wall august num num the manufacturer shall provide drawings shop drawings that complement the consultants drawings .
any exclusions to the consultants drawings shall be noted and made very clear on the manufacturers shop drawings .
the manufacturers drawings shall clearly show the height and depth of all bins thickness of all stringers and spacers and any special details .
num marking each sheet or each num mm length of steel coil or strip shall be millstenciled with the following information with num mm or larger letters .
manufacturers name or trademark .
material designation and cell class .
nominal thickness of steel sheet in millimetres .
the applicable specification designation .
date of manufacture and plant designation .
num inspection sampling and testing all materials shall be subject to inspection sampling and quality assurance testing by the consultant and the contractor shall provide safe convenient access acceptable to the consultant for inspection and sampling of the materials and shall cooperate in the inspection and sampling process when requested to do so .
the contractor shall contact the consultant at least num hours prior to shipping the materials to coordinate any inspection sampling or testing at the manufacturing location and the delivery site that the consultant deems necessary .
any material found unacceptable by the consultant shall be replaced with acceptable material by the contractor at his own expense .
num measurement and payment payment for the supply of metal bin retaining wall including all necessary hardware and appurtenances will be included in the unit price bid per square metre for metal retaining wall installation for the various design types of retaining wall installed .
when more than one design of retaining wall is specified the designs will be shown by letter suffixes following the pay item .
section num specification num geotextile august num table of contents num geotextilenum num general num num materialsnum num nonwoven geotextilenum num woven geotextile num num construction num num measurement and payment num section num specification num geotextile august num num num geotextile num general the work includes the supply and installation of both nonwoven and woven geotextile at locations shown on the drawings described in the special provisions or as directed by the consultant .
num materials num nonwoven geotextile nonwoven geotextile includes continuous monofilaments or staple fibers .
random fibers that are physically entangled by punching with needles .
random fibers that are pressed and melted together at the contact points .
the nonwoven geotextile fabric shall meet the following requirements material specification num average roll value property astm test type a num type b num type c num grab tensile strength n dnum num min num min num min grab tensile elongation dnum num min num min num min mullen burst mpa dnum num min num min num min puncture n dnum num min num min num min trapezoid tear n dnum num min num min num min ultraviolet stability retained strength dnum num num hr .
num num hr num num hr apparent opening size mm dnum num max num max num max permittivity per sec dnum num min num min num min flow rate lsecmnum dnum num min num min num min minimum fabric lap shall be num mm note num all numeric values except a.o.s .
represent minimum average roll value as measured in the weaker principal direction num typically used with perforated pipe and similar applications num typically used in medium duty situations such as under class numm num num riprap num typically used in heavy duty applications such as under class num riprap .
num woven geotextile woven geotextile consists of continuous monofilaments staple fibres multifilament yearns or slit films that are woven into a fabric .
woven geotextile shall have the following material properties section num specification num geotextile august num num material specification num average roll value property astm test class num class num class num elongation d num num min num min num min grab strength n d num num num min .
num num min .
num min .
sewn seam strength n d num num num min .
num min .
num min .
tear strength n d num num min .
num num min .
num num min .
puncture strength n d num num min .
num min .
num min .
permittivity per sec d num num min .
num num min .
num num min .
num apparent opening size mm d num num max .
num max .
num max .
ultraviolet stability retained strength d num num after num hrs of exposure num after num hrs of exposure num after num hrs of exposure note num all numeric values except a.o.s .
represent minimum average roll value as measured in the weaker principal direction note num for woven monofilament geotextile the required minimum average roll value for tear strength is num n. note num default value .
permittivity of the geotextile should be greater than that of the soil .
the consultant may also require the permeability of the geotextile to be greater than that of the soil .
num construction unless otherwise directed in the applicable specification the placement of geotextile shall be in accordance with the following the surface to receive the geotextile shall be prepared to a relatively smooth condition free of obstructions depressions debris and soft or low density pockets of material .
the geotextile fabric shall be installed free from tensile stresses folds wrinkles or creases .
if more than one width of geotextile fabric is used the contractor shall either overlap the joints by a minimum of num mm with no stitching or overlap the joint by num mm and provide two rows of stitching at each joint .
the geotextile fabric shall be protected all times during construction .
wheeled or tracked vehicles shall not be allowed to travel directly on the geotextile fabric .
any geotextile fabric damaged during installation or during placement of granular material shall be replaced by the contractor at his own expense .
num measurement and payment supply and installation of geotextile will not be paid separately when the applicable specification states that the cost of supplying and installing geotextile is considered incidental to the work or included in the unit price bid for the work for which the geotextile is being utilized .
in contracts where the specification states the supply and installation of geotextile will be paid separately geotextile will be measured in square metres of ground covered excluding the area associated with laps or stitching .
section num specification num geotextile august num num payment for nonwoven geotextile supply and install for the type specified geotextile for stabilization supply and install for the class specified geotextile for materials separation supply and install for the class specified will be made at the unit price bid per square metre .
the price bid will be considered full compensation for all labour materials equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num permanent environmental protection devices august num table of contents num permanent environmental protection devices num num general num num abbreviations and definitions num num materials num num commercially available productsnum num pins num num rock num num stakes num num straw bales num num constructionnum num erosion control barrier silt fence num num rolled erosion control products num num rock check dams num num straw bale check dams and barriersnum num synthetic permeable ditch barriernum num maintenance num num measurement and paymentnum num excavation and backfilling num num erosion control barrier silt fence num num rolled erosion control products num num rock check dams num num straw bale check dams and barriersnum num synthetic permeable ditch barriernum num maintenancenum section num specification num permanent environmental protection devices august num num num permanent environmental protection devices num general this specification covers the installation of permanent environmental protection devices as defined in subsection num permanent environmental protection devices or procedures of the general specifications including silt fences synthetic permeable barriers erosion control soil covering rock check dams and straw bale barriers .
the work shall be in accordance with the best management practices for the various structures as shown in the design guidelines for erosion and sediment control for highways and as specified herein .
the location spacing and the estimated quantities of permanent environmental protection devices will be provided in the special provisions or will be as shown on the contract drawings .
num abbreviations and definitions b.m.p .
best management practice e.c.b .
erosion control barrier silt fence r.e.c.p . .
rolled erosion control products r.c.d .
rock check dam s.b.b .
straw bale barrier s.b.c.d straw bale check dam s.p.b .
synthetic permeable ditch barrier num materials num commercially available products silt fences synthetic permeable barriers and rolled erosion control products supplied by the contractor shall be one of the proven products from the alberta transportation products list found on the departments web page .
alternative products that meet or exceed the material and performance properties shown on the products list will be accepted subject to the consultants review .
num pins pins shall be made in either a t or u shape from num mm diameter minimum ungalvanized wire .
tshaped pins shall be made from a single length of wire to a height of num mm after bending .
the bar of the t shall be num mm wide and the free end of the wire shall be bent downward approximately num mm .
ushaped pins shall have num mm long parallel legs spaced num mm apart at the crown .
the contractor shall have the option of supplying biodegradable plastic or wooden pins compatible with the proven product as an alternative to ungalvanized wire pins .
for synthetic permeable barriers the pins shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num rock rock shall meet the requirements of class numm riprap in accordance with specification num riprap .
section num specification num permanent environmental protection devices august num num num stakes stakes used for silt fence and straw bale check dams and barriers shall be new construction grade or better spruce wood cut from sound timber and shall be free from any form of decay .
the stake dimensions shall be in accordance with best management practice .
broken or split ended stakes will not be acceptable .
stakes cut from other types of wood may be used subject to the prior approval of the consultant .
num straw bales straw bales shall be less than numyear old and shall show no signs of weathering .
bales shall be comprised of weedfree cereal crop straw such as wheat oats rye or barley .
straw bales shall be machinemade tightly compacted and bound with two rows of wire or synthetic string and shall be rectangular in plan and crosssection .
num construction num erosion control barrier silt fence silt fence barriers shall be constructed as early as practicable to maximize the entrapment of silt and shall be placed along the contour of the fill slopes at the elevation specified or as directed by the consultant .
the terminal ends of the barrier shall be at a marginally higher elevation to prevent water from bypassing them .
the geotextile used in the fence construction shall be selfedged at the top and shall be buried at the lower end in a shallow trench on the upstream side of the fence line as shown in the b.m.p .. num rolled erosion control products soil covering shall be placed immediately following seeding and fertilizing operations .
the contractor shall ensure that the ground surface is free from stones or other debris which would interfere with the uniform contact of the covering within the soil .
soil coverings shall be unrolled in the direction of expected water flow and shall be applied without stretching so that they loosely but smoothly contact the soil surface .
the top end of any ditch or slope installation shall be stapled and buried in a narrow trench that is at least num mm deep .
the soil backfill in the trench shall be firmly tamped in place .
longitudinal laps in covering installation shall be achieved by excavating a check slot of num mm minimum depth at the location of the lap and burying the upper end of the downslope blanket in the slot .
the upslope covering shall then overlap the downslope one by a minimum of num mm .
coverings lying side by side shall be lapped a minimum of num mm .
additional check slots shall be provided at a spacing of num m along slopes and num m along ditches measured parallel to the ground slope .
the covering shall be folded to contact the crosssection of the slot and stapled in place .
the trench shall then be firmly tamped .
pinning of r.e.c.p .
shall be as shown in the b.m.p .. a common row of pins shall be used for all laps .
num rock check dams the rock check dam shall be constructed in a num m deep key trench as shown in the b.m.p ..
section num specification num permanent environmental protection devices august num num typically the weir crest shall be num m above the ditch bed elevation unless otherwise directed by the consultant .
num straw bale check dams and barriers straw bale check dams and straw bale barriers shall be constructed in accordance with b.m.p .
no .
num and no .
num .
bales shall be placed in an open trench excavated in the ditch to accommodate the dimensions of the barrier as shown on the b.m.p drawing .
the bales shall butt tightly against each other and shall be pinned to the ground with wooden stakes as shown in the b.m.p ..
the joint between bales shall be caulked using loosing straw .
at the junctions where the sideslopes and backslope meet the ditch bottom one end face of the bales meeting at these junctions shall be distorted or otherwise modified so as to permit a snug fit with the adjacent bale .
the joint at these junctions shall also be caulked with loose straw .
num synthetic permeable ditch barrier the contractor shall integrate barrier installation with the installation of erosion control soil covering within ditch areas .
synthetic permeable barriers shall be shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations unless otherwise specified in the b.m.p .
no .
num .
num maintenance all permanent environmental protection devices shall be maintained by the contractor until the issuance of the construction completion certificate .
at no time shall silt or debris buildup be allowed to exceed more than onehalf of the above ground vertical height of the structure .
damage to the permanent environmental protection devices for whatever reason shall be immediately repaired by the contractor to the satisfaction of the consultant .
the contractor shall assume ownership of all silt and debris trapped by the permanent environmental protection devices and shall dispose of this material to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num measurement and payment num excavation and backfilling excavation and backfilling required for the installation of the permanent environmental protection devices will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
num erosion control barrier silt fence erosion control barrier will be measured in metres based on the length of the structure inplace .
payment will be made at the unit price bid for erosion control barrier silt fence and will be full compensation for all materials equipment labour tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num permanent environmental protection devices august num num num rolled erosion control products erosion control soil covering will be measured in square metres based on the surface area of the ground covered by the installation .
no allowances will be made for the burying or lapping of material .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per square metre for erosion control soil covering for the type installed .
this payment will be full compensation for all labour materials equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num rock check dams rock check dams will be measured by the volume of rocks present in each structure calculated to the nearest num cubic metre inplace .
payment will be made at the bid price per cubic metre for rock check dam .
this payment will be full compensation for supplying the riprap and all labour materials equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num straw bale check dams and barriers each row of bales in the structure will be measured in lineal metres .
if the structure contains multiple rows of bales the length paid will be the sum of the lengths of each row .
payment shall be made at the unit bid price per metre for straw bale check dam or straw bale barrier as applicable .
this payment will be full compensation for all labour materials equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num synthetic permeable ditch barrier each of the single rows of permeable ditch barriers will be measured to the nearest metre .
the quantity paid for will be the sum of the lengths of barriers in each row .
payment will be made at the unit price bid for synthetic permeable ditch barrier and will be full compensation for the supply of all materials equipment labour tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
erosion control soil covering will be measured and paid at the applicable unit price bid .
num maintenance maintaining permanent environmental protection devices will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
the removal and disposal of silt and debris trapped by the permanent environmental protection devices will be paid for as extra work in accordance with specification num general .
section num specification num gabion and gabion mattress august num table of contents num gabions and gabion mattresses num num general num num materialsnum num geotextilenum num rocknum num gabions and gabion mattress num num construction num num measurement and payment num num excavation num num geotextilenum num gabion num num gabion mattress num section num specification num gabion and gabion mattress august num num num gabions and gabion mattresses num general this specification covers the preparation of the ground surface to receive gabions the placement of geotextile and the construction of the gabion structures in place complete with rock filling in accordance with these specifications at locations shown on the drawings or described in the special provisions and in accordance with b.m.p .
no .
numac of the design guidelines for erosion and sediment control for highways .. num materials all materials shall be supplied by the contractor .
num geotextile when specified geotextile fabric shall be type b nonwoven in accordance with specification num geotextile .
num rock rock used for gabion structures shall consist of clean sound durable stones that are resistant to weathering and water action .
shale or other soft rock may not be used .
the stones shall be angular in shape with a height and width dimension of at least one third the length .
the gradation of the mixture shall be such that at least num percent by weight of the stones have a minimum dimension of at least num mm .
the maximum dimension of a stone shall be the lesser of num mm or the gabion structure thickness .
num gabions and gabion mattress the gabion materials supplied shall be a proven product selected from the alberta transportation products list .
albertnative products meeting the properties listed below will be accepted pending review and acceptance by the consultant gabion units shall be manufactured from wire in accordance with federal specification qqw numg wire steel carbon round bare and coated and shall be soft tempered .
additional requirements of the wire for gabion units are given in table num .
table num wire requirements for gabion units type property num galvanized basket galvanized and pvc coated basket galvanized and pvc coated mattress netting wire dia .
mm num num num selfedge wire dia .
mm num num num binding wire dia .
mm num num num num zinc coating gmmnum num num num pvc coating mm num num note num the allowable tolerance on all properties is num note num galvanized clips with a wire diameter of num mm may be used with galvanized baskets .
section num specification num gabion and gabion mattress august num num mattresses and baskets shall be cubical in shape and shall be assembled from independent rectangular faces laced or clipped together .
each face shall be a nonraveling wire mesh woven with a double twist into regular hexagonal openings measuring approximately num mm x num mm .
the edges of each face shall be selfedged by weaving the mesh around a reinforcing wire in a manner designed to prevent slippage .
the selfedging shall be secure at all points so that joints formed by tying adjacent faces along the selfedges shall be at least as strong as the internal mesh .
gabion basket and mattress shall be supplied complete with diaphragms and dividers from among the various sizes listed in tables num and num .
table num gabion basket sizes and dimensions dimensions and volumes size no .
number of diaphragms length m width m depth m capacity mnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num table num gabion mattress sizes and dimensions dimensions and areas size no .
no .
of dividers no .
of diaphragm length m width m depth mm plan area mnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num construction all stumps roots debris and rocks shall be removed and disposed of as directed by the consultant prior to placing gabions .
excavation to accommodate gabion installation shall be carried out to the lines and levels as shown on the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
geotextile shall be laid free from wrinkles onto the prepared ground surface .
laps in geotextile shall be a minimum of num mm with the upslope portion on top .
the edges of the geotextile shall be neatly trimmed or buried in the ground whichever is specified .
individual gabion units shall form the component parts of a gabion structure .
gabion cages shall be assembled by tying the appropriate faces together along the selfedges with binding wire .
the binding wire shall be tightly looped around every other mesh opening to form a spiral with single and double loops alternating .
diaphragms and dividers shall be affixed section num specification num gabion and gabion mattress august num num in position by similarly binding them to the mesh of the assembled cage .
free ends of binding wire shall not be made to project from exposed faces of gabion structures .
when assembled gabion baskets shall be divided by the diaphragms into compartments having a plan dimension of one metre square .
gabion mattress shall be separated lengthwise by the dividers into num m wide strips .
the diaphragms shall further subdivide the mattress into compartments that have a plan dimension of num m x num m. gabion units grouped together to form a gabion structure shall be securely bound to each other along all contacting selfedges in the same manner as the faces are bound in the assembly of the cages .
irregular shapes in any structure shall be achieved by overlapping and bending the rectangular components .
cutting of the mesh shall be minimized to avoid damage to the galvanized wire .
rocks shall be infilled in the assembled cage units either by machine or by hand .
when machine is used minor rock repositioning shall be done by hand to fill the voids between larger rocks and thereby achieve a dense structure .
rocks along visible faces shall be selected and placed by hand from among the larger sizes with a flat face toward the exterior to produce a semblance of a masonry structure and a neat and workmanlike appearance .
undue distortion in gabion units shall be avoided .
rock filing shall be carried out in stages with the difference in rock level between any two adjacent compartments limited to num mm .
further distortion of gabion baskets shall also be prevented by tying with binding wire the opposite faces of a compartment at the surface level of the rocks when the depth of fill has reached designated levels .
these levels shall be num mm and num mm for num m deep baskets and num mm for num m deep baskets .
cross ties are not required for num m deep baskets .
the exposed faces of a gabion structure shall be maintained true to vertical and horizontal alignment by stretching taut with a standard fence stretcher or other approved method before placing rocks within the baskets .
no such stretching is required for gabion mattress installation .
following the filling of each gabion unit the lid shall be affixed in position so that the selfedges coincide with the perimeter of the filled gabion unit .
the selfedges shall then be laced together in the same manner as described above .
num measurement and payment num excavation where excavation for gabions does not overlap with excavation for other work excavation will be classified and paid as channel excavation in accordance with specification num grading .
where the excavation for gabion overlaps excavation for other work only the excavation for other work will be measured and paid as if no separate excavation for gabions took place .
the removal and disposal of debris stumps roots etc .
will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
num geotextile geotextile will be measured by the square metre based on the surface area covered by the material with no allowance made for laps .
payment will be at the price bid for geotextile installation gabions .
this payment shall be compensation in full for the supply of all labour materials equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num specification num gabion and gabion mattress august num num num gabion gabion baskets will be measured in cubic metres based on the nominal dimensions of the baskets installed .
payment for gabion baskets will be made at the price bid per cubic metre for gabion basket .
this payment shall be compensation in full for the supply of all materials including rock and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num gabion mattress gabion mattress will be measured in square metres based on surface area of the mattress in place .
payment for gabion mattress will be made at the price bid per square metre for gabion mattress .
this payment shall be compensation in full for the supply of all materials including rock and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num traffic accommodation and temporary signing august num table of contents num traffic accommodation and temporary signing num num general num num traffic accommodation strategy num num requirements for traffic accommodation and temporary signingnum num typical drawingsnum num temporary construction signingnum num materialsnum num equipment num num erection of signs num num maintenance and removal of signs num num modifications to temporary construction signingnum num daily recording of temporary construction signing num num removal of existing signs and guidepostsnum num sequential arrowboards and variable message boardsnum num general num num stationary arrowboardsnum num truckmounted mobile arrowboards num num flagpersons num num general num num safety apparelnum num night time operations num num detoursnum num localized detour within or adjacent to the rightofway num num local road detour num num roadway maintenance and gravel surfacing num num prolonged shutdownnum num dust abatementnum num traffic accommodation for bridge construction num num monitoring traffic accommodation at the work zone num num compliancenum num paymentnum num general num num bonus and penalty assessment num section num specification num traffic accommodation and temporary signing august num num num traffic accommodation and temporary signing num general this specification details the requirements for traffic accommodation including the preparation of the traffic accommodation strategy and the supply installation maintenance and removal of temporary construction signing and traffic control devices which are specifically related to construction repair or emergency situations and which are generally removed when the work is completed or the situation returns to normal .
permanent signing requirements for normal use of the roadway are detailed in specification num permanent highway signing .
num traffic accommodation strategy the contractor shall prepare a traffic accommodation strategy detailing his proposed methods for accommodating traffic throughout the work zone .
the minimum requirements are specified in the department manual entitled traffic accommodation in work zones num numst edition .
any project specific requirements in excess of the minimum requirements will be identified in the special provisions .
the traffic accommodation strategy shall consist of drawings detailing the configuration of temporary construction signs and other traffic control devices in the work areas and written confirmation of the methods or procedures being used by the contractor to address specific traffic safety related issues or situations at the work zone .
when localized detours are required the contractors traffic accommodation strategy shall include detailed drawings of proposed traffic accommodation measures signed and stamped by a professional engineer registered in the province of alberta .
the detour plans shall be drawn to scale and shall include the proposed vertical and horizontal alignments .
detours shall meet or exceed the requirements of the following department manuals traffic accommodation in work zones num numst edition and section bnum of the highway geometric design guide num .
unless otherwise specified the contractor shall submit the traffic accommodation strategy to the consultant a minimum of num days prior to the preconstruction meeting for the project .
the consultant will review the traffic accommodation strategy and communicate any concerns to the contractor within num days of the preconstruction meeting .
any issues or concerns regarding the contractors proposed traffic accommodation strategy shall be addressed to the mutual satisfaction of the contractor and the consultant prior to the commencement of the work .
the contractor shall have no claim against the department resulting from the consultants failure to accept the contractors traffic accommodation strategy submission nor any costs incurred by the contractor to address concerns raised by either the consultant or the department during the review of the contractors traffic accommodation strategy submission .
num requirements for traffic accommodation and temporary signing unless otherwise specified the contractor shall accommodate public traffic through the work zone on a numhour per day basis using any means at the contractors discretion subject to the minimum requirements of the traffic accommodation in work zones manual and the following section num specification num traffic accommodation and temporary signing august num num the contractor shall make suitable provisions including the use of detours to accommodate all vehicular and pedestrian traffic safely and with a minimum of inconvenience through or around the work .
provide install maintain and protect traffic control devices such as signs barriers fences and lights at his own expense and in accordance with section num temporary construction signing .
install maintain and protect at his expense any additional traffic control devices that the department chooses to provide .
provide the required number of flag persons during all periods of active equipment operations which may affect normal traffic operations .
control his operations to ensure normal school bus operations are not interfered with .
ensure uninterrupted access to developments along the project .
obtain approval from the consultant prior to changing or disrupting existing accesses and road crossings .
carry out construction operations in one continuous operation at road crossings intersections and entrances for each phase of the work .
when working in large cut or fill areas stage construction as shown on standard drawing cbnummnum and as approved by the consultant .
provide and use such other methods or equipment necessary to accommodate traffic safely through the work site .
include provision in his traffic accommodation strategy for standard drawing tcsbnum for double fines when passing workers in the active work area .
the contractor is advised that the signing sequence shown on this drawing is provided as general guidance only .
the contractor shall adjust his traffic accommodation strategy and construction zone signing as required based on site conditions .
if the contractors operations are such that the active work area exceeds num km in length the contractor shall install interim speed limit and idnum signs at the approximate midpoint of the active work area .
if the contractor maintains separate active work areas where the cumulative length of the active work area plus any gaps exceeds num km the contractor shall sign each active work area separately in general accordance with standard drawing tcsbnum .
the contractor shall promptly make any modifications to the traffic accommodation operations deemed necessary by the consultant .
where in the opinion of consultant the contractor fails to adequately provide for the safety of the public for recurring safety issues and or when the contractor fails to comply with orders issued by the consultant regarding traffic accommodation operations the consultant may suspend work in accordance with subsection num authority to suspend work of specification num general .
the contractor shall remove or cover all traffic control devices when not essential for the safe accommodation of traffic in order to eliminate unnecessary inconvenience to the traffic .
the contractor shall coordinate his traffic accommodation measures with those of other forces that may be working at or adjacent to the work as required to accommodate traffic safely and section num specification num traffic accommodation and temporary signing august num num conveniently .
this shall not relieve the contractor of his responsibility for the safe accommodation of traffic over the whole of the work .
num typical drawings drawings detailing minimum requirements for temporary signing and other traffic control devices for typical rural and urban highway situations are contained in sections ii and iii respectively of the department manual entitled traffic accommodation in work zones num numst edition .
any drawings necessary to address nontypical rural or urban highway situations shall be developed by the contractor and included in the traffic accommodation strategy .
num temporary construction signing num materials the contractor shall supply all signing materials including sign posts weighted stands brackets and any required mounting hardware and miscellaneous materials required for the erection of temporary construction signs .
all signs barricades and other traffic control devices shall conform to the requirements for shape colour and size specified in section v of the traffic accommodation in work zones manual .
the orange portion of all signs barricades and other traffic control devices shall be fully reflectorized using high brightness retroreflective nonmetallized prismatic sheeting material which incorporates durable transparent flourescent pigment and meets the brightness requirements as specified in astm dnum for type viii sheeting .
unless otherwise approved by the consultant the orange coloured reflective sheeting supplied by the contractor shall be one of the proven products for temporary orange work zoneconstruction signs shown on the alberta transportation products list .
all other colours of sheeting material shall be type iii or type iv high intensity retroreflective sheeting meeting or exceeding the minimum requirements as specified in astmdnum .
larger construction signs or oversized signs may be used where conditions require greater visibility in order to be effective .
they shall be used in special circumstances where more than average attention value is required from the sign .
num equipment the contractor shall supply all equipment required to complete the work .
num erection of signs work on the project shall not commence until all necessary temporary construction signs and all other traffic control devices as proposed in the traffic accommodation strategy are in place .
when signs require frequent moves portable type signs mounted on weighted stands may be used .
portable signs shall be placed on the shoulder of the road such that the face of the sign is fully visible to oncoming traffic and the bottom of the sign is not less than num m above the road surface .
the stands shall be securely weighted and erected to ensure against being blown over by prevailing winds or gusts from passing vehicles .
nonportable signs shall be conspicuously posted and erected at right angles to the roadway with the bottom of the sign at a height of num m above the roadway surface and not less than section num specification num traffic accommodation and temporary signing august num num num m nor more than num m from the nearest traffic lane .
traffic signs and devices shall be moved and kept as close to the work area as practical as construction progresses .
objects within or immediately adjacent to the roadway which constitute a hazard to traffic shall be marked with alternating black and orange stripes attached directly to the object or erected immediately in front of it .
the use of signs shall be held to a minimum to prevent confusion .
stop signs shall be installed on all subsidiary roads local district municipal service or approach intersecting a primary highway detour route .
speed zones where required shall be posted as indicated on the applicable drawing contained in the traffic accommodation in work zones manual or as shown in the special provisions .
num maintenance and removal of signs poorly maintained defaced damaged andor dirty construction signs shall be replaced repaired or cleaned without delay .
special care shall be taken to ensure that construction materials and dust are not allowed to obscure the face of a sign .
signs not in effect shall be covered or removed and all construction signs shall be removed after the project has been completed .
num modifications to temporary construction signing the contractor shall be responsible for the supply and proper placement of temporary construction signs .
however in the case of potential danger to the travelling public or other circumstances where the consultant determines that signing is inadequate the consultant may direct that changes to the contractors operations be implemented to remedy the situation .
these changes may involve the use of different types andor sizes of signs modifying the number or locations of signs andor any other modifications or additions required to protect the safety of the travelling public .
num daily recording of temporary construction signing each day and as the work area changes the contractor shall record the location of all temporary construction signs and any other traffic control devices used at the work areas .
the contractor shall record this information on a form suitable to the consultant and shall submit it to the consultant on a weekly basis or when requested .
num removal of existing signs and guideposts unless otherwise specified all existing signs which must be removed in the prosecution of the work shall be carefully salvaged by the contractor .
guideposts which must be removed shall be disposed of .
critical signs necessary for the protection of traffic such as railroad crossing signs or stop signs shall be maintained .
payment for the removal and salvage of existing signs will be made at the applicable unit prices bid in accordance with specification num permanent highway signing .
all costs associated with the maintenance of existing signs and the removal and disposal of guideposts will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
section num specification num traffic accommodation and temporary signing august num num num sequential arrowboards and variable message boards num general when specified in the special provisions the specifications or as directed by the consultant the contractor shall use sequential arrowboards for the accommodation of traffic .
the contractor shall have the option of supplying either stationary arrowboards or truckmounted mobile arrowboards .
when specified in the special provisions the specifications or as directed by the consultant the contractor shall supply and operate an electronic variable message board in advance of the sequential arrowboard .
num stationary arrowboards stationary arrowboards shall meet the following requirements i minimum size of num m x num m num ft x num ft ii minimum of num lamps that are legible at a minimum distance of num num m iii fully adjustable light intensity on all arrowboard lights iv operating modes which include a sequential left arrow or chevron b sequential right arrow or chevron c sequential double arrow or chevron d horizontal bar e all four lamps in the extreme corners of the panel shall be flashing num truckmounted mobile arrowboards truckmounted mobile arrowboards shall meet the following requirements i minimum size of num m x num m num ft x num ft ii minimum of num lamps are legible at a minimum distance of num num m iii fully adjustable light intensity on all arrowboard lights iv operating modes which include a sequential left arrow or chevron b sequential right arrow or chevron c sequential double arrow or chevron d horizontal bar e all four lamps in the extreme corners of the panel shall be flashing num flagpersons num general when construction operations or work zone conditions cause interruption delay or hazard to the traveling public or anyone on the worksite and necessitates the use of flag persons the contractor shall provide and equip responsible flag persons for the direction and control of traffic .
the contractor shall ensure that flag persons are instructed in and use proper traffic control procedures appropriate for the prevailing conditions .
section num specification num traffic accommodation and temporary signing august num num flag persons shall have proof of certification from a recognized training program on traffic control procedures through construction zones .
the department will recognize traffic control programs administered by the alberta construction safety association however the department reserves the right to accept or reject certification from any other institute .
num safety apparel num coveralls flag persons shall be dressed in coveralls which meet the class num level num requirements of csa znum high visibility safety apparel .
each pair of coveralls shall have a permanent label affixed certifying compliance with class num level num of csa znum .
the colour of the coveralls shall be fluorescent yellowgreen with silver retroreflective striping .
the retroreflective striping shall be a minimum of num mm wide and shall be sewn onto a num mm wide fluorescent redorange background material .
flag person safety apparel shall be kept clean and in good condition at all times .
faded torn andor dirty coveralls or coveralls without csa certification labels will not be acceptable and shall be replaced by the contractor .
num headgear prior to commencement of the work the contractor shall identify and assess existing and potential hazards at the project site .
where there is a foreseeable risk of injury to a workers head flag persons shall wear fluorescent orange protective hardhats meeting the requirements of csa standard znum .
where no foreseeable risk of head injury exists flag persons will be permitted to wear any type of fluorescent orange headgear .
num night time operations during hours of darkness flag persons shall be equipped with hand held red traffic signal wands of sufficient brightness to be clearly visible to approaching traffic .
in addition flagging stations shall be illuminated by overhead lighting and signs indicating hazardous conditions andor signs requiring increased attention shall be marked with flashers .
num detours unless otherwise indicated in the special provisions or shown on the drawings the contractor shall have the option of constructing temporary localized detours or utilizing local roads for the accommodation of public traffic around major phases of the work .
num localized detour within or adjacent to the rightofway subject to review by the consultant localized detours within or adjacent to the rightofway may be utilized by the contractor to carry traffic around the work .
if the consultant directs the construction of a localized detour the consultant will obtain any required environmental authorizations andor rightofway easements and will arrange for the temporary relocation of utilities .
when the consultant directs that a localized detour be constructed payment for the construction and removal of the detour including gravel surfacing will be made at the applicable unit prices bid for the types of work incorporated .
section num specification num traffic accommodation and temporary signing august num num if the contractor elects to accommodate traffic using localized detours the contractor shall be responsible for the design construction and removal of the localized detour .
in addition the contractor shall be responsible for obtaining any required environmental authorizations andor rightofway easements the temporary relocation of any utilities and the reclamation of disturbed areas to a condition similar to that which existed prior to the disturbance .
prior to the commencement of any construction the contractor shall provide a copy of the authorizations and easement agreements to the consultant for review .
when the contractor elects to construct a localized detour all associated costs including but not limited to design construction maintenance and removal of the detour will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
num local road detour when traffic is diverted entirely off the rightofway via local roads the contractor shall establish and maintain local road detour signing complete with signs at every intersection in accordance with the plans and specifications .
the contractor shall initially condition maintain and restore roads used as local road detours to the satisfaction of the agency having jurisdiction and in the case of provincially owned or controlled roads to the satisfaction of the consultant .
the contractor shall maintain the local roads including dust abatement as required and following completion of construction operations restore the roads to a condition comparable to that which existed prior to the commencement of the work .
if the contractor elects to use local roads to accommodate public traffic the contractor shall be solely responsible for obtaining authority to utilize the local road detour from the agency having jurisdiction .
in situations where the consultant directs the use of a local road detour the consultant will obtain the necessary approvals from the local road authority .
unless otherwise stated in the special provisions all costs associated with local road detours including but not limited to local road signing initial road conditioning maintenance dust abatement gravel surfacing and local road restoration will be considered the incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
num roadway maintenance and gravel surfacing when the work requires disturbance of the surface of an existing roadway that is carrying public traffic the contractor shall at his own expense keep the disturbed areas of the travelled lanes well graded free of potholes and of sufficient width for the required number of travel lanes .
when in the opinion of the consultant surfacing gravel is required for traffic accommodation on areas disturbed by the contractor prior to the completion of the work on these areas the contractor shall supply and place surfacing gravel to the satisfaction of the consultant .
for detours payment for the supply and placement of surfacing gravel will be made in accordance with subsections num localized detour within or adjacent to the rightofway andor num local road detours as applicable .
for haul roads from gravel pits payment for the supply and placement of surfacing gravel will be in accordance with specification num hauling .
for roads other than detours and haul roads from gravel pits the supply and placement of section num specification num traffic accommodation and temporary signing august num num surfacing gravel shall be at the contractors expense except that the department will pay for the truck haul of the gravel at the rate specified in subsection num interim crushing hauling and stockpiling of specification num aggregate production and stockpiling .
if the contract contains a department source option for the supply of aggregate the contractor may obtain the pitrun material necessary for gravel surfacing from the department source at no cost .
if the contractor fails to promptly carry out maintenance andor the application of surfacing gravel when directed by the consultant the department may make other arrangements to have the work done and deduct the cost thereof from any money owing to the contractor .
the contractor will not be responsible for maintenance of those areas of an existing roadway which are to be constructed or reconstructed but which have not yet been disturbed by the contractors construction or hauling activities .
num prolonged shutdown prior to any prolonged shutdown of construction the contractor shall ensure that any disturbed roadway surface is restored to a condition suitable for traffic operations and acceptable to the consultant .
the contractor will not be responsible for normal winter snow and ice control for traffic accommodation during the prolonged shutdown .
prior to commencing any prolonged shutdown of the work the contractor shall host a meeting between the contractor the consultant the project sponsor and the regional maintenance contractor .
the purpose of the meeting shall be to develop a shutdown plan based on the specific needs and requirements of the project .
the shutdown plan shall outline the contractors methods and procedures for monitoring and maintaining the project during the winter shutdown period and will outline any responsibilities of the other parties .
notwithstanding the above no component of the shutdown plan will negate the contractors responsibilities for the project except for snow and ice control .
num dust abatement the contractor shall maintain detours and disturbed roadways that carry traffic within the project limits free of excessive dust .
in this case disturbed roadways shall mean sections of roadway under construction andor sections of roadway being used by the contractor for hauling of equipment or materials .
the contractor shall supply and apply all dust abatement materials at his expense .
if the contractor fails to promptly undertake dust abatement measures the department may make other arrangements to have the work done and deduct the cost thereof from any money owing to the contractor .
dust abatement requirements for haul roads are detailed in specification num hauling .
num traffic accommodation for bridge construction in addition to the requirements stated herein the following requirements are required for work involving bridges andor bridge culverts .
detailed traffic control plans taking into account site specific conditions that may impact the work shall be provided for each bridge site .
section num specification num traffic accommodation and temporary signing august num num traffic control shall be in place only during the time it is applicable to the work on the bridge site .
traffic control signals if required shall be adjusted to the traffic demands encountered .
the contractor shall minimize inconvenience to traffic as much as possible and shall provide the widest traffic roadway width practicable .
the minimum traffic roadway width as shown or specified shall be maintained and be available to public traffic at all times .
the contractor shall anticipate and as practical accommodate wide load vehicles that may enter the work zone .
on projects with a bridge construction component the tender documents may contain a bid item for traffic accommodation for bridge construction .
generally this bid item will be included only on projects where traffic accommodation is required by localized detour or staged construction and the tender documents do not include separate bid items for the detour construction work or when other specialized requirements are detailed in the special provisions .
when a lump sum bid item for traffic accommodation for bridge construction is included payment will be considered full compensation for all costs associated with the accommodation of public traffic through the site by the use of a localized detour staged construction the implementation of other measures described in the special provisions or any combination thereof including the supply installation monitoring maintenance and removal of all required temporary traffic control measures barriers signs and devices and all labour materials equipment tools and incidentals necessary to carry out the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
payment will be made as follows when the contractor accommodates traffic using a localized detour num of the lump sum price bid will be paid once the detour is inplace and fully operational .
the remaining num of the lump sum price bid will be paid once the detour and all temporary traffic control measures have been removed the site is opened to the unrestricted flow of public traffic all associated cleanup has been completed and the area has been restored to a condition satisfactory to the consultant .
when the contractor accommodates traffic using staged construction num of the lump sum price bid will be paid once the initial stage is inplace and fully operational .
the second num of the lump sum price bid will be paid once the traffic is switched to the second stage .
the remaining num of the lump sum price bid will be paid once all temporary traffic control measures have been removed the site is opened to the unrestricted flow of public traffic and all associated cleanup has been completed to the satisfaction of the consultant .
when the contractor accommodates traffic through the implementation of methods described in the special provisions other than the use of a localized detour or staged construction num of the lump sum price bid will be paid upon acceptance of the initial installation of temporary traffic accommodation measures .
the remaining num of the lump sum price bid will be paid when construction has been completed all temporary traffic control measures have been removed the site is opened to the unrestricted flow of public traffic and all associated cleanup has been completed to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num traffic accommodation and temporary signing august num num num monitoring traffic accommodation at the work zone to ensure the traffic accommodation strategy is performing as intended the contractor shall monitor and maintain traffic accommodation at the work zone on a regular basis .
the contractor shall designate a specific individual or individuals to perform this function to ensure any issues arising are addressed in a consistent and timely manner .
designated personnel shall be qualified trained and experienced in traffic control and shall be knowledgeable in the operation of the traffic control devices and other related equipment .
these workers shall be provided vehicles equipped with revolving warning lights and suitable communication devices to contact others for assistance if and when required .
the contractor shall identify those workers who will be responsible for monitoring and maintaining the traffic control devices at the preconstruction meeting .
the contractor shall monitor all traffic control devices temporary signing and roadway conditions during periods of inactivity .
the frequency of inspection shall be commensurate with the traffic volumes on the highway .
for all localized detours on roadway and bridge projects and for staged construction on bridge projects under no circumstances shall consecutive inspections be more than six hours apart unless otherwise agreed by the consultant .
all site inspections shall be documented by the contractor and available for the consultants review upon request .
the contractors traffic accommodation measures will be monitored by the department and the consultant .
if in the opinion of the consultant traffic is being unduly hindered the contractor may be required to modify his traffic accommodation measures .
num compliance in cases where the contractor is not in compliance with the specifications and in the opinion of the consultant there is imminent danger to the travelling public the consultant has the authority to order the immediate suspension of work .
such orders will be made in writing .
in other cases where the contractor is not in compliance with the specifications but in the opinion of the consultant the infraction is not causing imminent danger to the travelling public the consultant will use the following escalating process to address the situation i issue verbal instructions requiring the contractor to correct the infraction .
ii issue a written warning instructing the contractor to correct the infraction .
iii issue a written order instructing the contractor to suspend work until the infraction is corrected to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num payment num general traffic accommodation and temporary construction signing is the sole responsibility of the contractor .
unless otherwise stated all costs including but not limited to the preparation and implementation of the traffic accommodation strategy the supply installation maintenance and removal of all traffic control devices and temporary construction signing the daily recording of temporary construction signing the provision of flag persons gravel surfacing detour design construction dust abatement maintenance and removal local road detour preparation maintenance and restoration dust abatement and all labour materials equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
section num specification num traffic accommodation and temporary signing august num num num bonus and penalty assessment the contractor will be assessed a num penalty for each written warning to correct an infraction issued by the consultant .
stage num of escalation process the contractor will be assessed a num penalty for each written order to suspend work issued by the consultant .
stage num of escalation process or in cases of immediate suspension of work due to imminent danger if neither of the following has occurred prior to the issuance of the construction completion certificate written orders to suspend work or written warnings issued by the consultant .
written orders to suspend work issued by the department .
the contractor will receive a lump sum num payment .
bonus and penalty assessments and written orders will not be administered separately for separate and distinct projects within the contract or for distinct work phases on any given project within the contract but will be administered as a single process for the entire work regardless of the number of separate and distinct projects or the number of distinct work phases on any given project .
section num specification num painted roadway lines august num table of contents num painted roadway lines num num general num num description num num contractor quality control inspection plan num num materials num num equipment num num general num num painting truck num num companion vehicles num num safety equipmentnum num highway operationsnum num general num num operation of companion vehicles num num arrowboard message num num painting roadway linesnum num areas to be paintednum num pavement surface and atmospheric conditionsnum num paint and bead application num num acceptance criterianum num removal repair or replacement of unacceptable painted lines num num painting of temporary roadway lines for seasonal shutdown num num removal of existing painted linesnum num measurement and paymentnum num painting roadway linesnum num temporary roadway line painting num num removal of existing painted linesnum num warrantynum section num specification num painted roadway lines august num num num painted roadway lines num general num description this specification covers the painting and removal of roadway lines including edge lines lane lines continuity lines and directional dividing lines as shown on the drawings .
num contractor quality control inspection plan the contractor shall be totally responsible for quality control inspection throughout every stage of the work to ensure that materials and workmanship comply with the requirements of this specification .
the contractor shall develop and submit in writing to the consultant a quality control inspection program qcip that addresses all the elements that affect the quality of the line painting including but not limited to paint application rates glass bead application rates pavement surface and atmospheric conditions line widths line lengths and space lengths .
the contractor shall maintain records of qcip data complaints from the public and other details relevant to the work and shall provide these records to the consultant daily .
num materials the contractor shall supply all paint and glass beads in accordance with specification num supply of line painting materials .
num equipment num general the contractor shall provide all equipment necessary for completion of the work including but not limited to the painting truck a pilot truck a crash attenuator vehicle and all ancillary equipment such as fork lifts hoists pumps and transport vehicles required to load unload and transport the paint and glass beads .
num painting truck the painting truck shall be selfpropelled and equipped to meet or exceed the following requirements a two paint tanks each having a minimum capacity of num litres feeding three lines for a simultaneous twocolour application two yellow directional dividing lines and one white edgeline .
b painting controls capable of adjusting the paint application for the length of dashed line required .
each spray gun shall have independent controls and adjustment mechanisms and shall be operated from the operators compartment .
section num specification num painted roadway lines august num num c the compressor shall have a minimum rated capacity of num cubic metres per minute .
d bead dispensers shall be electrically controlled air operated gravity fed with controls to adjust the bead flow .
the bead dispensers shall be fed from tanks capable of holding a minimum of num kilograms of beads .
e a television vehicle guidance or a vehicle guidance system mounted on a retractable a frame with a guide wheel and pointer system to assist the truck driver in maintaining alignment on the existing lines .
f a minimum of five spray guns and five bead dispensers mounted in the following configuration i three spray guns and three bead dispensers mounted on an independentlycontrolled boom located on the left side of the truck to paint the directional dividing lines .
the outer two spray guns and bead dispensers shall be in a configuration that will produce two lines of equal width with the distance between the two lines equal to the width of one line num mm .
the inner spray gun and bead dispenser shall operate independently and shall be used to apply the directional dividing line where only a single directional dividing line is required .
when a num mm wide line is required num guns shall be used simultaneously .
ii two spray guns and two bead dispensers mounted on an independently controlled boom on the right side of the truck to apply the right edge line .
when a num mm wide line is required num guns shall be used simultaneously .
g equipped to apply white or yellow paint from the three spray guns mounted on the left hand side of the paint truck and to switch from one colour to the other during operation .
h control of both independent booms all spray guns bead dispensers and painting controls from the operators compartments .
num companion vehicles the painting vehicle shall be immediately followed by a vehicle equipped with a crash attenuator which meets national cooperative highway research program report num test criteria test level num for num kmhour work zones .
the weight of the crash attenuator vehicle including ballast flashing arrow board and truck mounted crash attenuator shall be num num to num num kg .
the crash attenuator vehicle shall be followed by a  ton or larger truck acting as a pilot vehicle .
num safety equipment the painting truck and both companion vehicles shall be equipped with the following a a twoway radio for voice communication .
b an overhead revolving beacon with an amber lens a minimum of num mm high and num mm wide .
the beacon shall be mounted on the top of the vehicle fully visible to traffic approaching from both front and rear .
c a sequential arrowboard meeting the requirements as described in specification num general .
section num specification num painted roadway lines august num num i the arrowboard shall be controlled from a console located in the vehicle cab .
ii the arrowboard display shall be visible to traffic approaching the rear of the trucks .
d a slow moving vehicle sign .
the sign shall be mounted at the rear of the vehicle and be visible to the public only when the painting truck is applying paint .
e a warning sign mounted at the rear of the truck stating wet paint keep off .
the sign shall have standard warning colours with letters having a minimum height of num mm and shall be visible to the public only when the truck is applying paint .
num highway operations num general all painting shall be carried out during hours of daylight between  hour after sunrise and  hour before sunset .
generally the contractor may paint lines during any day of the week but is cautioned that traffic volumes are usually higher on all highways on friday saturday and sunday .
line painting on highways with relatively high traffic volumes shall be performed between monday and thursday inclusive if so directed by the consultant .
operation of the painting truck against the flow of traffic will not be permitted .
loading glass beads or paint onto the painting truck is not permitted on a roadway surface .
num operation of companion vehicles num general the contractor shall operate both companion vehicles in conjunction with the painting truck during the painting of all longitudinal lines .
companion vehicle operators shall not attempt to control traffic from inside the vehicle .
the actual operating parameters of the companion vehicles will be determined by the contractor to safely accommodate traffic and will be based on site specific conditions such as sight distances highway geometrics and traffic patterns and volumes .
typical operating parameters are as follows .
num crash attenuator vehicle the crash attenuator vehicle shall follow behind the painting truck at a distance of num m to num m. typically on num lane highways the crash attenuator vehicle should closely follow the paint truck to encourage traffic to maintain the passing lane and not pull in behind the paint vehicle .
on num lane roadways traffic should still be encouraged to pass both vehicles in one pass however actual conditions may dictate that the crash attenuator vehicle give way to allow safe passing .
on single lane roads for example on interchange ramps the crash attenuator vehicle shall be driven in the travel lane to keep traffic from passing the painting truck .
num pilot vehicle on num lane and num lane highways the pilot vehicle shall be operated as follows section num specification num painted roadway lines august num num i on a num lane highway the pilot truck shall be driven in the same travel lane as the paint machine following it at a constant distance of approximately two kilometres .
ii on a num lane highway with a minimum num m shoulder the pilot truck shall be driven along the right shoulder not straddling the right edge line and following the painting truck at a constant distance of approximately num km .
iii on a num lane highway with less than a num m shoulder the pilot truck shall travel from approach road to approach road and stop until the paint machine has cleared the next approach road .
approach road in this context includes local roads farm entrances field entrances etc .
the pilot truck when stopped in an approach road shall sit parallel to the highway in order that the signs and arrowboard are fully visible to traffic approaching from the rear .
num arrowboard message the crash attenuator vehicle pilot truck and the painting truck are to display the same message at all times .
the message shall be one of the following a on num lane highway a bar num horizontal lights flashing is preferred but if a bar can not be shown on the type of arrowboard used the num corner lights flashing is an acceptable alternative .
b on a num lane highway a right arrow when operating in the left lane and a left arrow when operating in the right lane .
c on a single lane road for example the exit leg of an interchange four flashing corner lights or a bar .
num painting roadway lines num areas to be painted the contractor shall paint lane lines continuity lines edge lines and directional dividing lines on the highway sections interchanges or intersections specified as well as the lines through towns at truck turnouts rest areas points of interest and weigh scale turnouts .
at intersections edge lines shall be painted to the rightofway limit or the point where the pavement ends whichever occurs first .
on pavement overlay projects the contractor shall ensure that the start and finish of no passing zones are consistent with those on the underlying pavement unless otherwise directed by the consultant .
on new construction the start and finish of nopassing zones will be determined and laid out by the consultant .
num pavement surface and atmospheric conditions painting shall not be performed during the following conditions i when the temperature is below numc for alkyd paints and numc for waterborne paints .
ii when wind conditions cause overspray .
iii when the visibility is less than num m. section num specification num painted roadway lines august num num iv during periods of rainfall .
areas to be painted shall be clean and dry during the application of paint .
areas to be painted shall be inspected by the contractor to ensure they are clean free of sand and debris and suitable for painting .
sweeping when required shall be completed by the contractor .
num paint and bead application all painted lines shall be uniformly applied at a minimum rate of not less than num lkm of solid num mm wide line .
glass beads shall be applied immediately following the paint application at a uniform minimum application rate of not less than num gl of paint .
the contractor may heat alkyd paint to a maximum temperature of numc prior to application to the roadway surface to reduce drying time .
the contractor shall use due care in heating the paint because of its volatile nature .
waterborne paints shall not be heated .
num acceptance criteria all painted lines shall not exceed a dimensional width of num mm for specified num mm wide line .
no tolerance below num mm is allowed for the specified num mm wide line .
all painted lines shall not exceed a dimensional width of num mm for specified num mm wide line .
no tolerance below num mm is allowed for the specified num mm wide line .
all painted direction dividing lane dividing or continuity lines shall not exceed a maximum dimensional length deviation of num mm for specified num m length of line .
all spaces between painted direction dividing lane dividing or continuity lines shall not exceed a maximum dimensional length deviation of num mm for specified num m or num m length of space .
all paint shall be applied at the proper locations in accordance with the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
all paint and glass beads shall be uniformly applied .
all painted lines shall be uniform in thickness and free of tire tracking with no splatter excessive overspray or other defects .
num removal repair or replacement of unacceptable painted lines all painted lines that do not meet the requirements of this specification shall be removed and correctly applied or repaired by the contractor .
in cases where the paint is tracked by vehicles tires the lines may be repaired by reapplying paint and glass beads to the damaged areas .
in cases where incorrectly painted lines need to be removed the contractor shall use methods and equipment that will totally eliminate the pattern of the lines without damaging the integrity of the pavement surface .
the methods and equipment used for such work shall be reviewed and accepted by the consultant prior to their use .
obliterating incorrectly painted lines through the sole use of paint liquid asphalt slurry seal or other similar materials will not be permitted .
section num specification num painted roadway lines august num num num painting of temporary roadway lines for seasonal shutdown when the contract is carried over from one season to the next all newly constructed asphalt pavement or asphalt stabilized surfaces shall be provided with temporary roadway lines as directed by the consultant .
all temporary roadway lines shall be painted in conformance with all of the requirements of this specification .
num removal of existing painted lines removal of existing painted lines shall be carried out as described in subsection num removal repair or replacement of unacceptable painted lines .
num measurement and payment num painting roadway lines measurement of painted roadway lines will be made in kilometres along the centreline of the roadway for the length of road painted including the length of road through intersections .
intersections and interchanges will be counted separately and will include all roadway lines which would not be covered by the standard painting operation .
only those intersections or interchanges specified in the contract or identified by the consultant will be counted separately for payment .
at locations such as truck turnouts and points of interest turnouts where additional lines are required beyond normal limits individual lines will be measured separately and paid for under the applicable bid item .
payment for painting roadway lines will be made at the unit price or prices bid for roadway lines supplying paint and painting for the type of line painted .
payment for painting intersection and interchange lines will be made at the unit prices bid for intersection lines supplying paint and painting or interchange lines supplying paint and painting as applicable .
these payments will be full compensation for inspecting the areas to be painted sweeping and cleaning the surfaces to be painted supplying and applying the paint and glass beads traffic accommodation and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num temporary roadway line painting when the contractor is required to paint roadway intersection andor interchange lines as a temporary measure at the end of a construction season payment will be made in accordance with this section .
num removal of existing painted lines measurement for removal of existing painted lines will be made in metres or kilometres of line removed whichever is specified .
payment will be made at the unit price bid for removal of existing painted lines and will be full compensation for all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
the repair or removal of incorrectly painted roadway lines shall be carried out by the contractor at his expense .
section num specification num painted roadway lines august num num num warranty contrary to section num contractors warranty and final acceptance the warranty period for painted roadway lines will be num days .
section num specification num pavement messages august num table of contents num pavement messages num num general num num materials num num templates num num marking materialsnum num scheduling of the worknum num application of pavement messagesnum num pavement surface and atmospheric conditionsnum num paint and bead application for painted messages num num durable pavement messages num num removal repair or replacement of unacceptable pavement messagesnum num measurement and paymentnum num pavement message applicationnum num removal of existing pavement messagesnum num removal of incorrectly applied pavement messagesnum section num specification num pavement messages august num num num pavement messages num general the work shall consist of applying pavement messages such as crosswalk stop ahead turning arrows and stop bar lines to the dimensions specified at the locations shown on the drawings or as designated by the consultant .
num materials num templates the contractor shall supply templates to the dimensions shown on the applicable drawings .
the dimensions shown are in millimetres unless otherwise indicated .
num marking materials the contractor shall supply paint glass beads and durable message materials in accordance with specification num supply of line painting and message marking materials .
num scheduling of the work pavement message application shall be carried out during hours of daylight between  hour after sunrise and  hour before sunset .
generally the contractor may apply messages during any day of the week but is cautioned that traffic volumes are usually higher on all highways on friday saturday and sunday .
message application on highways with relatively high traffic volumes shall be performed between monday and thursday inclusive if so directed by the consultant .
scheduling of the work shall be subject to the approval of the consultant .
prior to commencement of the message application work the contractor shall submit his schedule to the consultant for review and acceptance .
num application of pavement messages num pavement surface and atmospheric conditions message application shall not be performed during the following conditions when the temperature is below numc .
when wind conditions cause overspray .
when the visibility is less than num m. during periods of rainfall .
areas where messages are to be applied shall be clean and dry during the application of materials .
application areas shall be inspected by the contractor to ensure they are clean free of sand and debris and suitable for message application .
any required sweeping or other cleaning shall be carried out by the contractor and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num pavement messages august num num num paint and bead application for painted messages messages shall be painted using the templates .
each message shall be painted once unless otherwise specified in the special provisions or directed by the consultant .
paint shall be applied at the rate of num lmnum of actual painted area .
glass beads shall be applied immediately following the paint application at a uniform application rate of num gl of paint .
aircraft patrol zone markings do not require glass bead application .
messages initially applied at less than the specified rate as determined by the consultant shall be repainted at the expense of the contractor .
all painted messages shall be uniform in thickness with no splatter excessive overspray or other defects .
traffic shall be kept off newly painted messages until the paint has dried sufficiently to prevent tracking .
num durable pavement messages the application of durable pavement messages shall be carried out in accordance with the applicable sections of this specification and the manufacturers recommended procedures .
in cases of conflict the more stringent requirements shall apply .
num removal repair or replacement of unacceptable pavement messages pavement messages that do not meet the requirements of this specification shall be repaired or removed and correctly reapplied by the contractor .
in cases where painted messages have been tracked by vehicles tires the affected messages may be repaired by reapplying paint and glass beads to the damaged areas .
in cases where incorrectly painted messages require removal the contractor shall use methods and equipment that will totally eliminate the pattern of the messages without damaging the integrity of the pavement surface .
the methods and equipment used for such work shall be approved by the consultant prior to use .
obliterating incorrectly painted messages through the sole use of paint liquid asphalt slurry seal or other similar materials will not be permitted .
num measurement and payment num pavement message application painted pavement messages and durable pavement messages will be measured on a per message basis for each message applied to the roadway surface .
when the consultant directs a second application of paint to any message measurement will be based on each application of paint .
payment will be made at the applicable unit price bid for painted pavement message or durable pavement message for the specified message type and will be full compensation for inspecting the message application area sweeping if required supplying the templates paint and glass beads or durable message materials applying the pavement message traffic accommodation and all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
section num specification num pavement messages august num num num removal of existing pavement messages when the removal of existing pavement messages is required the removal of existing messages will be measured on a per message basis .
payment will be made at the applicable unit price bid for removal of existing painted pavement message or removal of existing durable pavement message and will be full compensation for all labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
num removal of incorrectly applied pavement messages the repair or removal of incorrectly applied pavement messages shall be carried out by the contractor at his expense .
section num specification num permanent highway signing august num table of contents num permanent highway signing num num general num num materials num num constructionnum num removal of existing signs num num removal of concrete bases and breakaway postsnum num general installation and layout num num installation of concrete bases num num installation of breakaway steel posts num num installation of wooden postsnum num installation of cluster framesnum num installation of signs num num acceptance of work and warrantynum num measurement and paymentnum num general num num removal of existing signs num num breakaway steel posts num num concrete basesnum num wooden postsnum num cluster framesnum num signs num section num specification num permanent highway signing august num num num permanent highway signing num general the work consists of the removal and reinstallation or disposal of existing signs and the installation of new signs and includes traffic control signing guide signing and facility signing for the normal use of the roadway .
signing for construction repair or emergency situations is specified in specification num traffic accommodation and temporary signing .
num materials the contractor shall supply all materials required for the installation of permanent signs including frames for cluster signs concrete bases steel breakaway posts wooden posts and all bolts and required mounting hardware in accordance with specification num supply of permanent highway signs posts and bases .
when the work necessitates the removal salvage and reinstallation of signs only materials from the existing installations shall be used .
contractor stockpiles of used material from other sources will not be considered acceptable .
num construction num removal of existing signs existing signs which must be removed in the prosecution of the work shall be carefully salvaged and reinstalled .
new wooden posts shall be used if the existing posts can not be salvaged .
critical signs necessary for the protection of traffic such as railroad crossing signs or stop signs shall be maintained .
existing signs designated for removal and disposal shall become the property of the contractor .
num removal of concrete bases and breakaway posts the contractor shall remove the sign and breakaway posts from the existing concrete base and salvage for reinstallation or dispose of as directed by the consultant .
when required the existing base shall be removed salvaged and moved to the new installation site .
where a base can not be totally removed the tops of the base shall be removed to below ground level and the excavation backfilled to the adjacent ground level .
this will be considered incidental to the work and will not be paid for separately .
num general installation and layout the consultant will provide plan layout information in the form of a base line for the installation of the permanent signs .
the contractor shall establish the height and elevation of the sign and install it in accordance with the drawings or as directed by the consultant .
it is the contractors responsibility to have all sign locations checked for utilities prior to digging holes for posts .
any adjustments to the locations of signs will be subject to the approval of the consultant .
the soil at the bottom of holes shall be thoroughly compacted to provide a firm bearing .
posts section num specification num permanent highway signing august num num shall be set vertically and backfilled with material free of organics .
all backfill shall be placed in thin layers and thoroughly compacted for the full depth .
cementitious materials shall not be used as backfill .
the disturbed area around installations shall be restored to the original contours .
the signs shall be fixed securely to the posts in accordance with the drawings .
num installation of concrete bases concrete bases shall be installed as shown on drawings teb num and teb num .
the contractor shall excavate holes to a minimum of num mm larger than the base and the base shall be installed in the centre of the excavation .
the backfill around the base shall be placed in thin layers and shall be thoroughly compacted for the full depth .
num installation of breakaway steel posts all installations shall conform to drawing teb num .
the installed post shall be within num degrees of vertical .
when salvaged materials are used the sign and breakaway steel posts shall be reassembled and installed on the base at the new site .
when new posts are required the size of steel i beam post will be as shown on the drawing or specified by the consultant or in the case of a replacement it will be the same size as the post being replaced .
the contractor shall saw cut the flange and web and cut drill weld and shim the flanges for the base joint as required to ensure an unstressed installation .
damage to galvanized surfaces shall be repaired by treating the damaged areas with zinc rich paint .
num installation of wooden posts posts shall be installed in accordance with drawing teb num and shall be within num degree of vertical .
when a post is removed and replacement is not requested the contractor shall backfill the hole in thin compacted lifts .
posts with rectangular crosssections shall be installed such that the longer dimension is orientated parallel to the direction of the highway .
unless otherwise directed by the consultant posts with a nominal crosssection larger than num mm x num mm shall be weakened as shown on drawing teb num .
all costs associated with weakening of wooden posts will be considered incidental to the work and no separate or additional payment will be made .
num installation of cluster frames the new frames shall be installed perpendicular to and facing the approaching traffic lane and shall be securely fastened to the post in accordance with drawing teb num .
section num specification num permanent highway signing august num num num installation of signs signs shall be mounted in accordance with drawings teb num teb num teb num teb num teb num and teb num .
the installed sign shall be clean and not bent or twisted .
the reflectorized surface shall be free of scratches and marks and must be securely fastened to the post or frame .
signs on utility posts shall be mounted by a procedure approved by the utility owner .
num acceptance of work and warranty prior to the final acceptance of the work all damage or deficiencies from any cause in signs and posts installed under this contract shall be rectified by the contractor at his own expense .
in addition to the warranty requirements detailed in specification num general during the warranty period the contractor shall straighten and recompact or reinstall as required all posts which are more than num degrees from vertical .
num measurement and payment num general all unit prices shall include traffic accommodation and temporary construction signing and all labour materials equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
because the condition of subsurface materials designed for salvage and reuse is unknown this contract may contain contingency bid items for units of work which may not be required .
the contractor shall have no claim against the department for the deletion of any bid items during construction .
num removal of existing signs measurement will be made of the number of sign installations removed .
payment will be made at the applicable unit price bid per sign for removal and reinstallation or disposal of existing signs one post or removal and reinstallation or disposal of existing signs two posts .
payment will be full compensation for removing salvaging and reinstalling the wooden posts and signs or removing and disposing of the existing wooden posts and signs .
if the consultant determines that the removed post is not suitable for reinstallation and the existing sign is reinstalled payment will be made for removal and reinstallation or disposal of existing signs plus supply and install wooden post for the applicable cross section of post installed .
num breakaway steel posts measurement will be made of the number of steel posts removed and disposed of and the number of steel posts removed salvaged and reinstalled .
measurement of the supply and installation of new breakaway steel posts will be measured on a per post basis .
payment for supplying and installing new post will be made at the applicable unit price bid per section num specification num permanent highway signing august num num post for supply and install breakaway steel posts wnum x num supply and install breakaway steel posts wnum x num supply and install breakaway steel posts wnum x num supply and install breakaway steel posts wnum x num this payment will be full compensation for supplying and installing the applicable post and all labour materials equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work to the satisfaction of the consultant .
payment for removal and reinstallation of existing breakaway posts will be made at the unit price bid per steel post for remove and reinstall breakaway steel posts .
this payment will be full compensation for removing and salvaging the steel post and sign hauling salvaged material to the new site and reassembling and installing the steel post and sign .
payment for removal and disposal of existing breakaway posts will be made at the unit price bid per steel post for remove and dispose breakaway steel posts .
this payment will be full compensation for removing and disposing of the steel post and sign .
num concrete bases measurement will be made separately of the number of bases supplied and installed bases removed salvaged and reinstalled and bases removed and disposed of .
payment for removing salvaging and installing existing bases will be made at the unit price bid per concrete base for concrete base remove and reinstall .
this payment will be full compensation for removing and salvaging of the existing base moving the salvaged concrete base to the new site and installing the salvaged concrete base .
payment for removing and disposing of concrete bases will be made at the unit price bid per base for concrete base remove and dispose .
this payment will be full compensation for removing and disposing of the base and placing and compacting backfill material in the hole .
payment for supplying and installing new concrete bases will be made at the unit price bid per base for concrete base supply and install .
this payment will be full compensation for supplying the base to the installation location excavating installing the new concrete base and backfilling and compacting around the base .
num wooden posts measurement will be made of the number of posts of a particular crosssection supplied and installed .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per post for supply and install num mm x num mm or supply and install post num mm x num mm or supply and install post num mm x num mm regardless of the length of the post .
this payment will be full compensation for supplying and installing and maintaining the post .
num cluster frames measurement will be made of the number of cluster frames supplied and installed .
payment will be made at the unit price bid per frame for cluster frames supply and install .
section num specification num permanent highway signing august num num this payment will be full compensation for the supply and installation of the new cluster frames .
num signs measurement will be made of the number of signs within a particular size range based on surface area .
payment will be made at the applicable unit price bid per sign for install sign less than num mnum or install sign num mnum to num mnum or install sign over num mnum .
separate payment will be made for each sign on a single post .
this payment will be full compensation for installing and maintaining the signs .
