department of transportation infrastructure and energy general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction revised num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy specifications current status date january num division section latest revision date num general provisions num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num earthwork num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy division section latest revision date num num num drainage num num figures num num num num num num num figure num new num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num figures num num revised num num granular material num num num num num bitumen num num num rescinded num num num pavement num num num rescinded num see below num num num num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy division section latest revision date num rescinded num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num rescinded num rescinded num num num num num num num see below num num num num num num num num num num num num num rehabilitation num num num num num num num num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy division section latest revision date num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num environment num num figures num num num and num revised num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num rescinded num num num num num num num safety general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy division section latest revision date num num num num num num figure num revised num figure num revised num figure num num figure num revised num num num figure num revised num num num num num num num figures num num num of num and num num of num revised num num num num num num electrical num num num num num num num num num concrete num num num num figures numand num revised num num num figure num figure num revised num revised num num num division section latest revision date num miscellaneous num num num num num supplementals as required appendix num tender form agreement sample num appendix num num appendix num num appendix num num revision num delete section insert section note blue text indicates additions red strikethrough text indicates removal green indicates relocated .
all drawingsfigures to be inserted into the num paper and electronic versions of the spec manual .
division num general provisions num terminology and definitions num num definitions certificate of final acceptance a written statement prepared by the engineer stating the date on which the work has been accepted by the department and the warranty period has ended final acceptance the date when the warranty period has ended and there are no warranty items .
substantial completion the identity state of a contract when the work or improvement is ready for use or is being used for the purpose intended and when the work remaining to be done under contract is capable of being complete or corrected at a cost of not more than ten percent num of the final contract price .
total completion the identity of a contract when all work which was described in the contract has been completed .
warm mix asphalt wma warm mix asphalt is a generic term for a variety of technologies that allow hot mix asphalt producers to lower temperatures at which the material is mixed and placed on the road .
num instructions to bidders num num bid and performance security all certified cheques irrevocable standby letters of credit bank drafts and bonds are to be made payable to the minister of finance energy and municipal affairs province of prince edward island .
num num material guaranty guarantee num scope of work num num acceptance of the work the engineer shall accept the work when all of the work has been completed and inspected and there are no deficiencies and issue a certificate of final completion .
the engineer shall issue a final acceptance letter and release the security deposit following the expiration of the one year warranty period and after all deficiencies identified have been rectified .
the engineer shall issue a certificate of final completion when all of the work has been completed inspected and there are no identified deficiencies .
the engineer shall issue a certificate of final acceptance and release the security deposit following the expiration of the one year warranty period and after any warranty issues have been rectified .
num prosecution and progress num num liquidated damages the contractor shall be assessed liquidated damages for each working day beyond the number of working days andor the completion date as both specified in the contract or beyond any extension of time that may be granted in accordance with provision num .
the liquidated damages for work being carried out on arterial highways shall be assessed at num num per day for each day beyond the time of final completion .
for work carried out on other highways or within any tendered project outside of highway limits liquidated damages shall be assessed at num num a day for each day beyond the time of final completion .
num payment num num records of contractor open for inspection the contractors payrolls time books account books invoices and statements shall be at all times open for inspection and extraction by the engineer or any authorized representative of the minister .
the contractor shall assist enable the engineer or representative to ascertain as far as possible the exact payment sums or claims so due and remaining unpaid by the contractor .
the contractor shall keep proper accounts and records of the cost to the contractor of the work and of all expenditures or commitments made by the contractor under contract including the related invoices receipts vouchers bill of ladings and statements .
such accounts invoices receipts vouchers bill of ladings and statements shall at all times be open to audit copying extracting information and inspection by the authorized representatives of government .
the contractor shall provide all facilities for the audits inspections copying and extractions and shall provide government and its authorized representatives with all information that is requested from the accounts records invoices receipts vouchers bill of ladings and statements .
subject to statutory limitations the contractor shall not without the written consent of government dispose of the accounts records invoices receipts vouchers bill of ladings and statements related to the contract but shall preserve and keep the same available for audit copying extracting information and inspections at any time .
num earthwork num clearing num num construction method all brush and other debris resulting from the clearing shall be burned without damage to adjacent property or otherwise disposed of at the contractors own expense as the engineer may direct .
burning shall be in accordance with the provisions of the fire prevention act and regulations .
the contractor shall take precautions to prevent the fires from spreading and shall be liable for any damages caused in the performance of this work .
all brush and other debris resulting from the clearing shall be disposed of at the contractors own expense .
burning shall only occur at the discretion of the engineer .
any burning shall be in accordance with the provisions of the fire prevention act and regulations .
the contractor shall take precautions to prevent the fires from spreading and shall be liable for any damages on the existing property as well as any adjacent property caused in the performance of this work .
num shoulder material num num scheduling and liquidated damages all shoulder material shall be placed within four days of no later than four days after the completion of the final lift of asphalt in each year .
liquidated damages of num per day num tap drain installation num num construction method straw or hay mulch shall be supplied and placed on all bare soil surfaces on a daily basis .
num ditching num num construction method straw or hay mulch shall be supplied and placed on all bare soil surfaces as required by the engineer .
num geogrid reinforcement num num material geogrid to be bxnum bxnum as manufactured by tensar or equivalent in terms of physical properties and strength .
the geogrid shall be a biaxially formed regular grid structure resistant to ultraviolet degradation to damage under normal construction practices and to all forms of biological or chemical degradation normally encountered in the material being reinforced .
it shall also have the characteristics outlined in table num .
table numrequirements for geogrid reinforcement property type num minimum type num minimum test aperture stability for punched and drawn mndeg num num astm dnum dnummnum aperture size along roll length mm num num calipered open area num num calipered rib thickness at ribs mm num num calipered polypropylene material num num astm dnum carbon black material num num astm dnum flexural rigidity along roll length mgcm num num astm dnum dnum strength at junctions kgm num astm dnum tensile strength num strain mdxmd knm num num num num num num astm dnum tensile strength num strain mdxmd knm num num num num num num astm dnum efficiency of junctions num num astm dnum division drainage num storm sewer installation num updated figure num inlet grate num updated figure num outlet grate num new figure added for adjustable manhole covers num num material the contractor shall supply the appropriate type of material to perform the required work .
adjusting rings for precast concrete structures shall be precast or castinplace as indicated on the drawings or as directed by the engineer and shall be the same shape as the frames and covers .
the outer size of the adjusting rings must be at least as large as the frames and covers but shall not extend beyond the edge of the catch basin .
adjusting rings for corrugated steel catch basins shall be steel ring inserts made to the height required specifically to fit inside the seat of the existing frame and also to accept the cover .
the design of the steel ring insert shall be approved by the engineer prior to manufacturing .
adjustable manhole frames and covers shall be cnummnum cone shaped frame autostable as manufactured by bibby stecroix or approved equivalent meeting the requirements of csa bnum and shall be as shown on detail drawing no .
num .
division num pavement num hot mix asphaltic concrete num num asphalt cement department staff shall have access to all asphalt binder delivery slips at the asphalt plant as the material is delivered .
if department staff are not present at the time of delivery then a copy of the delivery slips shall be retained in the asphalt plant control room for department staff .
adding new section num num warm mix asphalt wma wma technologies must be approved by the engineer prior to its use .
technology approved for previous work is not guaranteed approval on all future work .
the contractor shall supply all materials required for the production of wma .
supporting documentation from the wma supplier for the proper preparation storage and handling of their product shall be obtained by the contractor and submitted to the engineer .
num num hot mix asphaltic concrete the percent passing the num mm seive size num for the blended aggregate graduations for given mix types shall be as follows mix types a percent passing num mm sieve size num bc num c num num num placing of asphaltic concrete hot mix asphaltic concrete mix shall not be placed unless the air temperature at the surface of the road is num c or greater .
under no circumstances will hot mix be placed over a frozen base course or subgrade .
the temperature of the mixture immediately after spreading and prior to initial rolling shall be not less than num c. temperature requirements for placement num asphalt concrete mix shall not be placed unless the air temperature at the surface of the road is numºc or greater .
under no circumstances will asphalt concrete be placed on frozen base or subgrade .
num for hot mix the temperature prior to initial rolling shall be minimum numºc .
num for warm mix the temperature directly behind the screed shall be maximum numºc and minimum numºc prior to initial rolling .
placement temperatures may be altered depending on additive supplier recommendations and at the discretion of the engineer .
num chip seal rescinded division num environment num mulching num num description this item consists of the supply and application of hay or straw as a mulch on slopes and other exposed ground including selected sensitive ditch locations as directed by the engineer .
this is a temporary measure to control erosion and thereby minimizing the transfer of sedimentladen runoff to watercourses by protecting the soil surface from raindrop impact reducing the velocity of overland flow fostering the growth of vegetation by reducing moisture loss and providing insulation against extreme heat and cold .
num num material hay or straw mulch shall be supplied by the contractor .
it shall be reasonably free of noxious weeds as per the weed control act and other undesirable materials .
it shall not be so wet decayed or compacted that it inhibits even and uniform spreading .
hay mulch is the preferred material over straw mulch for areas that are to become vegetated .
however when mulching for overwintering protection straw mulch should be used .
num num construction method and maintenance to avoid the mulch from being blown around the length of hay or straw should be chopped to num mm .
mulching should be spread by the use of mechanical means such as a bale buster unless the job is small enough to be done by hand .
hay or straw mulch shall be spread evenly and uniformly over the designated areas at a rate of num kg per hectare with a coverage rate of num as deemed acceptable by the engineer .
at the request of the engineer the contractor shall be required to provide weigh scale documentation showing that the specified spread rate is being met .
division num castinplace num num num concrete mixes the contractor shall comply with the following procedure proportion normal density concrete in accordance with cancsa anum alternative num to give following properties for a suspended slab at a manhole chamber or a bridge deck use type general use blended gub cement .
minimum compressive strength at num days num mpa .
minimum cement content to cancsaanum .
class of exposure cnum .
nominal size of coarse aggregate num mm .
slump at time and point of discharge num mm num mm .
air content num to num .
maximum watercement ratio num .
chemical admixtures to cancsaanumm .
proportion normal density concrete in accordance with cancsa anum alternative num for all concrete except for a suspended slab at a manhole chamber or a bridge deck to give the following properties use type general use gu cement .
minimum compressive strength at num days num mpa .
minimum cement content to cancsaanum .
class of exposure cnum .
nominal size of coarse aggregate num mm .
slump at time and point of discharge num mm num mm .
air content num to num .
maximum watercement ratio num .
chemical admixtures to cancsaanumm .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy table of contents i division num general provisions num terminology and definitions num instructions to bidders num scope of work num control of work num legal relations and responsibilities num prosecution and progress num payment division num earthwork num clearing num grubbing num excavation num topsoil removal and reinstatement num borrow from adjacent land num borrow from pit num granular base num fine grading num compaction num preparing shoulders num shoulder material num topsoil for landscaping num random rip rap num tap drain installation num ditching num culvert end cleanout num trench excavation and backfilling num geotechnical fabric num geogrid reinforcement num bedding material division num drainage num storm sewer pipe installation num catch basin installation num catch basin manhole and valve adjustment num drain tile installation num roadway culvert installation num driveway culvert placement num culvert extension num culvert removal num timber box culvert num concrete box culvert num multiplated corrugated steel arch num culvert end treatment general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy table of contents ii division num granular material num aggregate num bedding material division num bitumen num asphalt cement num asphalt prime rescinded num asphalt emulsions division num pavement num tack coat application num prime coat application rescinded num hot mix asphaltic concrete compaction num chip seal rescinded num double emulsified asphalt slurry seal rescinded num asphaltic concrete curb num asphalt crack filling num cold mix bituminous patching material num hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification num hma driveway mix division num rehabilitation num pulverize in place num pulverize stockpile and replace rap num pulverize and stockpile rap num cold plane stockpile and replace rap num cold plane construction joint num cold plane and patch num asphalt reinforcement mesh placement num polystyrene foam board placement num pavement restoration num cutting asphalt num excavate and patch num cold plane stockpile and replace rap as shoulder material num longitudinal cold plane construction joint num curb removal num cold plane transport and pave num cold plane and stockpile division num environment num check dams num water for dust control num hydro seeding num landscaping and seeding num mulching num silt fence general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy table of contents iii num erosion control mats num sediment trap num sodding num maintenance and sediment control rescinded num straw bale barrier num compost num gabions division num safety num signallers num removal of flex beam guiderail num flex beam guiderail num pavement edge delineation num temporary marking num traffic control devices num vehicle configurations and restrictions num traffic control plan num installation of guiderail end treatment division num electrical num electrical general provisions num telephone ductbank num basic materials num traffic signals division num concrete num castinplace concrete num curb and gutter num concrete sidewalk and flatwork num precast concrete span division num miscellaneous num chain link fence and gates num cash allowance division num supplemental specifications appendix num sample tender document appendix num environmental requirements appendix num temporary workplace traffic control manual num appendix num weigh scale procedures general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy general provisions num num terminology and definitions num instructions to bidders num scope of work num control of work num legal relations and responsibilities num prosecution and progress num payment general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy terminology and definitions num num num num terminology this document titled general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction hereinafter referred to as this document contains information which is relevant to the administration of highway construction contracts .
this document is divided into divisions i.e .
num sections i.e .
num provisions i.e .
num and subprovisions i.e .
num .
unless otherwise specified in the text all references to specifications divisions sections provisions subprovisions tables or figures shall refer to this document .
whenever in this document it is provided that anything is is to be or to be done if as when or where contemplated required directed deemed necessary permitted suspended approved directed unacceptable suitable satisfactory unsatisfactory or sufficient such expressions shall have the same force as if followed by the words by the engineer or to the engineer as the case may be .
num definitions wherever in any part of the contract the following words expressions pronouns or abbreviations are used the intent and meaning shall be as follows aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials astm american society for testing and materials .
addendum a change in a tender issued prior to the time and date of tender closing stated in the advertisement which has the effect of modifying the tender .
an addendum shall be considered as an integral component of the tender and shall be deemed to take precedence over all other components of the tender .
advertisement a public or private announcement stating the name of the tender project location and the time date and location of the opening .
the announcement shall either be published on the governments website www.gov.pe.catenders in the newspapers of p.e.i .
or take the form of a letter of invitation .
bank draft a cheque issued by a bank on behalf of the bidder guaranteeing payment to the department as described by the conditions in the tender form and agreement if the agreement is executed by the minister .
bid bond a bond issued by a surety company on behalf of a bidder to guarantee to the department that the bidder will procure a performance bond and will carry out the work if the agreement is executed by the minister .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy terminology and definitions num num num bidder a person partnership or corporation acting directly or through a duly authorized representative submitting a tender for the work contemplated .
borrow an excavated material used in the construction of a subgrade with the origin of the source being located either inside or outside the rightofway .
bridge any structure having a span of num metres or more which carries pedestrian or vehicular traffic .
cgsb canadian general standards board csa canadian standards association csp corrugated steel pipe certificate of final acceptance a written statement prepared by the engineer stating the date on which the work has been accepted by the department and the warranty period has ended .
certificate of final completion a written statement prepared by the engineer stating the date on which the work has been completed .
certificate of final quantities a written statement of final quantities prepared by the engineer and agreed to by the contractor in writing .
certificate of substantial completion a written statement prepared by the engineer stating the date on which the work has been substantially completed .
certified cheque a cheque issued by the bidder and certified by a bank guaranteeing that the bidder has sufficient funds on deposit to cover payment to the department as described by the conditions in the tender form and agreement if the agreement is signed by the minister .
construction period that time referred to in the contract during which the work can be carried out .
contract the agreement between the contractor and the department covering the performance of the work and furnishing of construction materials .
the contract shall include the advertisement this document the plans the agreement addenda schedule the special provisions the release from liability and any supplemental agreements .
contract limits the geographic locations of the beginning and end of a project .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy terminology and definitions num num num contract time the number of working days as stipulated in the contract document to complete the work .
contractor the party of the first part to the contract acting directly or indirectly through agents or employees who is primarily liable for the acceptable performance of the contract and also for the payment of all legal debts pertaining to the work .
culvert any structure not classified as a bridge which provides an opening under a roadway .
department the department of transportation infrastructure and energy of the province of prince edward island .
deputy minister the deputy minister of transportation infrastructure and energy of the province of prince edward island .
engineer the person assigned by the department to be in charge of the work who is a member of engineers pei acting directly or indirectly through a designated assistant or representative .
final acceptance the date when the warranty period has ended and there are no warranty items .
final completion the date when there is no work remaining to be done under contract .
final inspection inspection which will take place no sooner than num months from the date of substantial completion .
a final inspection letter will be forwarded to the contractor outlining any warranty issues if any which shall be addressed under this contract prior to release of the performance security .
granular base a layer of granular material of specified type and thickness between the subbase and the base of the pavement surface .
highway the rightofway which is reserved for use in construction of the roadway and its appertaining structures .
irrevocable letter of credit a written promise issued by a bank on behalf of the bidder guaranteeing payment to the department as described by the conditions in the tender form and agreement and the irrevocable letter of credit if the agreement is signed by the minister .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy terminology and definitions num num num labour and materials bond a bond issued by a surety company on behalf of the contractor to guarantee to the department that all claimants will be paid for labour and materials used on the work described in the terms of the contract .
local material material that has its source on prince edward island .
major item a major item is any item of work which is required for the project to fully operate as intended and in a safe manner .
for example roadway granulars asphalt select borrow pipe work etc .
would be considered a major item .
landscaping would not be considered a major item .
minister the minister of transportation infrastructure and energy of the province of prince edward island .
overburden a layer of partially organic material located immediately below topsoil which is unacceptable for use in construction and also unacceptable as topsoil .
pcp precast concrete pipe pavement a layer or layers of asphaltic or portland cement concrete placed over an existing pavement base subbase or subgrade .
performance bond a bond issued by a surety company on behalf of the contractor to guarantee to the department proper performance of the terms of the contract .
plansdrawings any plans profiles typical crosssections supplemental drawings or exact reproductions thereof which are approved or stamped by the engineer and show the location character dimensions andor detail of the work to be done and which are to be considered part of the contract .
principals the officers and individuals holding more than a num interest in a corporation the partners in a partnership or the owners of an unincorporated firm .
province the province of prince edward island .
rap reclaimed asphalt pavement roadbed that portion of the roadway extending from shoulder line to shoulder line in other words the subgrade and shoulders taken as a unit .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy terminology and definitions num num num roadway that portion of the highway included between the outside lines of gutters or ditches including all appertaining structures and all slopes ditches channels and waterways necessary for proper drainage and protection .
sadt summer average daily traffic security deposit a deposit in the form of a certified cheque bid bond letter of credit or bank draft as security as described in the tender form and agreement for due fulfilment of the contract .
schedule a document whereby the contractor shows specific contract tasks being done on a time line .
slope rise to run expressed as a percent or run to rise expressed as a ratio .
snowtrap a field adjacent to the rightofway with a terrain that causes snow to gather upon the roadway .
specifications all written or printed descriptions or instructions pertaining to the method and manner of performing the work or to the quantities and qualities of the materials to be furnished and work to be carried out under the contract this includes the tender this document supplemental specifications special provisions and addenda together with all written agreements made or to be made pertaining to the method or manner of performing the work or to the quantities or qualities of materials to be furnished and works to be carried out under the contract .
special provisions special directions containing requirements peculiar to the work not adequately provided for by the general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction .
stop work order an order given in writing by the engineer which directs the contractor to stop work .
an order communicated verbally or in writing by a department representative to the contractor that directs the contractor to immediately stop work .
this shall be followed up with a formal written stop work order from the engineer .
the written order will state the reason the conditions and the deadline for compliance with the order .
subbase a layer of material or specified type and thickness between the subgrade and the base .
subcontractor any person company or entity that provides a service to or on behalf of the contractor in order to facilitate any aspect of the work subgrade the earth or rock surface whether in cut or in fill that is prepared for the subbase and base .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy terminology and definitions num num num substantial completion the state of a contract when the work or improvement is ready for use or is being used for the purpose intended and when the work remaining to be done under contract is capable of being complete or corrected at a cost of not more than ten percent num of the final contract price .
supplemental specifications specifications which are supplemental to this document .
supplier a person corporation or entity which supplies materials to be incorporated into the work by the contractor or his affiliates .
surplus material any and all unused material the department has placed a value on and may be stockpiled for future use or transported to another site .
technician an assistant to the engineer who is assigned to make inspection of work performed or being performed or of materials furnished or being furnished or to do such other work as assigned by the engineer .
tender an offer by the bidder for work on which the department requires formal bids to be prepared and submitted .
tender form the approval form for work on which the department requires formal bids to be prepared and submitted .
thickness the compacted depth of a lift or layer of material after placement within the roadbed .
ticket a voucher issued by a designated employee of the department at the point of origin of a load to a truck driver and delivered to a designated employee of the department at the work site describing the quantity of material upon which payment of the load is to be based showing the project number road name contractor source number scale number truck owner truck driver truck and trailer plate numbers with number of axles on each open or closed haul haul length date time loaded and unloaded signatures of department weigher and checker who can not be the same person and volume in cubic metres if measured by volume or gross weight tare weight and net weight of material in kilograms or pounds if measured by weight .
the ticket shall indicate that it is for either pit to stockpile stockpile to road void or nonpay item .
topsoil a fertile friable soil of loamy character that contains a normal amount of organic matter .
transportation and infrastructure renewal transportation and public works or transportation and infrastructure renewal which may be stated within this document shall mean transportation infrastructure and energy .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy terminology and definitions num num num warm mix asphalt wma warm mix asphalt is a generic term for a variety of technologies that allow hot mix asphalt producers to lower temperatures at which the material is mixed and placed on the road .
warranty period unless otherwise stipulated in the contract documents the warranty period shall be defined as a period of num consecutive months from the date of substantial completion as indicated in the certificate of substantial completion .
watercourse an area which has a sediment bed and may or may not contain water and without limiting the generality of the foregoing includes the full length and width of the sediment bed bank and shore of any stream spring creek brook river lake pond bay estuary or coastal body any water therein and any part thereof up to and including the watercourse boundary .
watercourse boundary in a nontidal watercourse the edge of the sediment bed and ii in a tidal watercourse the top of the bank of the watercourse and where there is no discernible bank means the mean high water mark of the watercourse .
wetland a wetland shall be defined as i an area which contains hydric soil aquatic or watertolerant vegetation and may or may not contain water and includes any water therein and everything up to and including the wetland boundary and ii without limiting the generality of the foregoing includes any area identified in the prince edward island wetland inventory as open water deep marsh shallow marsh salt marsh seasonally flooded flats brackish marsh a shrub swamp a wooded swamp a bog or a meadow wetland boundary where the vegetation in a wetland changes from aquatic or watertolerant vegetation to terrestrial vegetation or waterintolerant vegetation .
a wetland by this definition is any area with hydric soils and aquaticwater tolerant vegetation which maymay not be on the inventory and maymay not contain water .
waste material a material of any form which is deemed of no use to the department and is to be disposed of by the contractor .
weigh scale a device used for the measurement of weight .
work all of the work specified in the contract as contemplated .
work day any calendar day from the time of commencement of the work until the completion of the work other than saturday sunday or statutory holidays .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy instructions to bidders num num num num conformity of work with plans and specifications the contractor shall perform all work and shall furnish all materials unless specified elsewhere in the contract and complete the whole of the work in strict conformance with the plans and specifications .
num contents of tender the department shall furnish the bidder with a tender form and agreement which will show an estimate of the various quantities of work to be performed materials to be furnished and the time before which the work must be completed .
all papers bound attached or supplied with the tender form and agreement are a necessary part thereof and must not be removed from the tender package .
special provisions which are issued with the tender form and agreement shall supersede all other components of the tender but addenda may be issued at any time prior to the time and date specified in the advertisement for tender closing which may have the effect of modifying a special provision or any other tender component .
addenda issued within num hours of the closing date which affect a change in scope to the contract shall require an extension to the closing date of the tender .
the engineer shall determine the effect of a change in scope and the appropriate extension to the closing date required due to the effect .
num bidder investigations the bidder shall fully investigate the site and become acquainted with the location and character of the terrain upon which the work is being undertaken .
the bidder shall also become familiar with the plans profiles specifications both general and special provisions soil borings and reports and all other information concerning the work which may be supplied by the department to those bidding the contract .
no claims for extras will be entertained by the engineer unless the bidder can show that the extra cost arose from unforeseen circumstances not covered by the information provided to bidders by the department or not obvious to a prudent bidder before entering into the contract .
num preparation of tender the bidder must submit the tender on the forms furnished by the department .
the blank spaces in the tender form and agreement must be filled in for each and every item for which a quantity is given .
the bidder must write in ink the prices both in words and numerals for which the bidder proposes to do each item of the work contemplated .
the bidder must extend the total for each item of the work and carry out a summation to the total value of the work to be done under the tender .
if the tender form and agreement is made out by an individual the individuals name and post office address must be shown if it is made out by a firm or partnership the name and post office address of each member of the firm or partnership must be shown and if it is general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy instructions to bidders num num num made out by a corporation the person signing the tender must show the name of the province under the laws of which the corporation was incorporated and the names titles and business addresses of the president secretary and treasurer .
num delivery of tender the tender must be received on or before the time and date of the tender closing specified in the advertisement .
each tender form and agreement must be submitted in a sealed envelope and should be marked tender for .
. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
if forwarded by registered mail the sealed and marked envelope should be enclosed in another and sent to the minister department of transportation infrastructure and energy po box num charlottetown prince edward island cnuma numnnum if forwarded other than by registered mail it should be delivered to the minister of the prince edward island transportation infrastructure and energy num kent street charlottetown .
faxed or emailed submissions edits changes etc .
shall not be accepted .
num rejection of tender tenders will be rejected if they show any omissions form alterations additions not called for conditional or alternate bids or irregularities of any kind or if they contain a clause in which the bidder reserves the right to accept or reject a contract awarded .
the right to reject any or all tenders is reserved by the minister and lowest or any tender will not necessarily be accepted .
num bid and performance security bid security the tender shall be accompanied by either a a certified cheque equal to the amount specified in the tender form and agreement or b a bank draft equal to the amount specified in the tender form and agreement or c a bid format irrevocable standby letter of credit equal to the amount specified in the tender form and agreement on a government approved form or d a bid bond equal to the amount specified in the tender form and agreement .
the bid bond shall be from a surety company authorized to do business in canada guaranteeing to supply a performance bond and a labour and materials bond equal to the amount specified in the tender form and agreement .
the bidder shall forfeit the bid security to the minister if the bidder fails to enter into a contract when called upon to do so .
performance security before work commences on the project a performance security shall be filed with the department .
this security shall remain in place until the warranty period expires one year after substantial completion .
this performance security shall be either a a certified cheque in the minimum amount of ten percent num of the contract value excluding hst which shall be retained until the warranty period one num year after general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy instructions to bidders num num num substantial completion has elapsed .
note a certified cheque which has not been cashed shall be replaced within six months of the issue date or b a bank draft in the minimum amount of ten percent num of the contract value excluding hst which shall be retained until the warranty period one num year substantial completion has elapsed .
c a performance format irrevocable standby letter of credit on a government approved form in the minimum amount of ten percent num of the contract value excluding hst which shall be retained until the warranty period one num year after substantial completion has elapsed .
a performance standby letter of credit must have an automatic renewal clause within the body of the agreement or d a performance bond equal to num of the contract value excluding hst and a labour and materials bond equal to num of the contract value excluding hst which shall be retained until the warranty period one num year after substantial completion has elapsed .
the company issuing these bonds must be authorized to do business in canada .
a performance bond andor a labor and materials bond which matures prior to the end of the warranty period shall be replaced by the contractor with new security of equal value before maturity .
the minister may limit the performance security to bonds only to assure the completion of the work .
when a contract is to be completed over several construction years and portions of the contract are considered by the engineer as complete but the entire contract is not the engineer can issue a certificate of substantial completion for those portions of the work that are complete and the security which would be appropriate for that work can be released after the one year warranty expires .
all certified cheques irrevocable standby letters of credit bank drafts and bonds are to be made payable to the minister of finance province of prince edward island .
the contractor will forfeit the performance security to the minister if the contractor fails to carry out the contract when called upon to do so .
the government approved templates for the bid format and performance format irrevocable standby letters of credit can be found in appendix num .
bidders who choose to use the letter of credit as security must provide them as shown on these approved templates .
any deviation from this standard template may be cause for rejection of the tender .
the letters shall be on the bidders preferred financial institutions letter head and shall be signed and sealed by personnel having proper authority .
num withdrawal of tender a bidder will be permitted to withdraw the tender unopened after it has been deposited if a request is received by the department in writing prior to the latest time for receiving tenders .
num disqualification of tender each bidder shall submit only one num tender .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy instructions to bidders num num num num competency of bidder bidders must be capable of performing the various items of work bid upon .
bidders shall upon the request of the department provide a statement covering experience on similar work and a statement of their financial resources .
num material guarantee upon the request of the department bidders shall furnish a complete statement of the origin composition and manufacture of all materials to be used in the construction of the work together with any manufacturers instructions .
upon the request of the department bidders shall furnish samples of any or all materials to be used in the work these samples may be subject to testing as required by the department to determine their quality and fitness for the work .
num open truck haul for all truck haul for which department tickets are issued the contractor shall permit any person partnership or corporation to supply trucks for haulage of material to be used in the contract without giving preference to the contractors own trucks .
the contractor shall pay for trucks employed to haul materials to a work site at rates not less than the current government rates which may be reestablished from time to time by the department .
for those materials which are weighed for payment only those trucks which can be fully supported by the scales as required by measurements canada shall be permitted to haul .
these trucks must also conform to the vehicle configurations and restrictions as provided in section num of these specifications .
for those materials which are paid by volume the trucks must conform to the vehicle configurations and restrictions as provided in section num of these specifications .
the truck haul shall be considered to be that distance from the point of loading to the centre of the work being carried out in the contract agreement .
truck haul shall be determined in advance of any material being delivered to the work site .
the department representative and the contractor shall be in agreement with truck haul measurement prior to commencing the work .
the contractor shall limit the truck haul to those roads that can accommodate twoway traffic flow .
in the case of the material source being located on a road that can not meet this requirement the contractor may be required to provide pulloff areas as directed by the engineer .
the contractor may stockpile materials one time only prior to their incorporation into the work .
stockpile sites shall be determined and approved in advance of the stockpiling of the materials .
the contractor shall install weigh scales in accordance with section num at either the production site or the stockpile site .
in the case of materials imported by floating vessel the contractor may stockpile materials one time prior to their incorporation into the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy instructions to bidders num num num in the case of materials imported by truck the contractor must stockpile materials one time only prior to their incorporation into the work .
the haul from the stockpile to the work site shall be the open haul and no scales shall be required at the production site .
num scheduling of the work the contractor shall submit a schedule prior to being awarded the contract .
the department shall notify the successful bidder .
after receiving the notification the contractor shall have seven num working days to deliver an acceptable schedule .
the schedule shall be limited to the number of working days as stipulated in the tender form and agreement and shall be within the construction period as defined in section num definitions .
the department reserves the right to ask the contractor to revise the schedule prior to the time of commencement of the work .
in no case shall the scheduled completion date surpass the time of completion as stated in the tender form and agreement .
num errors or omissions the bidder shall notify the department of any errors or omissions found in the tender document prior to the tender closing .
num references all reference to acts regulations testing procedures and methods shall be understood to be the latest update to such acts regulations testing procedures and methods unless stated differently in the tender form and agreement .
num taxes harmonized sales tax .
the province is not exempt for harmonized sales tax hst purposes .
as a result the aggregate amount of tender for department contracts are subject to hst however prices submitted shall not include hst .
the hst payable by the department will be added as a separate item during department processing of progress payments and therefore hst will not appear as a cost in the aggregate amount of tender .
bidders are advised that they are eligible to claim an input tax credit itc for a portion of the hst paid in relation to the contract to the requirements of the government of canada .
num procedures for tender openings and evaluations num tender opening .
a preliminary check will be conducted at the tender opening to ensure the following information has been included .
security deposit .
each tender is reviewed to ensure that a security deposit accompanies the tender .
aggregate amount of tender contract price .
each tender is reviewed to ensure the total aggregate amount of tender contract price has been included .
all signed addenda if any .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy instructions to bidders num num num failure to meet these requirements shall result in rejection of the tender at the tender opening stage .
num tender evaluations .
all tenders not rejected at the tender opening will be subject to a detailed evaluation by department staff before a recommendation is made for award of tender .
this detailed review will take place as soon as possible after the public opening and will consist of the following tender form .
the tender shall be submitted on the proper form supplied by the department .
unit prices shall be written in ink or typewritten and shall be given in both words and numerals in the appropriate columns .
forms shall not be altered unless called for in a department addendum .
bid conditions .
the bidder is not permitted to include conditions with their tender .
bid security .
bid security meeting the requirements of clause num shall be included with the tender .
signaturesacknowledgements .
the tender form and agreement shall be completed and signed as an acknowledgement of the receipt and understanding of the tender documents .
arithmetic checks .
the tender will be checked for arithmetic errors .
in cases where the written unit price does not agree with the numeric price the written unit price will be used .
all mathematic errors will be corrected by department staff and the rating of tenders as to total bid will be based on the corrected totals .
failure to meet the requirements of the above items will result in the rejection of the tender .
unbalanced bids .
each unit price in the tender submission shall represent its proportionate share of the total cost of the work .
unbalanced bidding is not permitted .
the minister reserves the right in their sole and absolute discretion to deem a tender submission unbalanced and may reject any and all tenders which they so deem and for this purpose to be unbalanced .
identical bids .
where two or more acceptable bids are identical the successful bidder shall be selected by means of a coin toss performed by the department in the presence of the identical bidders .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy scope of work num num num num quantities the quantities set forth in schedule c of the tender form and agreement are based on estimated quantities .
if when carrying out the work andor supplying materials under the contract the quantities are foreseen to exceed the contract amount then the contractor shall notify the engineer .
either party may request a price adjustment when quantities on major items as stated within the tender form and agreement vary by more than num from the contract quantity .
adjustments to unit prices in the case of an overrun shall be applied only to that quantity that is over and above num of the original quantity .
num changes and alterations the engineer may in writing at any time alter the quantity of work to be done or materials to be supplied .
the contractor shall continue with the work and either party may request unit price adjustments in accordance with provision num .
in the case where the changes and alterations within the contract affect methods of construction and procedures then either party may request in writing negotiations to take place to determine the price adjustments to the contract .
the work shall not continue until these negotiations are finalized unless in the engineers opinion a stop work order would affect the safety of the travelling public or the completion of the contract .
num extra work work which can not be covered by any of the various items for which there is a bid price in the contract shall be deemed as extra work .
no additional work outside that which is included in the contract shall be done by the contractor except upon the written order of the engineer .
work that is deemed to be extra shall be paid in the order outlined below firstly the extra work will be paid for at rates agreed to by the engineer and the contractor prior to the extra work actually beginning .
secondly if the engineer directs the contractor to begin the extra work prior to rates of pay being agreed to by the engineer and the contractor and a rate of pay for the item is contained within the regularly published pei tie standard prices unbid jobs then the rates published in the standard prices unbid jobs shall be used as the basis for payment .
note if the work is carried out by a subcontractor then the contractor may add num to these rates .
finally if the engineer directs the contractor to begin the extra work prior to rates of pay being agreed to by the engineer and the contractor and a rate of pay for the item is not contained within the regularly published pei tie standard prices unbid jobs then the amount to be paid for the extra work shall be calculated as follows the contractor shall keep accurate records as agreed upon of quantities or costs and present an account of the cost of the change in the work together with vouchers where applicable .
the contractor shall present the valuation in detail giving actual material trade general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy scope of work num num num price not list price and actual labour costs including unemployment insurance and workers compensation premiums vacation pay etc .
and the actual cost of equipment rental if not covered in the province of prince edward island machinery rental rates .
to these prices the contractor may add the following percentage amounts to determine the total cost to the owner .
num .
for work involving the general contractor only the general contractor adds num to his costs .
num .
for work involving a subcontractor only the subcontractor adds num to his costs submits this price to the general contractor who adds num .
num .
for work involving the general contractor and a subcontractor the subcontractor adds num to his costs submits his price to the general contractor who adds num to this amount the general contractor adds the cost of his own work plus num of the cost of his own work only .
the general contractor does not add a further num to the cost of his own work .
note if the extra work includes machinery rental costs which are covered within the above noted machinery rental rates publication then these costs shall be added to the subtotal of all other costs ie no markup will be allowed by the contractor actually doing the work however the general contractor may add num to a subcontractors machinery rental rates as calculated in any of the above methods numbered num through num .
machinery costs which are not covered in the machinery rental rates publication will then be included in the calculations of the above methods numbered num through num .
the cost of any extra work shall not include the costs of service vehicles or the wages of supervisory personnel except under special circumstances authorized by the engineer .
the engineer may request the contractor to provide vouchers for all labour and materials used for extra work .
all provisions of the contract shall apply to extra work and no extra work shall cancel or impair the contract .
num final cleanup before the work will be accepted in accordance with provision num the contractor shall assure that the area within the limits of the contract are cleaned of all rubbish excess material equipment and temporary structures except for long term environmental structures .
in addition all ground grades shall match the surrounding terrain .
final cleanup costs shall be considered incidental to the performance of the work .
num acceptance of the work the engineer shall issue a certificate of substantial completion and shall list any deficiencies to the contract that need to be corrected by the contractor .
the engineer may accept any portion of the work when it is distinct and separate from the whole of the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy scope of work num num num the acceptance of any work does not alleviate the contractors responsibility for the quality of the work and materials supplied .
the engineer shall issue a certificate of final completion when all of the work has been completed inspected and there are no identified deficiencies .
the engineer shall issue a certificate of final acceptance and release the security deposit following the expiration of the one year warranty period and after any warranty issues have been rectified .
num subletting or assigning of contract the contractor may name any subcontractors to the contract under schedule e of the tender form and agreement .
this clause does not apply to the supply of materials but upon the award of contract the contractor shall be required to name the suppliers in writing prior to commencing work .
the department reserves the right to reject any subcontractor due to nonperformance or inability to do the work .
in no case shall any assignment or subletting of the contract relieve the contractor from responsibility for due performance and completion of the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy control of work num num num num authority the engineer is the departments representative and has authority to assure that the contractor completes all work in accordance with the plans and specifications .
the engineer shall determine the quantities of the work that are to be paid for under the contract and shall respond to all questions relating to the contract .
the engineer shall render decisions on all claims by the contractor .
the contractor shall at the contractors own expense furnish all reasonable aid and assistance to the engineer to enable proper inspection of the work .
notwithstanding any departmental inspections the failure of the engineer to condemn defective work or material shall not constitute a waiver of a specification or the acceptance of the defective work or material .
the contractor shall remain liable for any defective work or material and shall be responsible to correct any deficiencies .
num claims all claims shall be submitted in writing to the engineer prior to the acceptance of the work by the department .
the contractor shall be required to submit in writing any additional information that may be requested for the purpose of assessing the claims .
failure to submit the additional information requested in writing will be sufficient cause for not accepting the claim .
num modification of methods and procedures if at any time the engineer finds that the contractors methods equipment and procedures are found to be unsafe or nonproductive to the progress and quality of the work then the engineer may request in writing that the contractor modify methods equipment and procedures so that the safety progress and quality of the work are maintained .
failure of the contractor to comply with the engineers request may result in a stop work order being issued .
num plans and working drawings detailed plans of the existing conditions with a comprehensive description of the construction contemplated shall be available from the department .
working drawings showing shop details erection diagrams falsework formwork and any other such details that may be required for the work shall be submitted and approved by the contractor for review and acceptance by the department prior to work commencing .
the review and acceptance of any working drawings shall not alleviate the contractor from the responsibility for the soundness of such working drawings or for the work they represent .
the contractor shall not deviate from the contract plans or approved working drawings by the contractor without approval in writing from the engineer .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy control of work num num num num conflicts and omissions the onus is on the contractor to report any conflicts or omissions within the contract plans and specifications as soon as they become apparent .
the engineer shall determine which is to be followed and how the work is to be carried out .
the contractor shall not be entitled to additional compensation for work not specifically mentioned in the plans and specifications which is obviously necessary to complete the contracted work .
num lines and grades the engineer will only set such stakes that are necessary to properly define the location alignment elevation and grade of the work .
the contractor shall give a reasonable notice of the time and place where the lines and grades will be needed .
all stakes marks and reference points shall be carefully preserved by the contractor .
the contractor may be held responsible for the cost of replacing stakes marks or reference points that in the opinion of the engineer were disturbed unnecessarily when carrying out the work .
whenever necessary work shall be suspended for such reasonable time as may be necessary for the layout and inspection of any portion of the work .
the contractor shall not be allowed any extra compensation for this necessary suspension of the work .
num right of entry at any time during the work the department its servants or agents may enter the contract limits for the purpose of constructing or installing such collateral works that are necessary for the completion of the work .
the contractor shall accommodate any collateral work by scheduling their work so as not to interfere .
in the case where the contractor has knowledge of the collateral work at the time of bidding or when the collateral work does not affect the contractors methods and procedures no claim shall be allowed by the contractor .
num contractors responsibility the contractor shall continually give attention to the work while it is in progress .
the contractor shall identify and place a competent and reliable representative with authority to act for the contractor in charge of the work .
the contractor shall at all times supply a sufficient number of personnel and equipment to assure that the work is diligently completed in accordance with the specifications and the time specified .
num notice to contractor any notice order or direction given in writing by the engineer to the contractor or representative shall be deemed given whether delivered by hand mail facsimile or by general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy control of work num num num email .
failure of the contractor to respond to such notice order or direction may result in a stop work order .
num damage by vehicles and other equipment if at any time damage is being done or is likely to be done to areas outside the limits of the contract or to work already completed within the contract the contractor at the contractors own expense shall make changes in the type of equipment or its use and shall alter loadings so as to remove the cause of such damage .
the engineer may restrict the use of some local roads as haul routes in order to prevent damage to the road structures .
any damage caused by the contractors vehicles or equipment while carrying out the work shall be repaired at the contractors own expense unless such damage in the opinion of the engineer was unavoidable .
nevertheless the contractor shall take every reasonable step to avoid such damage .
num excess loading of motor vehicles the contractor shall not cause or permit vehicles to be loaded beyond the legal limits as specified in the roads act and regulations whether such vehicle is owned by the contractor or otherwise .
vehicles hauling materials to the work site which are weighed by department personnel will not be issued a ticket if such weight is in excess of the specified legal limits .
num defective work and materials no material shall be used in the work until it has been approved by the engineer .
all rejected material shall be removed and replaced with approved material at the contractors own expense .
if the contractor fails to remove the defective work or material within num hours the engineer may issue a stop work order .
the failure of the engineer to disapprove of any defective work or materials does not alleviate the contractor from responsibility for the work .
the work performed by the contractor shall have a warranty period of num year from the date of substantial completion .
if any failure due to poor workmanship or defective material occurs within the warranty period the contractor at the contractors own expense shall repair the deficiency .
num materials supplied by the department when the department is supplying material under the contract the contractor shall give the department sufficient notice for the delivery of the material .
when the department is supplying liquid asphalt cement the contractor shall pick up the asphalt cement from the source designated in the contract .
if any damage is done to material by the contractor after delivery it shall be repaired or replaced at the contractors own expense .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy control of work num num num num materials supplied by the contractor when the contractor supplies the material under the contract the material shall meet all specifications and manufacturing standards for the type of material supplied .
the unit bid price for the supply of material shall include all manufacturing costs freight charges royalties duties and applicable provincial taxes .
num utilization of surplus material and disposal of waste material all material which is not reused on a project will be considered surplus unless the engineer deems it to be waste .
the department will retain ownership and responsibility of all surplus material even if it is to be used outside the contract limits .
if the contractor is requested by the engineer to move surplus material off site or to stockpile and reload the surplus material the contractor shall be compensated for the haul off site andor the additional work of reloading the material .
for waste material once it is removed from the project site by the contractor the contractor assumes ownership and responsibility of the waste material including responsibility for proper disposal or reuse of the material .
the contractor shall ensure that the material is disposed of in compliance with all associated environmental acts and regulations such as the provincial environmental protection act and the federal fisheries act .
the unit bid price shall be full compensation for the proper disposal or reuse of the material .
num pit requirements prior to hauling of any material from any pit the contractor will make sure that the pit has a valid permit issued by the department of communities land and environment .
no material shall be hauled from any pit to the work site without this permit in place .
the contractor is also required to maintain the entrance to a pit to allow safe passage of departmental staff vehicles and trucks hauling material .
any damage caused by the failure to do so will be repaired at the contractors expense .
the contractor is required to operate and maintain all pits in accordance with all associated environmental acts and regulations including the provincial environmental protection act and the federal fisheries act .
num use of tarpaulins the contractor shall assure that all trucks hauling material to and from the work site are equipped with tarpaulins which are installed as part of a rail mounted system or they are of such size that they can fully cover the truck box .
the engineer may direct that any or all loads entering or leaving the work site shall be covered from the point of loading to the point of unloading .
failure of the trucker to carry out the direction of the engineer may restrict the trucker from hauling to the work site .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy control of work num num num num environmental protection the contractor shall carry out the work on the contract according to the plans and specifications and the approval to proceed issued by the environmental management section in such a manner so as to be in compliance with various environmental acts and regulations of the province of prince edward island andor the government of canada which concern the protection of the environment and any approvals or permits issued to the owner or contractor in accordance therewith .
the contractor shall carry out any extra work as directed by the engineer to protect the environment in accordance with provision num .
all work shall be carried out in accordance with the following documents num .
specifications manual division num environment num .
environmental requirements appendix anum .
num .
pei transportation infrastructure and energy environmental protection plan if the contractor fails to protect the environment in accordance with the above then a suspension of the work may be ordered as per section num of appendix anum environmental requirements .
the engineer may employ others to do whatever work is necessary for the protection of the environment and shall deduct the cost from any monies owed to the contractor .
failure of the engineer to act shall not relieve the contractor of any contractual responsibility .
all pits or plants from which material is taken or produced for use in the work shall comply with the regulations of the environmental protection act and regulations now in place and with the environmental requirements of appendix num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy legal relations and responsibilities num num num num contractor liable for risks contractor shall assume all risks and contingencies in connection with the work and shall bear all loss or damage .
if any such loss or damage shall occur before final completion delivery and acceptance of the work the contractor shall immediately at the contractors own expense repair restore and reexecute the damaged work within the specified time for completion .
the contractor shall repair at the contractors own expense all deficits and failures from any causes whatsoever whether such deficits or failures are due to the negligence of the contractor or due to bad workmanship and the contractor shall indemnify and save harmless the minister from any and all claims losses or damages in respect thereof .
num contractor liable for damages the contractor shall use due care that no person or property is injured and that no rights are infringed in the prosecution of the work .
the contractor shall be solely responsible for all claimable damages .
the contractor shall at the contractors own expense shall make such temporary provisions as may be necessary to ensure the avoidance of any such damage injury or infringement to prevent the interruption of or damage or menace to the traffic on any public or private road and to secure to all persons and corporations the uninterrupted enjoyment of all their rights during the performance of the work .
the contractor shall indemnify and save harmless the minister from and against all claims and demands losses costs damages actions suits or other proceedings .
num mail boxes the contractor at the contractors own expense shall carefully remove and satisfactorily replace any mail boxes in order to carry out the contract .
any mail boxes damaged by the contractor shall be repaired or replaced at the contractors own expense .
num insurance requirements the contractor shall without limiting its obligations for liabilities herein and at the contractors own expense provide and maintain the following insurances in forms and amounts acceptable to the minister .
comprehensive general liability in an amount not less than num inclusive per occurrence against bodily injury and property damage .
the government of prince edward island is to be added as an insured under this policy .
such insurance shall include but is not to be limited to the following products and completed operations liability owners and contractors protective liability blanket written contractual liability contingent employers liability personal injury liability nonowned automobile liability cross liability employees as additional insured broad form property damage general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy legal relations and responsibilities num num num operation of attached machinery shoring blasting excavating underpinning demolition removal pile driving and caisson work work below ground surface tunnelling and grading as application .
elevator and hoist liability .
automobile liability in an amount not less than num on all vehicles owned leased operated or licensed in the name of the contractor .
all the foregoing insurance shall be primary and shall not require the sharing of any loss by any insurer of the province and shall preclude subrogation by the insurer against the government of prince edward island .
num proof of insurance a certified copy of the required insurance shall be submitted prior to commencing work and shall be subject to the engineers approval for adequacy of protection .
approval by the engineer of any policy filed by the contractor shall in no way relieve the contractor of its obligations to provide the insurance referred to in the contract nor shall it imply that the policies are in accord with the terms of the agreement .
all required insurance shall be endorsed to provide the government with num days advance notice of cancellation or material change .
the contractor shall ensure that the products and completed operations coverage as applicable shall be in force for the duration of the warranty period .
the contractor hereby waives all rights of recourse against the province with regard to damage to the contractors property .
the contractor shall require and ensure that each subcontractor submits a certified copy of the required insurance in accordance with provision num insurance requirements .
num detours no detour shall be established without the authorization of the engineer .
the engineer may indicate as a special provision to the contract that a detour will be put in place to divert traffic around the work zone .
when such a provision is included in the contract all required traffic control devices will be erected maintained and removed by the department at the departments expense .
other work required for the construction of such a detour shall be included in the bid items of the contract .
notwithstanding the proceeding paragraph the engineer may order that a detour be implemented to divert traffic around the work zone if in the opinion of the engineer the work zone is unsafe for the travelling public .
when such a detour is implemented all required traffic control devices will be erected maintained and removed by the department .
if the detour is due to the contractor not carrying out the work in accordance with provision num the costs will be billed to the contractor .
the engineer may direct that any detour be removed and subsequently reestablished from time to time .
the contractor shall be responsible for removing barricades from the travelled portion of the roadway removing from view all signs pertaining to the detour replacing barricades and replacing the signs pertaining to the detour .
such temporary removal and general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy legal relations and responsibilities num num num replacement of any detour shall not be measured for payment but shall be considered as incidental to the work .
num provision of a road through the work unless otherwise provided the contractor shall at the contractors own expense make suitable provisions to accommodate all traffic pedestrian or vehicular over any part of the highway upon which work is being performed under the contract .
the contractor shall with the least amount of inconvenience provide for the safety of the travelling public during non working hours weekends and statutory holidays .
the work shall be completed progressively in order to assure a minimum disruption to the travelling public .
the grading operation shall not proceed more than num km ahead of the placing of materials and in no case shall more than num km of roadway remain unpaved within the contract .
any work not affecting the original travelled way may proceed as directed by the engineer .
num accommodating traffic where pursuant to provision num a detour is to be implemented to divert traffic around the work site the contractor shall provide traffic control persons to direct traffic through the detour as required to comply with the provisions of the latest edition of the pei temporary workplace traffic control manual of appendix num .
where pursuant to provision num a road is to be maintained through the work site the contractor shall provide install maintain and remove all traffic control devices at the contractors own expense as specified in the latest edition of the pei temporary workplace traffic control manual of appendix num .
all traffic control signs markings devices and procedures used must conform to or exceed the intent of the applicable specifications of the latest edition of the pei temporary workplace traffic control manual .
the contractor shall also provide traffic control persons to direct traffic through the work site in accordance with the latest edition of the pei temporary workplace traffic control manual of appendix num .
the contractor shall provide a traffic control plan as per the latest edition of the pei temporary workplace traffic control manual which shall be completed and signed by a trained and accredited traffic control manager .
all traffic control plans must be approved by the department prior to work commencing on site .
without limiting the responsibility of the contractor to properly notify the public of and protect it from traffic hazards the engineer may require the contractor to provide additional notification or protection for the public .
if at any time the contractor fails to provide safe passage and control of traffic on any existing road or detour for which the contractor is responsible and if the contractor fails to immediately correct an unsatisfactory condition upon being directed the engineer may issue a stop work order and may immediately correct the unsatisfactory condition and take such other action as is deemed necessary to provide for the safe passage and control of traffic .
the engineer may deduct from any monies due to the contractor on account of any cost .
failure to act on the part of the engineer under this paragraph shall not relieve the contractor from any contractual responsibilities .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy legal relations and responsibilities num num num num access to adjoining property adequate vehicular and pedestrian access to all properties adjacent to the work shall be provided at the contractors own expense .
when interruptions are necessary due to the nature of the work the contractor shall notify the landowners num hours in advance of the disruption .
the contractor shall schedule the work to minimize the effect of such disruptions .
num protection of utilities the contractor shall be responsible for determining the location of all utilities located within the work area prior to commencing the work .
during the course of the contract it is the contractors responsibility to consult with municipal authorities or utility companies for further information in regard to the exact location of these utilities to exercise the necessary care in construction operations and to take such precautions as are necessary to safeguard the utility from damage .
the contractor shall at the contractors own expense dig excavation pits for the location of any underground utility .
the preceding paragraph shall in no way relieve the contractor of any obligations under various provisions of the contract dealing with the contractors responsibilities for damage claims .
damage to any utility that the engineer deems to be unavoidable due to the prosecution of work shall be handled as extra work in accordance with provision num .
no claims will be allowed for additional work required in locating any utility or for damage caused by the contractor that in the opinion of the engineer was avoidable .
num use of explosives the use of explosives must be approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall conform to all regulations of the occupational health and safety act pertaining to the use and handling of explosives .
blasting shall be controlled electrically and the total electrical requirements of the circuits shall be within the stated capacity of the electrical equipment .
charges are to be a size and number compatible with the requirements of the project .
in addition to standard signals at the time of blasting the contractor shall warn all affected residents in advance that blasting will take place .
storage and transportation of explosives shall be in accordance with the provisions of the explosives act and any other requirements requested by the representative of the explosive division of the federal department of energy mines and resources .
num protection against royalties and patented inventions the contractor shall indemnify and save harmless the department from all and every claim for damages royalties or fees for the infringement of any patented invention or copyright occasioned in connection with work done or material furnished under the contract .
num protection of survey monuments the contractor shall be responsible for the cost of replacement of any geodetic bench mark survey monument or property marker which is disturbed or destroyed in the course of the work unless such disturbance or destruction is previously authorized in writing by the engineer .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy prosecution and progress num num num num time and order of completion the engineer may direct the contractor in writing as to the time precedence or order in which any work is to be done under the contract .
num time of commencement the contractor shall commence work in accordance to the schedule of work submitted under section num unless directed otherwise by the engineer and shall proceed continuously diligently and with all reasonable dispatch consistent with the proper execution of the work until final completion .
the rate of progress shall be such to ensure its final completion within the specified time .
after the schedule has been approved any changes to the date of commencement will require a minimum of one weeks notice to the engineer and approval from the engineer to allow for the proper utilization and scheduling of department workers .
revised schedules must be signed by the contractor and approved by the department prior to starting work .
the contractor must advise the engineer num hours in advance of the need for required employees .
num time of completion the whole of the work to be done under the contract shall be completed in accordance to the schedule of work submitted under section num .
in no case shall the time of completion exceed the completion of work date as specified in the tender document .
num extension of time an extension of time may be granted in writing by the engineer in the event of the work being delayed due to a change of scope in the work a significant unit quantity increase loss of production due to above average weather conditions delays in material supplied by others and any other causes beyond the contractors control .
such extensions shall be for such time as the engineer may prescribe and the engineer shall fix the terms on which the said extension may be granted .
any existing e.m.s .
permit pertaining to this contract may need to be extended and changes to it may be necessary .
an application by the contractor for an extension of time as herein provided shall be made to the engineer in writing prior to the end of the specified contract time .
where applicable all bonds or other surety furnished to the department by the contractor shall be amended where necessary at the expense of the contractor to provide coverage beyond the date of any extension of time granted and the contractor shall furnish the department with evidence of such amendment of the bonds or other surety .
any extension of time that may be granted to the contractor shall be so granted and accepted without prejudice to any rights of the department whatsoever under the contract .
all such rights shall continue to be in full force and in effect after the specified construction period .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy prosecution and progress num num num num liquidated damages the contractor shall pay liquidated damages for each working day beyond the number of working days andor the completion date as both specified in the contract or beyond any extension of time that may be granted in accordance with provision num .
the liquidated damages for work being carried out on arterial highways shall be assessed at num per day .
for work carried out on other highways or within any tendered project outside of highways limits liquidated damages shall be assessed at num a day .
num nonfulfilment of the contract if the contractor fails to complete or carry out the work under the terms of the contract the engineer may notify the contractor in writing to discontinue all work .
the engineer may employ such other means that may be necessary to complete the work and in such case the contractor shall have no claims for further payment for loss or damage against the department .
if the cost for completing the work exceeds the sum which would have been paid under the contract then the department shall deduct the additional cost from any monies due or surety that the contractor has in place .
num suspension of work the contractor shall upon verbal or written notice by way of a stop work order from a department representative discontinue or delay any or all work and the work shall not be resumed until the engineer directs so in writing .
num termination of contract the minister may at any time by notice in writing to the contractor terminate the work or any portion thereof and the contractor shall thereupon be entitled to payment for all work performed by the contractor as of the date of termination .
num labour disputes except to the extent that relief is granted under provision num the contractor shall bear the risk and responsibility of any loss damage or expense to the work or to the contractor arising from strikes or labour disputes other than such loss damage or expense caused by the failure of the department to meet its contractual obligations .
num character and employment of workers whenever the engineer informs the contractor in writing that any person or persons involved in the work are in the opinion of the engineer incompetent unfaithful or disorderly such person or persons shall be discharged from the work and shall not again be employed on the work without the consent in writing of the engineer .
num permits and licenses permits and licenses of a temporary nature normally required for the prosecution of the work shall be secured and paid for by the contractor .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy prosecution and progress num num num no extension of time for completion of the work will be allowed due to a delay in the contractor obtaining any licenses or permits .
num limitation of operations except for such work as may be required to maintain the travelled roadway in a safe and satisfactory condition for traffic the contractor shall not carry out operations under the contract between a half ½ hour before sunset and a half ½ hour after sunrise on any working day or at any time on saturday sunday or statutory holidays .
the engineer may require the contractor to work on saturdays sundays or statutory holidays to assure the safety of the travelling public .
in addition the engineer may require the contractor to work on saturdays in order to complete the work .
the engineer may in writing require the contractor to cease or limit operations under the contract on any working day or days if the operations are of such nature or if the work is so located or if the traffic is of such volume that the engineer deems it necessary or expedient to do so .
num occupational health and safety act the contractor is required to carry out the work in accordance to the occupational health and safety act of prince edward island .
the contractor will not be entitled to any extension of time or additional monies due to delays arising from a stop work order issued under the occupational health and safety act .
in the event that the department is issued a stop work order under the occupational health and safety act in relation to the contract the engineer will then issue a stop work order to the contractor as per section num .
failure of the contractor to comply with the conditions of the stop work order shall result in a num penalty .
the contractor shall submit to the department a copy of all occupational health and safety ohs reports independent of report content related to the contract .
the contractor shall also submit to the department written documentation of correctiveremedial measures taken to address any issue identified as requiring such in an ohs report .
num workers compensation insurance prior to commencing the work and prior to receiving payment on the certificate of substantial completion the contractor shall provide evidence of compliance with the requirements of the province with respect to workers compensation insurance including payment due thereunder .
at any time during the term of the contract when requested by the engineer the contractor shall provide such evidence of compliance .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy payment num num num num payments to the contractor progress payments equal to num of the value of work completed as determined by the engineer will be made monthly to the contractor as the work progresses .
such progress payments shall be based on a written progress estimate prepared by the engineer .
the num holdback is to meet the requirements of the mechanics lien act .
the contractor shall supply a statutory declaration that num of the monies the contractor owes in carrying out the work to date has been paid for the second and each subsequent progress payment .
the engineer shall deduct any liquidated damages from all payments made to the contractor .
the engineer shall make a deduction for any defective or deficient work from all payments made to the contractor except the final payment .
the engineer shall deduct either double the engineers estimated costing for the defective or deficient work or an amount set at the engineers discretion for the repair of any defective or deficient work .
notwithstanding the foregoing no payment shall be construed to be an acceptance of any defective work or material .
the engineer may release the holdback no less than num days after the date of substantial completion provided that the contractor has submitted a statutory declaration stating that all monies the contractor owes in carrying out the work have been paid .
the contractor shall also provide evidence of compliance with the requirements of workers compensation insurance .
when a contract is to be completed over several construction years and portions of the contract are considered by the engineer as complete but the entire contract is not the engineer can issue an interim certificate of substantial completion for those portions of the work that are complete .
the engineer may release the portion of holdback no less than num days after the date of interim substantial completion provided that the contractor has submitted a statutory declaration stating that all monies the contractor owes in carrying out the work have been paid .
performance security however which would be appropriate for that work will only be released after the one year warranty expires from the total contracts substantial completion date .
after the engineer is satisfied that all work associated with the contract has been completed a certificate of final completion will be issued and a certificate of final quantities will be presented to the contractor .
final payment ensuring that all quantities in the contract will be paid at num of their value will be made once the contractor accepts the certificate of final quantities .
num measurement of excavated materials by volume whenever the contract requires the payment for excavation at a price per cubic metre the volumes shall be measured in their original position and computed in cubic metres whenever the contract requires the payment for excavation at a price per cubic metre the volumes shall be measured in their original position and computed in cubic metres by the method of average end areas unless otherwise specified .
by comparing the original triangulated three dimensional surface to the excavated or graded triangulated three dimensional surface .
these two surfaces combine to form an enclosed volume .
the number generated for this volume in cubic metres represents the excavation quantity .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy payment num num num num measurement of weighed materials where the contract includes tender items that require measurement for payment by weighing the contractor shall provide install and maintain as necessary weigh scales meeting the requirements of the government of canada weights and measures act and regulations and in accordance with the weigh scale procedures of appendix num .
where an individual line item for granular material exceeds numt the contractor shall ensure that scales of a minimum of numm numft are used to weigh the material .
split weighing shall not be permitted .
if the contractor has more than one certified scale at the source the longer scale shall be the scale of record .
in the event the shorter scale is equal or greater than numm numft either scale can be considered the scale of record .
weight measurements shall be made by the weigher supplied by the department .
when a platform scale is being used on the contract the tares of the hauling vehicles will be determined before work commences and as required by the engineer .
vehicles which are being weighed for the tare shall contain the normal hauling complement of a driver and accessories such as spare tires and tools .
each truck and each coupled vehicle combination shall have a distinguishing number prominently displayed where it will be readily visible to the weigher .
the distinguishing number shall be a minimum of nummm high and located at the top front corner on both sides of the trailer box of all pup trailers semitrailers belly dump trailers and flowboy trailers .
the distinguishing number for a trailer must be the same as the number plate issued by highway safety division for that trailer .
all costs of providing installing maintaining and testing weighing equipment in accordance with this specification and the cost of any delay and inconvenience which may result shall be borne by the contractor as part of the work to be carried out at the contract price for the items which are measured for payment by weighing however the contractor will not be charged for labour and equipment supplied by the department to carry out tests and checks .
num measurement of quantities delivered by volume when materials are being paid by volume delivered payment will be based on truck measurement .
num payment of workers at minimum the contractor shall in addition to employee benefits and vacation pay pay signallers as required under section num employed for the purpose of this contract at least the current rate from the latest standard negotiated rates as established by the minister of transportation infrastructure and energy in addition to employee benefits and vacation pay .
should the rate change between the time of bid closing and construction a pay adjustment shall be applied to make up the difference .
the contractor shall in addition to any fringe benefits pay all other workers employed by the contract at wage rates not less than those established by the minimum wage order general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy payment num num num issued under authority of the labour act .
the contractor shall pay workers employed on the work at intervals of not less than twice a month .
the contractor shall require each subcontractor or other person doing any part of the work to covenant with the department that workers employed on the work by such sub contractors will be paid at the wage rates and intervals in accordance with this provision .
where any person employed by the contractor or any subcontractor or other person on work contemplated by this contract is paid less than the amount required to be paid under this contract the department may deduct from any monies payable to the contractor under this or any other contract and pay to such person a sum sufficient to bring that persons wages up to the amount required .
no claim for extra payment from the contractor will be considered by the department concerning any change in the minimum wage order which may occur during prosecution of the contract .
num haulage the cost of open truck haul in accordance with provision num shall be included in the unit bid price for all bid items measured in tonnes or cubic metres .
if the truck haul rate should change after the tender call then the unit bid prices shall be adjusted to accommodate the change .
num records of contractor open for inspection the contractor shall keep proper accounts and records of the cost to the contractor of the work and of all expenditures or commitments made by the contractor under contract including the related invoices receipts vouchers bill of ladings and statements .
such accounts invoices receipts vouchers bill of ladings and statements shall at all times be open to audit copying extracting information and inspection by the authorized representatives of government .
the contractor shall provide all facilities for the audits inspections copying and extractions and shall provide government and its authorized representatives with all information that is requested from the accounts records invoices receipts vouchers bill of ladings and statements .
subject to statutory limitations the contractor shall not without the written consent of government dispose of the accounts records invoices receipts vouchers bill of ladings and statements related to the contract but shall preserve and keep the same available for audit copying extracting information and inspections at any time .
num pay adjustments the num added for transporting hot mix asphalt as described in the trucking rates table in the pei standard negotiated rates document shall not be included in the fuel adjustment calculations .
the intent of this dollar is compensation for tarping and cleaning the truck box .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy earthwork num num clearing num grubbing num roadway excavation num topsoil removal and reinstatement num borrow from adjacent land num borrow from pit num granular base num fine grading num compaction num preparing shoulders num shoulder material num topsoil for landscaping num random rip rap num tap drain installation num ditching num culvert end cleanout num trench excavation and backfilling num geotechnical fabric num geogrid reinforcement num bedding material general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy clearing num num num num description clearing shall consist of the removal and disposal of all trees shrubs fallen timber logs and other surface litter within the rightofway and other areas as directed and designated by the engineer .
refer to section num vegetation clearing and disposal of ties environmental protection plan .
num construction method areas to be cleared shall be marked or staked by the engineer prior to any clearing operation .
all brush and trees shall be cut off at a height no greater than num mm above ground .
timber of any value shall be cleared of limbs and piled neatly outside the rightofway unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
all timber shall be the property of the department .
all brush and other debris resulting from the clearing shall be disposed of at the contractors own expense .
burning shall only occur at the discretion of the engineer .
any burning shall be in accordance with the provisions of the fire prevention act and regulations .
the contractor shall take precautions to prevent the fires from spreading and shall be liable for any damages caused in the performance of this work .
num method of measurement the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the number of hectares actually cleared derived from measurements made by the engineer .
num basis of payment clearing will be paid for at the unit bid price per hectare and this price shall be full compensation for tools machines labour and incidentals necessary to perform the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy grubbing num num num num description grubbing shall consist of the removal and disposal of all stumps and roots and other debris hereinafter referred to as debris .
refer to section num grubbing stripping and materials excavation of ties environmental protection plan .
num construction method environmental protection measures shall be installed if possible prior to beginning any excavation .
otherwise materials for environmental protection measures shall be onsite prior to excavation work and shall be installed at the earliest appropriate opportunity in consultation with the county environmental officer .
all work carried out under this section shall be done in accordance with the environmental requirements of appendix num .
grubbing shall be carried out for a distance of not more than num km ahead of grading operations .
the work shall consist of grubbing within the rightofway and other areas as designated by the engineer .
areas to be grubbed shall be marked or staked by the engineer prior to grubbing .
grubbing will not be required under embankments of num m or more .
debris shall become the property of the contractor and shall be disposed of at the contractors own expense .
application for and acquisition of relevant permits permission from landowners and compliance with applicable laws regulations and codes shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
a copy of any documents related to the foregoing shall be forwarded to the engineer .
num method of measurement the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the number of hectares actually grubbed .
num basis of payment grubbing shall be paid at the unit bid price per hectare derived from measurements made by the engineer of the designated and actually grubbed areas .
all tools machines labour and incidentals shall be fully compensated for in the unit bid price for grubbing .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy excavation num num num num description this work consists of excavating materials within the contract limits .
included would be the hauling and placement of suitable material within the contract limits the hauling and stockpiling onsite of surplus material for future use and the hauling and disposal of waste material .
this work is to be undertaken in accordance with section num refer to section num grubbing stripping and materials excavation of ties environmental protection plan num classification of excavated materials all excavated materials shall be classified for purposes of payment as rock muck earth or pavement as described herein .
all decisions concerning classification of excavated material will be made by the engineer .
num rock excavation material classified as rock shall include material excavated from solid masses or ledges of igneous sedimentary or metamorphic rock in their original or stratified bed or position and all boulders and detached fragments which measure one num mnum or more in volume .
num muck excavation material classified as muck may include bog and underlying material tree stumps roots andor organic matter .
muck shall be in a saturated flowable state high in silt or clay content requiring a water tight truck box to haul the material preventing drainage unto the haul road .
num pavement excavation material classified as pavement shall be asphaltic concrete portland cement concrete and portland cement stabilized soil i.e .
soil cement which may occur in a layer or in combinations of layers .
num common earth excavation material classified as common earth excavation shall include all other materials of whatsoever nature that may not be defined as rock muck or pavement .
this classification of material shall apply to all roadway and drainage construction work except culverts storm sewers and other underground pipe or conduit .
num earth excavation for pipe material classified as earth excavation for pipe shall include all other materials of whatsoever nature that may not be defined as rock muck or pavement which result from the installation or replacement of roadway culverts .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy excavation num num num num construction method prior to carrying out any work the contractor shall locate all underground services and shall take all necessary precautions to mitigate damage .
environmental protection measures shall be installed if possible prior to beginning any excavation .
otherwise materials for environmental protection measures shall be onsite prior to excavation work and shall be installed at the earliest appropriate opportunity in consultation with the county environmental officer .
all work carried out under this section shall be done in accordance with the ems approval to proceed and the environmental requirements of appendix num .
the contractor shall not excavate materials until crosssection measurements necessary to satisfy provision num have been taken .
the contractor shall perform all excavation operations in such a manner that flooding of embankment materials and roadway foundation materials is avoided either by providing effective surface drainage during all stages of the work or in the case of subexcavation and stripping operations where provision for surface drainage is not feasible by placing backfill material as soon as practical after excavation .
all materials that are to be incorporated in the work may be subject to testing by the engineer to determine suitability for use .
the contractor shall consult with the engineer for instruction regarding use of excavated materials which may be incorporated in the work disposed of due to poor quality or stockpiled to be used for other work .
the engineer shall determine what material is waste and the contractor shall dispose of the material in accordance with provision num .
when embankments less than num m in height are to be built the contractor shall first strip unsuitable materials from the foundation area .
should the contractor excavate to a depth greater than provided for in this provision the contractor shall be required to backfill such excavations at the contractors own expense and no payment shall be made for the backfill material or work required .
all excavated material used in the construction of the roadway shall be spread in uniform layers not exceeding num mm in thickness over the full width of the embankment .
embankments shall be constructed such that the first lift when sloped forms the toe of the slopes and each subsequent lift shall be completed to the full width prior to placing the next lift .
rock and rock fragments shall be uniformly distributed and broken to a maximum size of num mm .
each layer shall be shaped to the design crosssection and shall be thoroughly compacted in accordance with section num to num standard proctor density .
grading of excavated materials shall be performed within a tolerance of num mm .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy excavation num num num excavations which are potentially hazardous to the travelling public shall not proceed more than num m in advance of the backfilling operation such excavations shall be backfilled with the specified material and compacted prior to closing down operations each day .
num method of measurement the quantity to be paid for under this section shall be the number of cubic metres of excavated material as shown on the crosssection sheets between the original position of the ground lines as crosssectioned and the lines of the completed and accepted excavation as computed by the average end area method .
whenever material is to be excavated the contractor shall notify the engineer so that proper measurements or crosssections can be made .
no allowance will be made for material excavated before such measurements or crosssections have been made .
no allowance for excavated material will be made beyond the slope lines as indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment the measured volume of excavation shall be paid for at the unit bid price per cubic metre for excavation of rock muck pavement or earth material as the case may be and this price shall be full compensation for all the work including hauling and disposal of waste materials hauling and stockpiling of surplus material hauling and placement of suitable material including compaction equipment tools labour water for compaction and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
common earth excavation shall be divided into two payment line items common earth excavation suitablesurplus hauling and placement of suitable material andor the hauling and stockpiling onsite of surplus material for future use and common earth excavation waste hauling and disposal of waste material topsoil removal and reinstatement shall be paid for under section num .
environmental protection measures shall be paid for in accordance with the section for the type of environmental protection installed .
should the contractor fail to demonstrate diligent care in locating and protecting underground services all resulting repairs shall be the responsibility and the expense of the contractor .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy topsoil removal and reinstatement num num num num description this work shall consist of the excavation stockpiling and redistribution of topsoil and overburden as necessary .
num construction method environmental protection measures shall be installed if possible prior to beginning any excavation .
otherwise materials for environmental protection measures shall be onsite prior to excavation work and shall be installed at the earliest appropriate opportunity .
all work carried out under this section shall be done in accordance with the environmental requirements of appendix num .
the contractor shall remove all topsoil and overburden to the depth specified by the engineer and shall neatly and separately stockpile the material at a site approved by the engineer .
after removal and stockpiling of topsoil and overburden the contractor shall ensure that no other material is added to the topsoil and overburden stockpiles .
when the material is to be replaced on adjacent land the overburden and topsoil shall be spread in uniform layers .
when the material is to be reinstated within the rightofway the contractor shall place each layer to the depth determined by the engineer .
prior to reinstatement the area shall be scarified harrowed and cleared of all loose rocks and stones .
num method of measurement the quantity to be paid for under this section shall be the number of cubic metres of topsoil and overburden actually removed and replaced .
typically crosssection drawings will be prepared for computation by the average end area method .
no allowance will be made for material removed prior to the measurement of the original crosssections .
num basis of payment topsoil removal and reinstatement shall be paid for at the unit bid price per cubic metre and this price shall be full compensation for all work tools equipment labour and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy borrow from adjacent land num num num num description this work shall consist of the removal of borrow material from land adjacent to the work .
included would be the hauling and placement of suitable material for the construction of embankments within the contract limits the hauling and stockpiling onsite of surplus material for future use and the disposal of unsuitable or waste material .
num construction method environmental protection measures shall be installed if possible prior to any excavation .
otherwise materials for environmental protection measures shall be onsite prior to excavation work and shall be installed at the earliest appropriate opportunity .
all work carried out under this section shall be done in accordance with the environmental requirements of appendix num .
the contractor shall enter into an agreement with the land owner authorizing the contractor to excavate material from the land and upon request shall show proof of such an agreement .
the construction method shall be performed in accordance with section num and as specified herein .
topsoil and overburden shall be removed and reinstated in accordance with section num .
the adjacent land shall be crosssectioned prior to stripping of the topsoil and overburden and crosssectioned again prior to the removal of any borrow material .
the extent of the topsoil and overburden removal shall be limited by the rightofway and a line perpendicular to the rightofway of a minimum num slope projected from the design ditch grade to the surface unless otherwise specified by the engineer .
borrow material taken from adjacent land shall be approved by the engineer prior to placement on the work and rejected material shall be considered as waste to be disposed of by the contractor .
num method of measurement the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the number of cubic metres of borrow material as shown on the crosssection sheets and as computed by the average end area method .
no allowance will be made for material excavated before measurements or crosssections have been made .
num basis of payment the measured volume of borrow from adjacent land shall be paid for at the unit bid price per cubic metre and this price shall be full compensation for all work material transportation equipment tools labour water for compaction and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy borrow from pit num num num num description when sufficient quantities of material suitable for highway embankments are not obtainable from excavation within the rightofway in accordance with section num or from land adjacent to the work in accordance with section num the contractor shall provide borrow material from pits .
refer to num excavation pits of ties environmental protection plan .
num material borrow material specified in the work shall be of the type indicated in schedule c of the tender according to the following all borrow that is to be incorporated in the work shall be subject to tests by the engineer to determine its suitability .
such tests may involve chemical or physical analysis to determine the organic content bearing capacity density and stability .
the engineer reserves the right to reject any material based on the test results or on the basis of field performance .
num common borrow common borrow shall be nonplastic and free from lumps of clay or other deleterious material and shall have a maximum of num passing the num μm sieve .
regardless of the properties use of common borrow shall be subject to the approval of the engineer .
num select borrow select borrow shall be nonplastic well graded and composed of clean uncoated particles free from lumps of clay or other deleterious material with a maximum particle size of num mm and a maximum of num of the material passing the num mm sieve shall pass the num μm sieve .
num premium borrow premium borrow shall be nonplastic well graded and composed of clean uncoated particles free from lumps of clay and other deleterious material with a maximum particle size of num mm and a maximum of num of the material passing the num mm sieve shall pass the num μm sieve .
num construction method the contractor before entering any borrow pit site for operation purposes shall comply with provision num .
all work carried out under this section shall be done in accordance with the environmental requirements of appendix num .
the contractor shall clear and grub borrow areas and shall remove and stockpile topsoil and overburden .
where the borrow material is to be measured for payment by weight the contractor shall provide for weighing in accordance with provision num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy borrow from pit num num num the contractor shall ensure that the pit is excavated in such a manner as to avoid flooding of borrow material .
all borrow used in the construction of the roadway shall be spread in uniform layers not exceeding num mm in thickness over the full width of the embankment .
embankments shall be constructed such that the first lift when sloped forms the toe of the slopes and each subsequent lift shall be completed to the full width prior to placing the next lift .
rock and rock fragments shall be uniformly distributed and broken to a maximum size of num mm .
each layer shall be shaped to the design crosssection and shall be thoroughly compacted in accordance with section num to num of the standard proctor density .
all completed embankments shall truly conform to the lines and grades given by the engineer within a tolerance of num mm .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of cubic metres or tonnes of borrow .
the units of measurement shall be as indicated in schedule c of the tender .
when borrow material is to be supplied by the cubic metre the unit of measure for payment shall be by the volume of the truck box actually filled with borrow material .
where borrow is to be measured for payment by weight the quantity to be paid for under this section shall be the number of tonnes of borrow material weighed in accordance with provision num .
num basis of payment borrow from any pit shall be paid for at the unit bid price per cubic metre or tonne and this price shall be full compensation for all work royalty payments to land owners crop damage removal and stockpiling of topsoil and overburden trimming of pit slopes replacement of overburden and topsoil on the pit all equipment tools labour and incidentals necessary to compete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and enefgy granular base num num num num description this item shall consist of the supply and placement of aggregate to produce a granular base for the roadbed .
num material the material to be supplied under this item shall be in accordance with section num and shall be of the classification specified in the tender .
num construction method the contractor shall prepare the subgrade or subbase to receive the granular base by scarifying scraping and compacting as necessary to conform to the lines and grades given by the engineer within a tolerance of num mm and to provide compaction to num standard proctor density in accordance with section num .
the contractor will be completely responsible for ensuring the aggregate supplied is consistent with respect to particle size distribution and all physical properties as specified in section num .
the engineer may reject material received and may refuse any production source if the material lacks consistency or is proven to perform poorly .
aggregate supplied to the work shall not vary significantly in moisture content .
saturated aggregate will not be accepted for use in the work .
the contractor shall provide for weighing of the gravel in accordance with provision num .
placement of aggregate as granular base shall be within a tolerance of num mm to the lines and grades given by the engineer .
notwithstanding the acceptable tolerance work specified elsewhere may require more precise grading to ensure successful achievement of the work i.e .
pavements .
unless specified elsewhere all aggregate used in the construction of the granular base shall be spread in uniform layers not exceeding num mm in thickness over the full width of the roadway .
each layer shall be shaped to the design crosssection and shall be thoroughly compacted in accordance with section num to a minimum of num standard proctor density prior to the placement of the next layer .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of cubic metres or tonnes of aggregate for granular base .
the units of measurement shall be as indicated in schedule c of the tender .
when granular base material is to be supplied by the cubic metre the unit of measure for payment shall be by the volume of the truck box actually filled with aggregate .
when granular base is specified by the tonne the aggregate shall be weighed in accordance with provision num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and enefgy granular base num num num num basis of payment granular base shall be paid for at the unit bid price per cubic metre or tonne and this price shall be full compensation for all work aggregate material tools equipment labour and incidentals necessary to perform the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy fine grading num num num num description fine grading shall consist of shaping the roadway surface as shown on the contract drawings or as directed by the engineer to a final crosssection and profile in preparation for paving .
num construction method the required widths and lengths of the roadway surface shall be scarified unless otherwise directed by the engineer up to a depth of num mm to produce the specified grade and cross section and shall be compacted in accordance with section num to a minimum of num standard proctor density .
where insufficient material is obtained in the scarifying or blading operation to bring the crosssection and grade to within the specified tolerance the contractor shall provide additional material as provided for elsewhere in the contract and such material shall be placed to ensure homogeneity with the surrounding material .
the surface to be fine graded shall be to the width specified by the engineer but shall not be less than the width of the proposed pavement plus num mm on either side .
the maximum acceptable deviation from grade at any location shall be num mm of that specified .
the shaping and compaction operations shall continue until the surface conforms to the specified requirements and shall be repeated as required to maintain the surface until it is covered by pavement .
the equipment used shall consist of a rubber tired motor grader with a fully functional blade .
prior to fine grading the blade shall be inspected with a string line or straight edge to ensure the edge is true and not worn or cupped .
if the edge is worn cupped or damaged it shall be replaced or repaired prior to use for fine grading .
num method of measurement the area of roadway surface actually fine graded as herein provided shall be measured for payment in square metres .
num basis of payment fine grading shall be paid for at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for all work including scarifying and regrading equipment tools labour water for compaction and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
payment for additional materials provided will be paid in accordance with the section for the type of material supplied .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy compaction num num num num description this work shall consist of the compaction required on the subgrade subbase and base course materials .
num construction method the contractor shall provide the necessary compaction equipment to achieve the required compaction .
the required compaction shall be indicated in the various specifications for supply and placement of material .
the test method to assure that the required density is achieved shall be astm dnum for the supply and placement of all materials except for granular a and b as defined in section num which shall be aashto tnum method a and tnum .
the contractor shall take appropriate measures to ensure that the moisture content of the subject material is appropriate to achieve the specified density .
this may require reworking the material and airdrying or the application of water to the material .
num method of measurement there shall be no measurement for payment under this section .
num basis of payment no payment shall apply to this section .
compaction shall be supplied and paid for according to the various specifications for sub grade subbase and base materials .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy preparing shoulders num num num num description this work shall consist of excavating unsuitable material from the unpaved shoulder to the bottom of the asphaltic concrete in preparation for placement of new shoulder material .
num construction method the contractor shall excavate the existing unpaved shoulders to the lines and grades indicated by the engineer .
surplus shoulder material shall be disposed of in accordance with provision num .
the excavated surface shall be shaped to slope away from the pavement at a rate of num and shall be compacted in accordance to section num to num of standard proctor density .
excavations shall not be left open overnight .
waste material from the excavation shall be disposed of by the contractor .
the allowable deviation from grade shall be num mm .
num method of measurement the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the number of square metres of shoulders actually prepared .
num basis of payment preparing shoulders shall be paid for at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for excavation and disposal of material grading compaction and tools equipment labour and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy shoulder material num num num num description this work shall consist of the supply and placement of aggregate milled asphalt pavement borrow or topsoil on the shoulders of the roadway .
num material the material to be supplied under this section shall be of the type specified in schedule c of the tender and shall be approved by the engineer prior to placement .
aggregate shall meet all specifications for the class specified in section num .
borrow material shall be in accordance with subprovision num and topsoil shall be in accordance with section num with the additional requirement that num of both materials shall pass the num mm sieve .
num construction method the contractor shall prepare the shoulder as provided for elsewhere in the contract and shall ensure that any debris has been removed .
shoulder material shall be placed by a shouldering machine approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall produce a final graded surface having a uniform num crossslope toward the ditch except on the outer edge of a superelevated curve where the contractor shall consult with the engineer for direction .
where shoulder material is to be placed after paving compaction of aggregate and borrow shall be achieved using an appropriate rubbertired roller in accordance with section num to num of the standard proctor density .
the engineer may approve the use of an alternative type of roller if safe operation of a rubbertired roller can not be achieved .
topsoil shall be compacted to the satisfaction of the engineer .
excess shoulder material shall be removed at the contractors own expense .
all handwork required at driveways and intersecting roadways etc .
must be completed immediately following the shouldering process or the liquidated damages shall come in to effect .
the contractor shall sweep any excess material from the paved surface .
the contractor shall be responsible for repairing to the satisfaction of the engineer at the contractors own expense any damage caused to the paved surface by the shouldering operation .
num scheduling and liquidated damages shoulder material placement shall commence i for a one year project no later than four days after each individual section was ready for shouldering .
section length of roadway paved in one day ii for a multiple year project no later than four days after each individual section was ready for shouldering each year .
all shoulder material shall be placed within four days of the completion of the final lift of asphalt in each year .
liquidated damages of num per day shall be assessed for each day general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy shoulder material num num num beyond num days after the asphalt paving is completed .
this shall apply regardless of whether paved shoulders exist .
num method of measurement the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the number of tonnes of shoulder material placed .
num basis of payment shoulder material shall be paid for at the unit bid price per tonne for supply and placement of shoulder material and this price shall be full compensation for all work royalty payments to land owner equipment tools labour and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy topsoil and landscaping num num num num description this work shall consist of the supply and placement of topsoil for in areas designated by the engineer .
num material topsoil shall be a fertile friable loamy soil .
topsoil shall not contain excessive amounts of roots stones sods clods or other foreign matter .
topsoil shall come from a source which does not contain past or current evidence of invasive plants or seed .
the engineer shall accept or reject topsoil based on the overall quality andor source of the material .
num construction method areas to be landscaped with topsoil shall be scarified or tilled to a depth of num mm and then uniformly graded such that after topsoil placement the areas shall blend in with the adjoining topography .
topsoil shall be spread on the prepared areas to a uniform depth of num mm unless otherwise directed .
stones and all other deleterious materials shall be removed to the satisfaction of the engineer .
the final product shall be considered landscaped and ready for seeding .
the contractor shall perform a cleanup of excess topsoil spilled outside of the areas designated for landscaping .
num method of measurement the quantity to be measured for payment under this section shall be the number of tonnes in accordance with provision num or the number of cubic metres by truck box measure .
num basis of payment topsoil shall be paid for at the unit bid price per tonne or cubic metre and this price shall be full compensation for the supply of topsoil and all work including but not necessarily limited to landscaping scarifying tilling grading land levelling raking tools equipment labour and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy random rip rap num num num num description this item consists of the supply and placement of class num and class num random rip rap in accordance with the plans or as directed by the engineer .
refer to section num rip rap of ties environmental protection plan .
num material materials shall be supplied by the contractor after being approved by the engineer .
the engineer shall be notified of rip rap sources in writing at least num days prior to the contractor obtaining material .
the rock shall be free of splits seams laminations weak cleavages or defects likely to impair its soundness during handling and placing or result in undesirable weathering and disintegration from the action of air water and ice .
any rip rap with features such as seams joints lenses and bands of similar or different lithological material e.g .
conglomerates that tend to form planes of weakness along which the stone material breaks of separates shall be rejected .
random rip rap material supplied under this item shall be a wellgraded mixture and shall meet the gradation sizes as specified in table num .
the least dimension of any rock shall not be less than one half of the greatest dimension .
in addition random rip rap shall satisfy the following physical requirements class num class num random rip rap shall consist of clean hard durable quarried stone having a density of not less than num tonnemnum and a maximum petrographic number of num .
the rock material if subjected to the los angeles abrasion test astm cnum shall have a loss not greater than num .
when tested for soundness five cycles of magnesium sulphate astm cnum the rock material shall have a loss not greater than num .
sandstone rock will not be acceptable for use as class num random rip rap .
rock when tested by the freezethaw test method in accordance with mto ls num shall have a loss not greater than num .
class num class num random rip rap shall consist of clean hard durable field or quarry stone free of overburden and organic soil and approved for use by the engineer .
rock with visible planes of weakness andor subject to distinct deterioration by water or weather will not be accepted .
the contractor shall always use class num random rip rap unless otherwise specified .
num construction method the contractor shall provide for the weighing of random laid rip rap material in accordance with provision num .
before placing random rip rap grades and slopes of underlying material shall be shaped as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
random rip rap shall be placed in areas shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the random rip rap shall be placed by procedures and equipment approved by the engineer until specified dimensions are obtained .
no pushing of the stones by bulldozers or other equipment will be allowed .
the random rip rap shall be placed in such a manner that underlying slopes are not disturbed and material is not wasted .
the rip rap shall be placed such that each rock is stable secure and supported by rocks below and the placement shall be controlled to ensure that a uniform and continuous cover is achieved .
when random rip rap is placed on top of a geotextile the contractor shall take due care to prevent damage to the geotextile material .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy random rip rap num num num num quality controlquality assurance the acceptability of the rock for use shall be determined based on available service records andor laboratoryfield test results .
any additional prequalification testing shall be carried out at the discretion of the engineer .
control of gradation of material as delivered to the site shall be by visual examination .
any difference in opinion between the engineer and the contractor shall be resolved by testing carried out by qualified personnel in accordance with astm dnum test method a .
the contractor shall provide the equipment a sorting site and any labour required to undertake such testing .
the cost associated with any required prequalification testing shall be borne by the contractor .
the cost of the provision of materials labour and equipment to resolve disagreement between the owner and the contractor shall be borne by the contractor if the test results show that the material does not conform to the specified gradation otherwise the owner shall bear the cost of the testing .
the cost of any retesting to resolve the supply of the specified material gradation shall be borne by the contractor .
num method of measurement measurement for payment of random rip rap shall only include material supplied and placed in accordance with the provisions of this section and acceptable to the engineer .
the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the acceptable number of tonnes of random rip rap weighed in accordance with provision num .
num basis of payment random rip rap material shall be paid for at the unit bid price per tonne and this price shall be full compensation for supply and placement including labour tools equipment loading delivering stockpiling transporting both to the site and on site as required .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy random rip rap num num num table num random rip rap gradation finer by mass size mm rnum rnum rnum rnum rnum rnum rnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num thickness num mm num num num num num num num num measured perpendicular to the prepared surface num the titles rnum rnum etc .
refer to minimum average mass in kg .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy tap drain installation num num num num d escription this work shall consist of construction of diversion ditches outside of the roadway hereafter referred to as tap drains .
refer to section num tap drains of ties environmental protection plan .
num c onstruction method environmental protection measures shall be installed if possible prior to beginning any excavation .
otherwise materials for environmental protection measures shall be onsite prior to excavation work and shall be installed at the earliest appropriate opportunity .
all work carried out under this section shall be done in accordance with the environmental requirements of appendix num .
the engineer shall lay out the line and grade of the tap drain prior to excavation .
the tap drain shall be constructed to have a minim um num m wide flat bottom and side slopes not steeper than num unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
clearing grubbing and topsoil rem oval and reinstatem ent as required shall be perform ed in accordance with the respective provisions num num and num .
hay mulch shall be supplied and placed on all bare soil surfaces on a daily basis .
excavated material deem ed as surplus may be reused or stockpiled for future use .
the contractor shall transport this material within the job site to a location indicated by the engineer .
excavated material deem ed as waste shall be disposed of in accordance with provision num num method of measurement the quantity to be measured for tap drain construction shall be the number of linear meters of tap drain constructed .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per linear meter and this price shall be full compensation for all work clearing grubbing excavation stockpiling and topsoil rem oval and reinstatement equipment labour and incidentals necessary to perform the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy ditching num num num num description this work shall consist of excavating and regrading the existing ditch within the roadway and removing sediment buildup around inlets and outlets of roadway and driveway culverts located within the limits of the work .
refer to section num ditching of ties environmental protection plan .
num construction method environmental protection measures shall be installed if possible prior to beginning any excavation .
otherwise materials for environmental protection measures shall be onsite prior to excavation work and shall be installed at the earliest appropriate opportunity in consultation with the county environmental officer .
all work carried out under this section shall be done in accordance with the ems approval to proceed and the environmental requirements of appendix num .
the excavation shall proceed in the upstream direction .
the ditch shall be reshaped to have a num m wide flat bottom with side slopes not steeper than num .
in cases where the available rightofway is insufficient in width to achieve the desired crosssection the engineer shall direct the contractor on a case specific basis .
immediately upon completion of the ditching or as a minimum at the end of the day and if so directed by the engineer disturbed slope areas within numm of a culvert shall be stabilized as indicated in section num culvert end treatment .
hay mulch shall be supplied and placed on all bare soil surfaces as required by the engineer .
excavated material deemed as surplus may be reused or stockpiled for future use .
the contractor shall transport this material within the job site to a location indicated by the engineer .
excavated material deemed as waste shall be disposed of in accordance with provision num .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of linear metres of ditch reshaped .
no measurement for payment will be made under this section for culvert end treatments but shall be made under section num .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per linear metre and this price shall be full compensation for all work including excavation tools labour equipment and incidentals necessary to perform the work .
payment for culvert end treatments shall be in accordance with section num .
payment for environmental protection measures shall be paid for in accordance with the section for the type of protection required .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy culvert end cleanout num num num num description the work to be carried out under this section involves excavation of earth buildup near the ends of drainage culverts .
this item is essentially a maintenance measure designed to correct accumulated sediment buildup from local sources of soil erosion num construction method the contractor shall excavate excess material from within the ditch and culvert using appropriate hand and power tools .
handwork shall be required in many cases to avoid damage to the culverts .
the contractor shall dig a sump at the downstream end of the culvert .
sediment or rock deposits inside the culvert shall be removed .
damage to culverts as a result of this work shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the engineer at the expense of the contractor .
upon completion the original ditch profile and crosssection shall be restored to allow unobstructed drainage and the transition to the existing ditch shall be smooth .
the engineer may specify a location within the job for surplus material to be deposited for re use if not reused waste material shall be disposed of by the contractor .
excavation under this section shall not exceed num m in length at any culvert end .
immediately upon completion of the culvert end clean out extension or as a minimum at the end of the work day disturbed slope areas within numm of the culvert shall be stabilized as indicated in section num culvert end treatment .
num method of measurement the quantity to be measured for payment under this section shall be the number of culvert ends improved .
no measurement for payment will be made under this section for culvert end treatments but shall be made under section num .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per culvert end improved and this price shall be full compensation for all work tools labour equipment and incidentals necessary to perform the work .
payment for culvert end treatments shall be in accordance with section num .
payment for random rip rap shall be in accordance with section num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy trench excavation and backfilling num num num num scope this section specifies the requirements to perform excavation of all types of material to dispose of unsuitable and surplus material to place bedding material to place excavated material as backfill and to furnish backfill material .
the work generally includes but is not necessarily limited to the following items trench excavation and backfilling for pipelines conduits and appurtenances .
structure excavation and backfilling for manholes catch basins chambers signal pole bases and controller cabinet bases .
supply and placement of bedding material .
control of water in trench excavations by dewatering .
removal and disposal of surplus andor unsuitable material .
sheeting shoring trench boxes and bracing to support trench walls sides of excavations existing structures or utilities .
num existing structures and underground services furnish temporary support adequate protection and maintenance for all underground and surface structures drains forcemains water systems sewers trees utility poles and other obstructions under the direction of the engineer .
restore upon completion of the work structures which have been disturbed .
wherever obstructions not shown on drawings are encountered that interfere with the work the engineer shall have the authority to change the drawings and order a deviation from the line and grade or arrange with the owner to remove relocate and reconstruct the obstructing structure .
the contractor shall have no claim for any delays resulting from unforeseen obstructions encountered during the progress of the work .
the contractor shall proceed with caution in excavation and preparation of trenches so that the exact location of all buried pipes and services and underground structures may be determined .
the contractor shall be responsible for any repair of pipes services and structures when broken or otherwise damaged .
during the work the contractor shall not unreasonably interfere with flow of sewage or water in any existing sewer or drain nor jeopardize public health in any way .
wherever a sanitary sewer is pumped or diverted it shall be carried entirely in closed pipes .
temporary diversion of sanitary sewerage through an open channel shall not be permitted .
whenever it is necessary to explore and excavate to determine the location of existing underground utilities it shall be at the contractors own expense .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy trench excavation and backfilling num num num num support of excavation suitably slope or properly shore sides of excavations according to site conditions and use support where necessary .
the choice of any method of support shall be the responsibility of the contractor however drawings and calculations for the method of support designed by a qualified professional engineer in accordance with the provincial safety requirements are to be submitted to the engineer for approval .
if it is desirable that any support other than that which may be shown on the drawings be left in the excavations then the engineer will issue instructions accordingly .
every precaution shall be taken against slips or falls if a slip or fall occurs the contractor shall execute remedial work as the engineer considers necessary including filling with approved granular material .
num material select backfill material approved material from site excavation .
such material shall be free from stumps trees roots sod muck or other deleterious material and shall not contain rock boulders or masonry larger than num mm in diameter .
the material shall be free from frost and it shall not be placed on frozen ground or in water .
bedding material shall be the class specified in accordance with sections num and num .
num construction method general compute amounts and nature of excavation required and excavate all materials encountered on the work site .
protect property or structures above or below ground .
where excavation is to be performed through existing pavement cut pavement in accordance with section num .
found excavated surfaces on solid undisturbed ground .
if the excavated surface is unsuitable the engineer will determine what work is required to secure a proper foundation .
if such work is due solely to the nature of the ground then the engineer will measure the work but if such work is due to any act or default of the contractor resulting in disturbance of natural ground conditions then the contractor shall execute the work at no additional cost to the contract .
any excavation to a depth greater than shown on the drawings shall be at no additional cost to the contract unless ordered by the engineer .
make good trench bottoms with approved granular material adequately compacted as approved by the engineer or with concrete as may be necessary for the safety or stability of the work .
pile excavated material so it will not endanger personnel or the work reduce sight distances or obstruct roadways .
leave utility controls unobstructed and accessible at all times .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy trench excavation and backfilling num num num do not obstruct drainage ditches or natural watercourses .
remove all waste material with the engineers approval from the site at no additional cost to the contract .
the engineer reserves the right to reuse surplus material for embanking general grading or other improvements or uses on site .
control grading so that the surface of the ground will be properly sloped to prevent water from running into excavated areas .
num draining pumping and thawing keep all excavations and trenches free of water at all times .
control excavations to prevent surface water running into excavated areas and promptly remove any accumulated water .
supply and maintain pumps in number and capacity sufficient to keep all excavations dry and free from water at all times .
operate all equipment for as long as necessary .
dispose of water removed from excavations in a manner that will prevent damage to public health private property or the work .
pumping of water containing silt or other suspended material into streams or drainage courses is prohibited .
ensure that all subdrains sump holes wells or the like do not endanger the stability of the work .
on completion of the work completely backfill and consolidate any excavations .
excavate remove or thaw out frozen ground as necessary .
num structure excavation extend excavations a sufficient distance from foundations to allow the placement and removal of forms installation of services and inspection .
num trench excavation trenches for piping and related excavations shall be of sufficient width and depth at all points to allow pipes to be laid joints to be formed and appurtenant structures to be built .
when needed allow for sheeting and shoring pumping draining and removal and replacement of materials unsuitable for foundations .
excavate trenches so pipe can be laid to the alignment and depth required .
excavate only so far in advance of pipe laying as permitted by the engineer in most cases this shall be only what can be backfilled in the same day .
brace and drain trench so workmen can work safely and efficiently .
remove all organic material and soft deposits until medium dense to dense materials are encountered or to a depth as specified by the engineer .
do not stockpile excavated materials alongside trenches if the bearing soil will cause trench side failure or bottom uplift .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy trench excavation and backfilling num num num num bedding general bear foundations of all structures including pipe surrounds on num mm granular bedding material unless otherwise shown on the drawings .
the bedding material shall be compacted to num standard proctor density except when under existing or proposed asphalt which shall be compacted to a minimum of num standard proctor density in accordance with section num .
in confined areas of the excavation bedding shall be compacted using suitable hand or plate tampers .
neatly finish all bearing surfaces to the required levels and grades .
num backfilling general after pipelines and structures have been built backfill trenches and other excavated areas as specified with materials shown on the drawings .
remove all timber and debris from excavations before backfilling .
do not cover or put out of view any work until it has been examined approved and measured by the engineer .
if any work is covered without approval of the engineer it must be uncovered for examination .
any stones greater than num mm shall not be placed within num mm of the structure or pipe .
num backfilling structures after installation of structures and after authority to proceed backfill excavations using select backfill material .
place backfill in horizontal layers not more than num mm deep .
compact each layer to obtain a minimum density of num standard proctor density in accordance with section num .
bring backfill up evenly on all sides to a suitable elevation above grade to allow anticipated settlement .
num backfilling trenches backfill trench from top of bedding to top of subgrade using materials shown on the drawings .
place backfill in num mm layers and compact in accordance with section num to num standard proctor density with the exception of under existing or proposed asphalt which shall be compacted in accordance with section num to a minimum of num standard proctor density .
during backfilling keep trenches free of water at all times and control water to prevent surface water from running into excavated areas .
remove any silty materials which become wetted and subsequently liquid or extremely plastic .
leave surfaces of backfill initially high and make good any settlement of trench backfilling .
num method of measurement there shall be no measurement for payment under this section .
num basis of payment no payment shall apply to this section general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation and public works geotechnical fabric num num num num description this work involves supplying and placing of geotechnical fabric to be used as a separation layer between successive layers of distinct materials .
num material the plastic yarn of the geotechnical fabric and the threads used in sewing operations shall consist of a long chain synthetic polymer composed of at least num by mass of propylene ethylene ester amide or vinylidenechloride and shall consist of stabilizers or inhibitors added to the base plastic to make the filaments resistant to deterioration by ultraviolet and heat exposure .
type nnum nnum nnum and nnum fabric shall be a previous sheet of nonwoven plastic yarn .
type wnum and wnum fabric shall be a sheet of woven plastic yarn .
the geotechnical fabric shall conform to the requirements as listed in table num the material shall be handled and protected as per the manufacturers instructions and recommendations until incorporated into the work .
the contractor shall submit in advance of the work a mill certificate for the geotechnical fabric to be supplied as well as the manufacturers recommended procedures for installation and instructions for handling of the selected geotextile .
num construction method the contractor shall carry out the work as indicated in the contract documents andor as directed by the engineer .
install geotechnical fabric on a surface that has no stumps brush limbs or other material that may tear or puncture the fabric .
the fabric shall be layered in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
fabric that is damaged shall be replaced immediately .
num method of measurement the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the area in square metres of geotechnical filter fabric placed .
num basis of payment payment for the work under this section shall be the unit bid price per square metre for each type of geotechnical fabric supplied and installed .
it shall be the full compensation for the material the cost the labour tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation and public works geotechnical fabric num num num table numrequirements of nonwoven and woven geotechnical fabrics type of fabric property note num unit astm nnum nnum nnum nnum wnum wnum mullen burst strength kpa dnum num num num num num num tearing strength trapezoid method n dnum num num num num num num grab tensile strength both directions n dnum num num num num num num elongation at break dnum num num num num num max .
num max .
apparent opening size µm dnum num to num num to num num to num num to num num max .
note num uv degradation ret .
dnum num min .
note num permittivity sec g¹ dnum num to num num to num num to num num to num num min .
note num thickness mm num min .
note num values above the heavy line are minimum average roll values marv note num special requirement defined in the contract documents general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy geogrid reinforcement num num num num description this work includes the supply and placement of geogrid which will serve to strengthen the roadbed .
num material geogrid to be bxnum or bxnum as manufactured by tensar or equivalent in terms of physical properties and strength .
the geogrid shall be a biaxially formed regular grid structure resistant to ultraviolet degradation to damage under normal construction practices and to all forms of biological or chemical degradation normally encountered in the material being reinforced .
it shall also have the characteristics outlined in table num .
table numrequirements for geogrid reinforcement property type num minimum type num minimum test aperture stability for punched and drawn mndeg num num astm dnum dnummnum aperture size along roll length mm num num calipered open area num num calipered rib thickness at ribs mm num num calipered polypropylene material num num astm dnum carbon black material num num astm dnum flexural rigidity along roll length mgcm num num astm dnum num strength at junctions kgm num astm dnum num tensile strength num strain mdxmd knm num num num num astm dnum num tensile strength num strain mdxmd knm num num num num astm dnum num efficiency of junctions num num astm dnum num num construction method general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy geogrid reinforcement num num num the contractor shall supply material in standard rolls for general application where designated by the engineer .
the geogrid shall be laid on the prepared surface as indicated on the contract drawings or as directed by the engineer .
geogrid shall be laid in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
cut and overlap geogrid to accommodate curves underground structures and other protrusions .
secure geogrid to prevent separation and to provide anchorage in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
num method of measurement the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the number of square metres of geogrid actually used .
num basis of payment geogrid shall be paid for at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for the material the work labour tools equipment and other incidentals necessary to complete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy bedding material num num num num description this work involves the supply placement and compaction of granular bedding material for trenches catch basins storm sewers sidewalks conduits or similar work .
num material bedding material shall be the material specified in the tender document and it shall be in accordance with section num or num .
num construction method bedding material shall be placed and compacted to num standard proctor density except when under existing or proposed asphalt which shall be compacted to a minimum of num standard proctor density in accordance with section num .
num method of measurement measurement for payment of bedding material shall be the number of tonnes or cubic metres placed .
num basis of payment payment for bedding material shall be at the unit bid price per tonne or per cubic metre supplied placed and compacted .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy drainage num num storm sewer pipe installation num catch basin installation num catch basin manhole and valve adjustment num drain tile installation num roadway culvert installation num driveway culvert placement num culvert extension num culvert removal num timber box culvert num concrete box culvert num multiplated corrugated steel arch num culvert end treatment general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy storm sewer installation num num num num description the work of this section shall consist of storm sewer installation of precast concrete pipe pcp corrugated steel pipe csp double walled polethylene pipe dwp or poly vinyl chloride pipe pvc excavation of trenches placement of bedding material dewatering and backfilling .
num material num precast concrete pipe pcp unless specified otherwise in the tender document all concrete storm sewer pipes outfall pipes catch basin leads and flexible gaskets are to be supplied by the contractor .
concrete storm sewer pipe outfall pipe and catch basin lead are to be to astm cnum class iii reinforced concrete pipe designed for flexible rubber gasket joints to astm cnum and to the diameter indicated on the drawings .
num corrugated steel pipe csp unless specified otherwise all corrugated steel storm sewer pipes outfall pipes catch basin leads and couplings are to be supplied by the department in accordance with provision num .
num double walled polyethylene pipe dwp unless specified in the tender agreement all double walled polyethlene pipe dwp and all pipe fittings and gaskets are to by supplied by the contractor .
high density polyethylene pipe shall meet the requirements of the latest cancsa standard bnum with a minimum stiffness of num kpa joined together with an integral gasketed bell connection .
the gasket is to be type num silt tight .
double walled polyethylene pipe dwp nummm to nummm diameter has a smoothwalled interior and a corrugated exterior wall that is manufactured in standard lengths of approximately six metres .
num poly vinyl chloride pipe pvc unless specified in the tender agreement all poly vinyl pipe pvc pipe fittings and gaskets are to be supplied by the contractor .
poly vinyl pipe up to nummm diameter shall meet the requirements of the latest cancsa standard bnum and bnum .
the pipe shall be able to be joined by an integral gasketed bell and spigot connection .
the gasket is to be type num silt tight .
num galvanized steel grate unless specified in the tender agreement all galvanized steel grates and fasteners are to be supplied by the contractor .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy storm sewer installation num num num all steel grates and fasteners shall be hotdipped galvanized steel with a minimum coating of num g mnum squared as per csa gnum .
num construction method general the contractor shall begin work at the downgradient end of the section to be installed .
trench excavation bedding and backfill shall be in accordance with section num .
the excavated width of the bottom of the trench shall not be less than num mm nor more than num mm greater than the diameter of the pipe .
at the location of any bends the trench shall be shaped to accommodate bends .
all excavated trenches shall conform to the prince edward island occupational health and safety act and regulations with particular note to part num and part num .
bedding material shall be placed by hand in layers not exceeding num mm under the bottom one third a of the pipe for pcp and csp pipes .
dwp and pvc pipes shall be backfilled with bedding material to num mm above pipe or pipe diameter whichever is less .
pipes are to be installed with the use of laser or survey equipment specifically manufactured for pipe installation .
pipes which are not true in alignment or which show improper installation shall be taken out and relaid at the contractors own expense .
exposed inlets and outlets of storm sewer systems shall be tapered num horizontalvertical .
pipes num mm or greater in diameter and connected to closed storm sewer systems shall require galvanized steel grates to restrict access to the system .
open ended pipes num mm or greater in diameter and greater than num metres in length shall require galvanized steel grates to be fastened at the inlets and outlets .
bars shall be orientated vertically at inlets and horizontally at outlets .
installation of storm sewer grates shall be in accordance with figures num and figure num .
num precast concrete pipe pcp for pcp installation recesses shall be excavated for the bells .
the bell ends shall be placed upgrade with the spigot end fully entered into the bell .
num corrugated steel pipe csp csp shall be installed in such a manner so that the inside circumferential laps point downstream .
corrugated steel pipe couplings shall be placed so that the joint of the couplings are near horizontal .
the bolted joint connection on the coupling should be overlapped from the top and should be located on the lower half of the culvert i.e .
between num and num oclock .
num double walled polyethylene dwp and poly vinyl chloride pipe pvc for polyethylene and pvc installation recesses shall be excavated for bells .
the bell ends shall be placed upgrade with the spigot end fully entered into the bell .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy storm sewer installation num num num num method of measurement measurement for pcp csp dwp or pvc under this section shall be the number of linear metres of pipe installed for each diameter of pipe used in the work .
bedding material supplied under this section shall be measured for payment in accordance with section num .
measurement for galvanized steel grates under this section shall be the number of grates installed for each diameter specified in the contract .
additional material supplied for backfill shall be measured in accordance with the respective specification .
num basis of payment general payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price for each diameter of pipe installed and this price shall be full compensation for excavation disposal of waste or surplus material shoring bracing placement of pipe tapering exposed inlets and outlets dewatering backfilling compaction equipment tools lasers or survey equipment labour water for compaction and incidentals necessary to perform the work .
payment for supply of bedding material and additional backfill material will be made in accordance with the respective specification .
payment for the supply and installation of fittings such as couplings elbows tees wyes and crosses shall be included in the unit bid price for each diameter and type of pipe installed .
this shall also include any top grates installed at the inlet of the drain pipes galvanized inlet and outlet steel grates and all incidentals necessary to perform the work .
num precast concrete pipe pcp the unit bid price for pcp installation as defined in provision num shall also be full compensation for the supply of the concrete pipe outfall pipe catch basin leads and gaskets unless specified otherwise in the tender document .
num corrugated steel pipe csp the unit bid price for csp installation as defined in provision num shall not include compensation for the corrugated steel pipe outfall pipe catch basin leads or couplings as these will be supplied by the department in accordance with provision num unless specified otherwise in the tender document .
num double walled polyethylene dwp and poly vinyl chloride pipe pvc the unit bid price for polyethylene and pvc pipe installation as defined in provision num shall be full compensation for the supply of the pipe gaskets and incidentals required to perform the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy storm sewer installation num num num num galvanized steel grate the unit bid price for galvanized steel inlet and outlet grates as defined in provision num shall include full compensation for the supply and installation of the grate and all incidentals required to perform the work .
² ² general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy catch basin installation num num num num description the work of this section shall consist of the installation of precast concrete pcp precast concrete pipe or corrugated steel csp corrugated steel pipe catch basins grade rings adjusting rings frames and covers including excavation placement of bedding material dewatering backfilling and compaction .
num material num precast concrete pcp catch basin unless specified otherwise in the tender document all precast catch basins grade rings adjusting rings frames and covers are to be supplied by the contractor .
precast catch basin sections for municipal services are to be to astm cnum circular with a flat top section and opening offset .
catch basins shall be constructed with a precast or cast inplace base .
adjusting rings shall be precast or castinplace as indicated on the drawings or as directed by the engineer and shall be the same shape as the frames and covers .
the outer size of the adjusting rings must be at least as large as the frames and covers but shall not extend beyond the edge of the catch basin .
multiple adjusting rings shall be of identical shape and diameter and shall be installed in true vertical alignment with no overhanging edges .
whenever possible catch basins must be constructed to allow for a minimum num mm depth of adjusting rings .
every effort shall be made to minimize the number adjusting rings used for each catch basin .
joints are to be made watertight using bituminous gaskets or neoprene orings .
frames and covers are to be standard tough grey cast iron to astm anum and are to be the type and manufactured as indicated on the drawings .
bearing surface of covers are to be cast or machined to give continuous contact over the entire surface .
num corrugated steel csp catch basin unless specified otherwise in the tender document all corrugated steel catch basins rings and covers are to be supplied by the department in accordance with provision num .
adjusting rings shall be steel ring inserts made to the specific height required and made to fit inside the existing frame and to accept cover .
the design of the steel ring insert shall be approved by the engineer prior to the manufacturing .
num construction method general the contractor shall excavate to the invert elevation and undercut the elevation by num mm .
the minimum dimension of a catch basin excavation shall be no less than num m larger than the diameter of the catch basin .
the granular bedding material shall be placed and compacted such that an area is created num mm larger than the diameter of the catch basin .
backfilling and excavation shall be done in accordance with section num and as specified herein .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy catch basin installation num num num the contractor shall seal all connections between the catch basin and the base inlets or outlets of storm drains prior to backfilling .
when grouting is required to seal these connections it shall be completed on both the inside and outside of the catch basin .
num precast concrete pcp catch basin precast bases shall be placed on the bedding material and levelled .
if the base is to be cast in place the contractor shall ensure a proper surface is formed to accept the intermediate sections .
the contractor shall place a ring of mortar on the precast or cured inplace base to the circumference of the catch basin .
the first precast catch basin section shall be placed in the mortar so that it is level and so that the joint is completely sealed .
the subsequent precast intermediate or top sections will be placed and sealed using rubber orings or ramnek and properly orientated to ensure the specified inlets and outlets .
precast adjusting rings shall be placed on top of the catch basin structure using ramnek or other approved sealant and shall be oriented properly to match the longitudinal and cross slopes required .
castinplace adjusting rings shall be formed and poured in place in a manner to provide a watertight seal .
ramnek or other approved sealant shall be used to join the adjusting ring and frame .
num corrugated steel csp catch basin the contractor shall place num level concrete bricks or blocks num mm in height around the circumference of the corrugated steel catch basin .
the top of the corrugated steel catch basin when placed shall be at the specified grade and shall be orientated to ensure proper inlet and outlet connections .
castinplace concrete shall be placed inside and outside the corrugated steel catch basin to a minimum thickness of nummm and shall be given sufficient time to cure prior to backfilling .
if height adjustment is required due to improper manufacturing or improper placement of catch basin the contractor shall supply and place adjusting rings as required .
num method of measurement measurement under this section shall be the number of precast concrete pcp or corrugated steel csp catch basins installed for each diameter specified .
num basis of payment general payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price for the number of catch basins installed for each diameter and this price shall be full compensation for installation excavation dewatering undercutting shoring bracing placement of bedding material construction of forms construction of bases placement of backfill compaction and equipment cement concrete tools labour water for compaction and incidentals necessary to perform the work .
payment for supply of bedding material and additional backfill material will be made in accordance with the respective specification .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy catch basin installation num num num num precast concrete pcp catch basin the unit bid price for precast concrete catch basin installation as defined in provision num shall also be full compensation for the supply of the precast concrete catch basins adjusting rings frames and covers unless specified otherwise in the tender document .
num corrugated steel csp catch basin the unit bid price for corrugated steel catch basins as defined in provision num shall not include compensation for the corrugated steel catch basins frames or covers as these materials will be supplied by the department unless otherwise specified in the tender document .
the unit bid price shall include full compensation for the supply and installation of adjusting rings if they are required due to improper installation by the contractor .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy catch basin manhole and valve adjustment num num num num description this work shall consist of raising or lowering existing corrugated steel or concrete catch basins and concrete manholes or valve boxes to meet the final pavement elevation .
num material the contractor shall supply the appropriate type of material to perform the required work .
adjusting rings for precast concrete structures shall be precast or castinplace as indicated on the drawings or as directed by the engineer and shall be the same shape as the frames and covers .
the outer size of the adjusting rings must be at least as large as the frames and covers but shall not extend beyond the edge of the catch basin .
adjusting rings for corrugated steel catch basins shall be steel ring inserts made to the height required specifically to fit inside the seat of the existing frame and also to accept the cover .
the design of the steel ring insert shall be approved by the engineer prior to manufacturing .
adjustable manhole frames and covers shall be cnummnum cone shaped frame autostable as manufactured by bibbystecroix or approved equivalent meeting the requirements of csa bnum and shall be as shown on detail drawing no .
num .
num construction method the contractor when raising existing corrugated steel catch basins shall determine the height required to meet the new grade and shall manufacture a steel ring insert to raise the catch basin cover to the desired grade .
the contractor when lowering existing corrugated steel catch basins shall cut and remove any existing pavement around the catch basin excavate around the catch basin to a depth sufficient to adjust the catch basin to the desired elevation .
the contractor shall cut the catch basin vertically to remove the ring and cover and shall reset the ring and cover into the corrugation at the new pavement elevation .
the contractor shall insure that the ring and cover are secure and will not pop out under traffic .
the contractor when raising existing concrete catch basins or manholes shall use concrete grade rings or shall supply castinplace concrete to the appropriate depth to meet the new grade .
when lowering concrete catch basins or manholes the contractor will remove grade rings to meet the new grade .
the contractor shall use the available adjustment of the valve boxes or supply extension pieces or modify existing to raise or lower the valve box to the appropriate elevation .
the contractor shall ensure methods and materials are acceptable to the appropriate utility owners .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy catch basin manhole and valve adjustment num num num num method of measurement the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the number of catch basins manholes or valve boxes actually raised or lowered .
pavement placed while performing this work shall be measured for payment in accordance with section num .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at unit bid price per catch basin or manhole actually lowered or raised and this price shall be full compensation for all adjustment rings equipment tools labour and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
payment of pavement restoration shall be made in accordance with section num .
cnummnum cnummnum general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy drain tile installation num num num num description this specification applies to the supply and installation of drain tile in the shoulder region of the highway .
num material the drain tile is to be num mm diameter type num perforated corrugated plastic tubing in compliance with cgsb numgpnum ma .
num drain tile location the drain tile is to be placed in the shoulder of the highway along a line parallel to the outside edge of the pavement or as outlined in the plans or drawings or as directed by the engineer .
num drain tile depth and grading the drain tile shall be placed num m below the normal grade of the edge of the asphalt surface or as outlined in the plans or drawings or as directed by the engineer .
the constructed grade should not deviate from the design grade by more than num of the drain tile diameter .
it is intended that the drain tile be located at a consistent depth in the crosssection .
reverse grades are not allowed .
num laying drain tile open trench installation the method of installation is to be with trencher ditch witch or equivalent equipment .
a backhoe with a num mm wide bucket may be used however extra costs for drainage aggregate shall be incidental .
the equipment shall construct a smooth bottomed open trench nummm in depth .
the width of the opening shall conform closely to the outside diameter of the drain tile .
the drain tile shall be placed in the bottom of the trench and the remainder of the trench shall be filled with class d drainage aggregate .
the drain tile must be protected from deformation during placement of the class d aggregate .
following placement of the class d aggregate the trench shall be covered with the granular base prior to the road being opened to traffic to provide additional protection to the drain tile .
drain tile shall not be stretched more than num of its normal length .
directional changes in drain tile can be made without the use of fittings provided the centreline radius of the bend is not less than num times the tube diameter .
this is the preferred method of drain tile installation .
num laying drain tile plow installation the method of installation is to be with drainage plow equipment .
this is not the preferred method of installation and shall be approved only if the contractor can demonstrate to the engineer that the installation is acceptable general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy drain tile installation num num num the drainage plow equipment should construct a smooth bottomed opening in the soil and maintain the opening until the flexible drain tile has been properly installed .
the size of the opening should conform closely to the outside diameter of the drain tile .
drain tile must be protected from deformation and from floating in wet trenches .
the inside of the drain tile shall be kept clean during construction .
all soil and debris shall be removed before additional tubing is laid .
drain tile shall not be stretched more than num of its normal length .
directional changes in drain tile can be made without the use of fittings provided the centreline radius of the bend is not less than num times the tube diameter .
num connections where lengths of drain tile are to be joined the ends must be square and all ragged or burred edges removed .
a plastic coupling shall be used to secure the ends of the drain tile in proper alignment and to prevent the joint from separating during installation .
num backfilling at the end of each day the exposed end of the drain tile is to be covered to prevent entry of debris or sediment .
during this process care shall be taken to ensure that the drain tile is not damaged from excessive traffic or equipment loads .
num filter envelopes the drain tile is to be installed with an envelope material surrounding the drain tile to restrain the entry of base soil particles .
num outfall drains will be located at regular num m outfall intervals and will discharge into the roadside ditch subject to a minimum freeboard distance of num mm as shown on the contract drawings .
where the num mm freeboard between the end pipe invert and the ditch bottom is not achievable the engineer will determine the location of the drain in some cases the drain may have to be relocated or omitted for this reason .
the outfall end pipe is to be num mm in diameter of rigid nonperforated pipe complete with a hinged grate .
the joint between the end pipe and the drain tile shall be securely sealed .
num method of measurement the quantities to be measured for payment under this section shall be the number of linear metres of drain tile installed and the number of outfalls installed .
no measurement for payment will be made under this section for drain tile or outfall installations required as a result of faulty placement .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy drain tile installation num num num num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per linear metre of drain tile and per outfall and this price shall be full compensation for all work including excavation materials labour equipment and incidentals necessary to carry out the work .
payment for the supply of drainage aggregate shall be accordance with section num .
excess drainage aggregate required to fill trench created by backhoe and bucket shall not be measured for payment .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy roadway culvert installation num num num num description the work to be carried out under this section shall include the removal of existing roadway culverts all excavation and the installation of new roadway culverts .
this may also include the installation of watercourse culvert installations see section num of ties environmental protection plan .
num material num precast concrete pipe pcp unless specified otherwise in the tender document all concrete pipes and flexible gaskets are to be supplied by the contractor .
concrete pipe is to be to astm cnum class iii reinforced concrete pipe designed for flexible rubber gasket joints to astm cnum and to the diameter indicated on the drawings .
num corrugated steel pipe csp unless specified otherwise all corrugated steel pipes and couplings are to be supplied by the department in accordance with provision num .
num double walled polyethylene dwp or poly vinyl chloride pipe pvc unless specified in the tender agreement all double walled polyethylene or pvc pipe pipe fittings and gaskets are to be supplied by the contractor .
double walled polyethylene pipe nummm to nummm diameter has a smoothwalled interior and a corrugated exterior wall that is manufactured in standard lengths of approximately six num metres to class r num num kpa and is joined together with integral gasketed snap bell connection or integral gasketed bell and spigot connection and which meets the requirements of csa bnum or csa bnum .
for diameters up to num mm a pvc pipe sdr num with integral gasketed bell and spigot joints can be used which meets the requirements of csa bnum and csa bnum num construction method unless approved by the engineer the contractor shall make provisions for twoway traffic during the work .
all work carried out under this section shall be done in accordance with the ems approval to proceed and the environmental requirements of appendix num .
excavation shall begin at the downstream end of the pipe and shall be performed in accordance with section num and shall comply with the occupational health and safety act and regulations .
watercourse culverts must be installed in compliance with the pei watercourse and wetland alteration guidelines peiwwag see appendix num section num .
unless otherwise specified watercourse culvert installations may only occur between june num and september num of any given year .
the watercourse must be isolated during installation of the culvert unless specified otherwise in the ems approval to proceed .
the pipe shall be laid parallel to flow on a uniform slope of num unless otherwise specified and shall have the inlet and outlet embedded numd of the culvert and at a slope of not more than num unless specifically general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy roadway culvert installation num num num authorized .
a preconstruction survey in accordance with the peiwwag must be completed prior to any work taking place .
a surveyor must be onsite during the installation of the culvert to ensure proper slope is achieved .
the contractor shall excavate the roadbed to the specified line and grade to a width of num mm on both sides of the pipe .
the excavated material shall be conserved for reuse as directed by the engineer and it shall be stockpiled in a manner and location which will not endanger the work or delay the travelling public .
existing roadway culverts shall be removed in accordance with section num .
bedding material shall be placed to a depth of a num mm below the pipe and in layers not exceeding num mm under the bottom a of the pipe .
bedding material shall be compacted to a minimum of num standard proctor density in accordance with section num .
in confined areas of the excavation bedding shall be compacted using suitable hand or plate tampers .
in the case of concrete pipe the bed shall be shaped to ensure uniform load bearing around the bell end .
prior to backfilling the work shall be inspected .
backfilling shall be by hand under the bottom half of the pipe .
machine backfilling is acceptable for the remaining work provided compaction is achieved on individual layers not exceeding num mm .
backfill material shall be that approved by the engineer .
stones larger than num mm shall not be placed within num mm of the pipe .
exposed inlets and outlets of the roadway culvert shall be tapered num horizontalvertical .
compaction shall be achieved in accordance with section num to a minimum of num standard proctor density .
immediately upon completion of culvert installation or as a minimum at the end of the work day disturbed slope areas within num m of the culvert shall be stabilized as indicated in section num culvert end treatment .
where directed by the engineer old roadbed culverts shall be removed and relayed extended or renewed in the same manner as specified for new culverts .
all pipe placed under this section which is not in true alignment or which shows any settlement after laying shall be taken out and relayed at the contractors own expense .
num precast concrete pipe pcp for pcp installation recesses shall be excavated for the bells .
the bell ends shall be placed upgrade with the spigot end fully entered into the bell .
all joints are to be as tight as possible .
num corrugated steel pipe csp csp shall be installed in such a manner so that the inside circumferential laps point downstream .
corrugated steel pipe couplings shall be placed so that the joint of the couplings are near horizontal .
the bolted joint connection on the coupling should be overlapped from the top and should be located on the lower half of the culvert i.e .
between general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy roadway culvert installation num num num num and num oclock .
helical corrugated steel pipe shall be placed so the helix angle is constant for the total length of the installation and each pipe section in a series shall be installed so the lock seam forms a continuous helix .
num double walled polyethylene dwp and poly vinyl chloride pipe pvc for polyethylene and pvc installation recesses shall be excavated for bells .
the bell ends shall be placed upgrade with the spigot end fully entered into the bell .
num method of measurement measurement for pcp csp dwp or pvc under this section shall be the number of linear metres of pipe installed for each diameter of pipe used in the work .
new material supplied for backfilling roadway culverts shall not be measured for payment under this section but shall be included elsewhere in the contract .
no measurement for payment will be made under this section for culvert end treatments but shall be made under section num .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per linear metre for each size and type of culvert supplied and installed and this price shall be full compensation for the supply unloading laying tapering inlets and outlets dewatering backfilling compacting equipment labour and all incidentals necessary to perform the work .
payment for the supply of backfill material required under this section shall be in accordance with the respective specification .
payment for the supply of bedding material shall be in accordance with section num .
excavations with depths less than num metres measured from centreline grade to the invert of the pipe at centreline shall be considered incidental to the work and shall not be measured or paid for .
the contractor shall ensure that excavation measures are conducted in strict accordance with wcb and ohs regulations .
payments for excavations with depths greater than num metres measured from centreline grade to the invert of the pipe at centreline shall be in accordance with section num but the volume to be measured for payment for pipe excavation shall not exceed the volume calculated by the product of the depth equal to the nominal pipe diameter plus num metres .
all other excavation required or directed by the engineer to facilitate a smooth transition shall be paid at the price of common roadway excavation price .
payment for the supply and installation of fittings such as couplings elbows tees wyes and crosses shall be included in the unit bid price for each diameter and type of pipe installed .
this shall also include any top grates installed at the inlet of the drain pipes galvanized inlet and outlet steel grates and all incidentals necessary to perform the work .
payment for removal of culverts shall be in accordance with section num .
payment for culvert end treatments shall be in accordance with section num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy roadway culvert installation num num num num precast concrete pipe pcp the unit bid price for pcp installation shall also be full compensation for the supply of the concrete pipe grates gaskets and incidentals required to perform the work unless specified otherwise in the tender document .
num corrugated steel pipe csp the unit bid price for csp installation shall not include compensation for the corrugated steel pipe and couplings as these will be supplied by the department in accordance with provision num unless specified otherwise in the tender document .
num double walled polyethylene dwp and poly vinyl chloride pipe pvc the unit bid price for polyethylene and pvc pipe installation shall be full compensation for the supply of the pipe grates gaskets and incidentals required to perform the work unless specified otherwise in the tender document .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy driveway culvert placement num num num num description the work to be carried out under this section shall include the installation and backfilling of driveway culverts .
num material num precast concrete pipe pcp unless specified otherwise in the tender document all concrete pipes and flexible gaskets are to be supplied by the contractor .
concrete pipe is to be to astm cnum class iii reinforced concrete pipe designed for flexible rubber gasket joints to astm cnum and to the diameter indicated on the drawings .
num corrugated steel pipe csp unless specified otherwise all corrugated steel pipes and couplings are to be supplied by the department in accordance with provision num .
num double walled polyethylene dwp or poly vinyl chloride pipe pvc unless specified in the tender agreement all double walled polyethylene or pvc pipe pipe fittings and gaskets are to be supplied by the contractor .
double walled polyethylene pipe num mm to num mm diameter has a smoothwalled interior and a corrugated exterior wall that is manufactured in standard lengths of approximately six num metres to class r num num kpa and is joined together with integral gasketed snap bell connection or integral gasketed bell and spigot connection and which meets the requirements of csa bnum or csa bnum .
for diameters up to num mm a pvc pipe sdr num with integral gasketed bell and spigot joints can be used which meets the requirements of csa bnum and csa bnum num construction method the contractor shall excavate the area to the lines and grades specified .
on the direction of the engineer the contractor shall undercut the location of a driveway culvert to a specified depth .
when no undercutting is specified the contractor shall grade the ditch uniformly and shall compact the ditch bottom to a depth of num mm in accordance with section num to num of standard proctor density .
backfill material shall be approved by the engineer and shall be placed by hand under the bottom half of the culvert .
the top half of the culvert may be backfilled by machine in layers not exceeding num mm .
the top of the driveway shall be constructed to a width of not more than num m unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
exposed inlets and outlets of the roadway culvert shall general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy driveway culvert placement num num num be tapered num horizontalvertical .
the backfill material at each end of the culvert shall be neatly graded and shaped to provide a uniform slope not steeper than num horizvert .
immediately upon completion of culvert installation or as a minimum at the end of the work day disturbed slope areas within num m of the culvert shall be stabilized as indicated in section num culvert end treatment .
where directed by the engineer old driveway culverts shall be removed and relayed extended or renewed in the same manner as specified for new culverts .
all pipe which is not in true alignment or which shows any settlement after laying shall be taken out and replaced .
num precast concrete pipe pcp for pcp installation the bed shall be shaped to ensure uniform load bearing around the bell ends .
the bell ends shall be placed upgrade and the spigot ends are to be fully entered into the bells .
all joints are to be as tight as possible .
num corrugated steel pipe csp csp shall be installed in such a manner so that the inside circumferential laps point downstream .
corrugated steel pipe couplings shall be placed so that the joint of the couplings are near horizontal .
the bolted joint connection on the coupling should be overlapped from the top and should be located on the lower half of the culvert i.e .
between num and num oclock .
helical corrugated steel pipe shall be placed so the helix angle is constant for the total length of the installation and each pipe section in a series shall be installed so the lock seam forms a continuous helix .
num double walled polyethylene dwp and poly vinyl chloride pipe pvc for polyethylene and pvc installation recesses shall be excavated for bells .
the bell ends shall be placed upgrade with the spigot end fully entered into the bell .
num method of measurement measurement for pcp csp dwp or pvc under this section shall be the number of linear metres of pipe installed for each diameter of pipe used in the work .
new material supplied for backfilling driveway culverts shall not be measured for payment under this section but shall be included elsewhere in the contract .
no measurement for payment will be made under this section for culvert end treatments but shall be made under section num .
num basis of payment general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy driveway culvert placement num num num payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per linear metre for each size and type of culvert supplied and installed and this price shall be full compensation for the all work supply unloading excavation laying tapering inlets and outlets dewatering backfilling compacting equipment labour and all incidentals necessary to perform the work .
payment for the supply of backfill material required under this section shall be in accordance with the respective specification .
payment for the supply of bedding material shall be in accordance with section num .
payment for culvert end treatments shall be in accordance with section num .
num precast concrete pipe pcp the unit bid price for pcp installation shall also be full compensation for the supply of the concrete pipe grates gaskets and incidentals required to perform the work unless specified otherwise in the tender document .
num corrugated steel pipe csp the unit bid price for csp installation shall not include compensation for the corrugated steel pipe and couplings as these will be supplied by the department in accordance with provision num unless specified otherwise in the tender document .
num double walled polyethylene dwp and poly vinyl chloride pipe pvc the unit bid price for polyethylene and pvc pipe installation shall be full compensation for the supply of the pipe grates gaskets and incidentals required to perform the work unless specified otherwise in the tender document .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy culvert extension num num num num description the work to be carried out under this section relates to the restoration of or extension of drainage culverts .
this work is intended to be a maintenance measure where it is more economical to extend service life of an existing culvert than to replace it .
this may also include the extension of watercourse culverts see section num culverts of ties environmental protection plan .
num material all couplings and corrugated steel pipe or polyethylene pipe used to make the restoration shall be supplied by the department in accordance with provision num .
all new concrete pipe to astm cnum class iii reinforced concrete pipe designed for flexible rubber gasket joints to astm cnum shall be supplied by the contractor .
num construction method watercourse culvert extensions must be installed in compliance with the pei watercourse and wetland alteration guidelines peiwwag see appendix num section num .
unless otherwise specified watercourse culvert extensions may only occur between june num and september num of any given year .
the watercourse must be fully isolated during construction activities unless otherwise specified on the ems approval to proceed .
a preconstruction survey in accordance with the peiwwag must be completed prior to any work taking place .
a surveyor must be onsite during the installation of the culvert to ensure proper slope is achieved .
the contractor shall excavate the existing fill material from around the end of the culvert and reserve it for reuse .
damage to the ends of the culvert if present shall be cutoff with a method approved by the engineer .
the result shall be a smooth distortionfree straight edge perpendicular to the line and grade of flow i.e .
gradient .
the contractor shall excavate existing fill material from around the end of the concrete culvert to expose a full intact bell or spigot joint .
the joint shall be completely cleaned prior to placing lubricant and gaskets and additional concrete pipe materials .
a length of corrugated steel pipe will be joined using a coupling band and the total exposed pipe shall be backfilled and shaped as necessary to restore the original drainage course .
this may result in a culvert slightly longer or shorter than the original .
the culvert to be joined onto must be cleaned of soil and debris to ensure the culvert functions properly and to enable an effective coupling with the extension pipe .
the extension pipe shall be placed on a similar line and grade as the original pipe unless otherwise specified by the engineer .
the contractor will ensure that this alignment is maintained throughout the work .
couplings shall be placed so that the joint of the coupling is near horizontal .
the joint should occur at midlength of the coupling .
the bolted joint connection on the coupling should be general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy culvert extension num num num overlapped from the top and should be located on the lower half of the culvert i.e .
between num and num oclock .
exposed inlets and outlets of the roadway culvert shall be tapered num horizontalvertical .
backfilling by hand is necessary below the midelevation of the culvert circumference but may be done by machine for the upper regions .
all backfill material shall be approved by the engineer and shall be compacted to num standard proctor density except when under existing or proposed asphalt which shall be compacted to num standard proctor density .
stones larger than num mm shall not be placed within num mm of the culvert .
immediately upon completion of the culvert extension or as a minimum at the end of the work day disturbed slope areas within numm of the culvert shall be stabilized as indicated in section num culvert end treatment .
num method of measurement the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the number of linear metres of culvert extension placed .
no measurement for payment will be made under this section for culvert end treatments but shall be made under section num .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per linear metre and this price shall be full compensation for loading material transportation excavation removal of damaged pipe sections if any coupling of culverts tapering inlets and outlets supply or reinstatement of backfill material compaction of backfill shaping of backfill and all equipment and labour necessary to complete the work .
payment for supply of pipe shall be included in unit bid price per size when materials are supplied by the contractor .
extra backfill if required may be supplied at no additional cost from ditching or from surplus earth excavation generated within the work site .
if the engineer chooses to use a foundation material such as borrow it shall be paid for in accordance with the respective specification .
payment for culvert end treatments shall be in accordance with section num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy culvert removal num num num num description this work shall consist of the removal of roadway culverts and driveway culverts .
num construction method when the engineer directs that roadway culverts or driveway culverts are to be removed from the roadway the contractor shall excavate the surrounding material and remove the culvert without damage .
the interior of the pipe shall be cleared of any accumulated sediment rocks or debris .
reusable culverts shall be stockpiled for pickup by the department .
culverts which in the opinion of the engineer are not worthy of salvage shall be disposed of by the contractor .
the engineer shall establish the limits of material to be removed in order to recover any culvert and the contractor shall not excavate beyond the limits established by the engineer .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of linear metres of culvert salvaged or disposed of .
no measurement for payment will be made for excavation of materials required for the removal of driveway culverts .
measurement for payment will be made for excavation of materials required for the removal of roadway culverts .
num basis of payment removal of culverts shall be paid for at the unit bid price per linear metre and this price shall be full compensation for removal cleaning and stockpiling of the reusable culverts disposal of unsalvageable culverts equipment tools labour and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
excavations with depths less than num metres measured from centreline grade to the invert of the pipe at centreline shall be considered incidental to the work and shall not be measured for payment .
the contractor shall ensure that excavation methods are conducted in strict accordance with wcb and ohs regulations .
payments for excavations with depths greater than num metres measured from centreline grade to the invert of the pipe at centreline shall be in accordance with section num but the volume to be measured for payment for pipe excavation shall not exceed the volume calculated by the product of the depth equal to the distance from the underside of bedding to the underside of common roadway excavation by the width equal to the nominal pipe diameter plus num metres .
all other excavation required or directed by the engineer to facilitate a smooth transition shall be paid at the price of common roadway excavation price .
all other excavation required or directed by the engineer to facilitate a smooth transition shall be paid at the price of common roadway excavation price .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy culvert removal num num num suitable excavated materials will be reinstated at no additional cost as per section num .
additional backfill materials will be paid under the respective section .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy timber box culvert num num num num description this work consists of the building of a timber box culvert as shown in figure num with pressure treated wood as shown on the plans or as designated by the engineer .
if this work includes a watercourse refer to section num culverts of ties environmental protection plan .
num material the material shall be eastern hemlock graded to nlga rule num structural grade lumber up to num may be rule num structural treated in accordance to cancsanum m and with minimum preservative retention as per cancsa num .
where nontreated lumber is specified as part of the construction it shall be hemlock and shall be approved by the engineer before being used in the structure .
hardware including pins bolts washers nails and all other items necessary to be incorporated into the work shall be as shown on figure num or as specified by the engineer .
borrow bedding material rip rap and other materials required for backfilling and bedding for the structure shall meet the respective specifications for that item .
num construction method all work carried out under this section shall be done in accordance with the ems approval to proceed and the environmental requirements of appendix num .
timber boxes that carry watercourses must be installed in compliance with the pei watercourse and wetland alteration guidelines peiwwag see appendix num section num .
unless otherwise specified watercourse structure installations may only occur between june num and september num of any given year .
the watercourse must be isolated during installation of the timber box unless specified otherwise in the ems approval to proceed .
a pre construction survey in accordance with the peiwwag must be completed prior to any work taking place .
a surveyor must be onsite during the installation of the timber box to ensure proper slope is achieved .
the contractor shall place signs and other warning devices and keep such in place and in good repair until the work is completed .
such warning devices shall meet the requirement of the respective specifications for that item .
all work carried out under this section shall be done in accordance with the environmental requirements of appendix num .
all asphalt pavement in the work area shall be cut and removed by the contractor before the excavation is started .
existing culverts shall be removed and disposed of as part of this work .
the excavation shall be to an elevation as established by the engineer to provide a hard bottom suitable to support the box structure .
excavation to a depth of num m below the bottom of the sills shall be included in the bid price for the construction of the box .
excavation beyond the num m depth below the bottom of the sills shall be paid for as foundation excavation and shall be included in the unit bid price for general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy timber box culvert num num num this section .
in calculating this excavation quantity use the depth of the excavation below the num m times the length of the box plus num m times the width of the box plus num m on each side of the box .
both during the excavation if required and after the excavation all exposed soil on the slopes of the excavation shall be covered with a suitable material to prevent the potential of soil erosion and deposition into the stream .
the contractor shall dismantle the existing structure and pile the used material in such a manner to facilitate its removal from the site .
this material will be picked up by the department and returned to the bridge stock yard or disposed of as directed by the engineer .
the excavated hole shall be kept free of water during the placement of bedding material sills and abutments for the new structure .
this cost shall be included in the bid price .
the contractor shall supply all labour and material necessary for the proper execution of the work as well as all necessary false work that may be required for the safety of the workmen .
the bedding material shall be compacted to num standard proctor density except when under existing or proposed asphalt which shall be compacted to a minimum num standard proctor density in accordance with section num .
the surface of the bedding material shall have a uniform compacted surface .
in confined areas of the excavation the bedding shall be compacted using suitable vibratory hand or plate tamper .
the treated wood culvert shall be laid out and the timber shall be placed and fastened as shown on the construction drawings and as directed by the engineer .
the sills on which the box is constructed must be located accurately to line grade and span in accordance with the construction drawings .
assembly is performed on site directly on the prepared sills .
holes for drift pins shall be num mm less than the diameter of the pin and drilled to a depth of num mm less than the length of the pin .
the heads of all pins shall be driven sufficiently into the timber that the overlaying timber will have a proper bearing on the timber beneath .
holes for the bolts shall be bored to the proper size so that the bolt can be driven without damage to the lumber .
all bolts shall have num washers num under the head and num under the nut .
backfill to the top of the structure with select borrow in accordance with subprovision num .
it shall be placed in layers of not more than num mm and compacted to a minimum of a minimum num of standard proctor density .
it shall be placed on both sides of the structure to approximately the same elevation simultaneously .
from the top of the structure to the subgrade elevation the original excavated material shall be placed in layers and compacted to num standard proctor density .
if the excavated material is deemed to be unsuitable for backfill material i.e .
moisture content too high then additional material as approved by the engineer will be used in its place .
the unsuitable material will be disposed of as per the engineers approval .
random rip rap rnum in accordance with section num shall be supplied and placed by the contractor as directed by the engineer .
this shall include all work necessary to prepare the area to be rip rapped .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy timber box culvert num num num unless approval is granted by the engineer to establish a detour which would have to be signed according to department specifications twoway traffic must be maintained at all times .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be by the fbm foot board measure for all wood work .
measurement for payment for excavation shall be in accordance with section num and provision num .
measurement for borrow bedding material and rip rap shall be made in accordance with the respective specification .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price measured in fbm and this price shall be full compensation for all tools equipment labour materials and other incidentals necessary to perform the work .
payment for excavation except for the num m below the bottom of the sills under this section shall be made in accordance with section num .
payment for the num m of excavation below the bottom of the sills shall be based on cubic metres as measured in accordance with provision num .
payment for bedding material shall be made in accordance with section num .
payment for borrow under this section shall be made in accordance with section num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy concrete box culvert num num num num description work under this section will require the removal of an existing structure and replacement with a concrete box culvert manufactured in accordance with astm cnum .
if this work includes a watercourse refer to section num culverts of ties environmental protection plan .
num material bedding material shall be as specified in accordance with sections num and num .
backfill material shall be select borrow in accordance with subprovision num .
concrete box culvert is a product manufactured in accordance with astm cnum to the size and dimensions as shown on the plan .
num construction method all work carried out under this section shall be done in accordance with the ems approval to proceed and the environmental requirements of appendix num .
concrete boxes that carry watercourses must be installed in compliance with the pei watercourse and wetland alteration guidelines peiwwag see appendix num section num .
unless otherwise specified watercourse structure installations may only occur between june num and september num of any given year .
the watercourse must be isolated during installation of the concrete box unless specified otherwise in the ems approval to proceed .
a pre construction survey in accordance with the peiwwag must be completed prior to any work taking place .
a surveyor must be onsite during the installation of the concrete box to ensure proper slope is achieved .
the contractor shall organize the work such that the removal and replacement of any length of section is completed in the same day .
the contractor shall be required to set up adequate traffic control measures to the satisfaction of the engineer prior to construction .
the existing guiderail shall be dismantled and reinstalled by the contractor .
all work carried out under this section shall be done in accordance with the environmental requirements of appendix num .
the asphalt shall be cut in a clean and vertical fashion .
the asphalt shall be deemed as waste .
excavated material shall be piled such that it does not produce a traffic hazard .
surplus excavated material shall be deemed as waste material .
the contractor shall dewater the excavation in order to install the new box culvert and place the bedding material .
the bedding material shall be compacted to num standard proctor density except when under existing or proposed asphalt which shall be compacted to a minimum num standard proctor density in accordance with section num prior to the placement of the concrete box culvert .
the surface of the bedding material shall have a uniform compacted surface .
in confined areas of the excavation the bedding shall be compacted using suitable vibratory hand or plate tampers .
the box culvert shall be placed to the lines and grades shown on the plan and shall have all joints oriented downstream .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy concrete box culvert num num num backfilling of the structure using select borrow shall be done in symmetrical lifts with each lift no greater than num mm .
each lift placed shall be uniformly compacted to a minimum num standard proctor density prior to the placement of any successive lift .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of concrete box culverts installed .
excavation shall be measured by the average end area method in accordance with section num .
bedding material shall be measured by the tonne placed in accordance with section num .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per concrete box culvert and this price shall be full compensation for supply and placement of the box culvert bedding preparation removal of existing culvert dewatering placing and compacting select borrow and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
bedding material shall be paid for in accordance with section num .
excavation shall be paid for in accordance with section num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy multiplated corrugated steel arch num num num num description this work consists of the construction of a multiplated corrugated steel arch .
refer to section num culverts of ties environmental protection plan .
num material the plates shall be corrugated steel to csa can numg anummnum .
all bolts and nuts shall be special heated steel to astm fnum and astm anum .
the galvanizing on these bolts and nuts must meet csa gnum class num .
hardware including pins bolts washers spikes and other necessary items for construction shall be as shown on figure num .
the arch rails shall be pressure treated eastern hemlock wood graded to nlgg rule num .
at least num must be structural grade lumber treated in accordance with cancsa num m and with a minimum preservative retention in accordance with num m. where nontreated lumber is specified it shall be approved by the engineer .
select borrow bedding material rip rap and other materials required for backfilling and bedding shall meet the respective specification .
num construction method the contractor shall place and keep in good repair signs and other warning devices .
such warning devices shall meet the requirement of the respective specification .
all work carried out under this section shall be done in accordance with the ems approval to proceed and the environmental requirements of appendix num .
all structures that carry watercourses must be installed in compliance with the pei watercourse and wetland alteration guidelines peiwwag see appendix num section num .
unless otherwise specified watercourse structure installations may only occur between june num and september num of any given year .
the watercourse must be isolated during installation or extension of the arch culvert unless specified otherwise in the ems approval to proceed .
a preconstruction survey in accordance with the peiwwag must be completed prior to any work taking place .
a surveyor must be onsite during the installation or extension of the arch culvert to ensure proper slope is achieved .
all asphalt pavement shall be cut and removed by the contractor before excavation commences .
existing culverts shall be removed and disposed of as part of this work .
the excavation shall be to hard bottom suitable to support the arch to an elevation as established by the engineer .
excavation to a depth of num m below the bottom of the sills shall be included in the unit bid price for this section .
excavation beyond num m below the sills shall be paid for as foundation excavation .
in calculating this excavation use the depth of the excavation below the num m times the length of the arch plus num m times the width of the arch plus num m on each side of the arch .
both during and after the excavation all exposed soil on the slopes of the excavation shall be covered with a suitable material to prevent soil erosion and deposition into the stream .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy multiplated corrugated steel arch num num num the contractor shall dismantle the existing structure and pile the used material to facilitate its removal from the site .
this material will be picked up by the department and returned to the bridge stock yard or disposed of as directed by the engineer .
the excavated hole shall be kept free of water during the placement of bedding material sills and rails .
this cost shall be included in the unit bid price .
the contractor shall supply all labour and material necessary for the proper execution of the work as well as all necessary falsework that may be required for the safety of the workmen .
bedding material shall be compacted to a minimum num standard proctor density in accordance with section num .
the surface of the bedding material shall have a uniform compacted surface .
in confined areas of the excavation the bedding shall be compacted using suitable vibratory hand or plate tampers .
the arch rails on which the bottom plates rest must be located accurately to line grade and span in accordance with the construction drawings .
plate by plate assembly shall be performed directly on the arch rails .
holes for drift pins shall be num mm less than the diameter of the pin and drilled to a depth of num mm less than the length of the pin .
the pin heads shall be driven so that the overlaying timber will have proper bearing on the timber beneath .
the bolts should be torqued to a minimum of num nm and a maximum of num nm .
the curved surface of the nut shall be placed against the plate .
backfill to the top of the arch structure with select borrow in accordance with subprovision num .
from the top of the structure to the existing subgrade elevation the original excavated material shall be placed .
if the excavated material is deemed to be an unsuitable backfill material i.e .
moisture content too high then additional material as approved by the engineer will be used .
the unsuitable material will be disposed of as per the engineers approval .
backfill material shall be placed in layers no more than num mm and compacted to a minimum num of standard proctor density in accordance with section num .
backfill material shall be placed on both sides of the structure simultaneously to approximately the same elevation .
rnum random rip rap in accordance with section num shall be supplied and placed by the contractor as directed by the engineer .
this work shall include preparation of the area to be rip rapped .
twoway traffic must be maintained at all times unless the engineer approves a detour .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be by the fbm foot board measure for all wood work and by the linear meter for the multiplated steel arch .
measurement for borrow shall be in accordance with section num .
measurement for bedding material shall be in accordance with section num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy multiplated corrugated steel arch num num num num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per fbm for wood work and per linear metre for steel work and this price shall be full compensation for all work tools equipment labour and incidentals necessary to perform the work .
payment for excavation except for the num m below the bottom of the sills shall be made in accordance with section num .
payment for the num m of excavation below the bottom of the sills shall be based on cubic meters as measured in accordance with provision num .
payment for borrow under this section shall be made in accordance with section num .
payment for bedding material shall be made in accordance with section num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy culvert end treatment num num .
num num description the work to be carried out under this section shall include the stabilization and protection of ditch slopes adjacent drainage culverts as a result of work carried out in sections num ditching num culvert end cleanout num roadway culvert installation num driveway culvert placement and num culvert extension and shall include the necessary excavation and installation of geotechnical fabric mulching and random rip rap as required to complete the work of this section .
refer to sections num mulching and num rip rap of ties environmental protection plan .
num material rnum rip rap as specified in section num random rip rap .
type nnum geotechnical fabric as specified in section num geotechnical fabric .
mulching as specified in section num mulching .
erosion control mats as specified in section num erosion control mats .
num construction method roadway culvertshigh erosion potential driveway culverts immediately upon completion of roadway culvert installation or as a minimum at the end of the work day disturbed slope areas within num m of the culvert shall be stabilized with mulch from top of foreslope to top of backslope .
at the inlet the contractor shall place random rnum riprap to a nummm depth over geotechnical fabric from the toe of the foreslope of the ditch to a minimum of num metre above the top of the culvert as indicated in figure num culvert end treatment inlet .
the riprap apron shall extend num meters on either side of the centreline of the culvert .
the elevation of the ditch at the inlet shall not be lower than the culvert inlet .
mulch stabilization is acceptable at the culvert on a temporary basis not to exceed two days unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
at the outlet the contractor shall place random rnum riprap to a nummm depth over geotechnical fabric from a minimum of num meter beyond the end of the culvert into the ditch to a minimum of num meter above the top of the culvert as indicated in figure num culvert end treatment outlet .
the riprap apron shall extend num meters on either side of the centreline of the culvert .
for culverts not carrying streamflow the elevation of the ditch at the outlet shall not be higher than the culvert outlet .
mulch stabilization is acceptable at the culvert on a temporary basis not to exceed two days otherwise directed by the engineer .
at the inlet and outlet of the culvert to a minimum distance of num m on either side of the culvert the remaining disturbed fill slope areas not riprapped shall be mulched from top of foreslope to top of backslope .
this includes the slope area above the riprap to the top of the slope .
all mulch shall be removed from slopes prior to final grading .
after slopes have been graded to the satisfaction of the engineer and the disturbed areas have been hydro seeded then all areas shall be remulched or erosion control mats shall be placed as directed by engineer .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy culvert end treatment num num .
num num construction method driveway culverts low erosion potential immediately upon completion of driveway culvert installation or as a minimum at the end of the work day disturbed slope areas within numm of the culvert shall be stabilized from top of foreslope to top of backslope .
at locations with low erosion potential i.e .
locations with small ditch flow volumes low velocities etc .
erosion control mat i.e .
jute mat erosion control blanket shall be installed from a minimum of num m beyond the end of the culvert into the ditch to a minimum of num m above the top of the culvert .
at inlets to culverts the elevation of the ditch shall not be lower than the culvert inlet .
at culvert outlets the elevation of the ditch shall not be higher than the culvert outlet .
the erosion control mat shall extend num m on either side of the centerline of the culvert along the foreslope of the driveway or to a combined distance of numm along the foreslope of the driveway and the foreslope andor backslope of the roadway ditch .
remaining disturbed fill slope areas at the driveway shall be mulched .
all mulch shall be removed from slopes prior to final grading .
after slopes have been graded to the satisfaction of the engineer and the disturbed areas have been hydro seeded then all areas shall be re mulched or erosion control mats shall be placed as directed by engineer .
num construction method ditching culvert end cleanouts and culvert extension the method of culvert end treatment stabilization and protection to be followed when carry out work relating to sections num ditching num culvert end cleanout and section num culvert extension shall be determined by the type of culvert being cleaned or extended .
for example if a roadway culvert is being extended then the contractor shall follow the method described in provision num but if ditching is being carried out near a driveway culvert and the engineer indicates that there is low erosion potential then the method to be followed shall be the method described in provision num .
num method of measurement measurement for payment made under this section shall be the number of roadway and high erosion potential driveway culvert ends treated regardless of culvert diameter .
no measurement for payment will be made for excavation required to prepare the area for placement of the geotechnical fabric and rip rap as it will be considered incidental to the work of this section .
measurement for payment for rip rap shall be measured under section num random rip rap .
measurement for payment for geotechnical fabric shall be measured under section num geotechnical fabric .
no measurement for payment will be made for low erosion potential driveway culvert ends treated .
measurement for payment for mulching andor remulching shall be measured under section num mulching .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy culvert end treatment num num .
num measurement for payment for erosion control mats shall be measured under section num erosion control mats .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price for the number of roadway and high erosion potential driveway culvert ends treated regardless of culvert diameter and this price shall be full compensation for all labour excavation equipment tools materials and incidentals necessary to complete the work of this section .
payment for rip rap required under this section shall be in accordance with section num random rip rap .
payment for geotechnical fabric required under this section shall be in accordance with section num geotechnical fabric .
payment for supply and placement of mulching andor remulching required under this section shall be in accordance with section num mulching .
payment for supply and placement of erosion control mats required under this section shall be in accordance with section num erosion control mats .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy granular material num num aggregate num bedding material general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy aggregate num num num num scope this section outlines the source processing sampling testing and quality requirements for aggregates to be incorporated in department work or stockpiled for department use .
num quality of material aggregate shall satisfy all requirements of the specification for the type of material furnished and unless otherwise specified shall be one or a blend of the following crushed rock composed of hard sound durable uncoated cubical fragments of consistent quality produced from nonsedimentary bedrock or nonsedimentary boulders .
boulders shall be defined in accordance with astm dnum as rock fragments usually rounded with an average dimension of num mm or greater .
crushed or uncrushed of naturally formed hard sound durable uncoated particles of consistent quality produced from gravel formations .
aggregate specified in the tender shall conform to tables num and num and shall be approved by the engineer .
aggregate shall be free from flat elongated or other objectionable particles and shall be well graded from coarse to fine .
the gradings shall not show marked fluctuations from opposite extremes of the limiting sizes and the plotted curve shall flow in a manner free from acute changes in direction .
blending of acceptable aggregate will be permitted in order to satisfy the gradation requirements for the class of material specified .
the blending shall be performed in an approved manner which consistently produces a well graded product .
blending to improve quality will not be permitted except to increase the percentage of crushed particles or decrease the percentage of flat and elongated particles .
class a material shall be processed by crushing quarried rock .
the fine aggregate passing the num mm sieve shall consist of resulting particles from the crushing of the coarse aggregate .
class b material shall be processed by crushing and screening .
the fine aggregate passing the num mm sieve shall consist of particles from the crushing of the coarse aggregate andor natural sand .
crushing of class c material shall not be required .
class d materials shall be processed by crushing quarried rock .
aggregates may be rejected based on past field performance regardless of compliance with gradation or physical requirements .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy aggregate num num num table num gradation requirement for aggregate passing by mass sieve size granular class a granular class b granular class c drainage class d num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm num num num num num mm num num num num num mm num num mm num num num num num mm num num num num num mm num num num μm num num num μm num num num num μm num num num note the granular class a and b material shall have a minimum of num retained between the num mm and num μm sieves .
as tested in compliance with astm cnum and astm cnum .
num sampling and testing the engineer shall be notified by the contractor sufficiently in advance of his intent to deliver aggregate to the contract indicating his source of supply .
aggregate shall be randomly sampled as delivered to the contract and tested to meet the requirements of table num and table num .
acceptance shall conform to the properties and specified gradation requirements for the class of material specified as defined in table num and table num incorporated into the work and up to the completion of the contract .
num if the material incorporated into the work does not conform with the specified properties andor gradation as defined in table num and table num the contractor shall cease hauling from the source of supply and shall immediately rectify the problem to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num any material found to be nonconforming to the specified material shall be removed from the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy aggregate num num num if the contractors methods results in segregation of the materials as defined by astm cnum and tested in accordance with astm cnum the contractor shall cease work immediately and correct deficiency .
if segregation of material occurs the contractor shall scarify and make good the work in place or shall remove the segregated material from the work .
the acceptance of material shall not preclude its future rejection if it is subsequently found to lack consistency or if its field performance is unsatisfactory .
table num physical requirements for aggregate test class a class b class c class d astm los angeles abrasion max .
loss num num num num cnum magnesium sulfate soundness max .
loss num num cnum crushed min .
num num num flat and elongated max .
num num num num plasticity index max num num num dnum petrographic number max .
num num num num the percent of crushed material will be determined on the fraction of particles by mass retained on the num mm sieve having num or more mechanically fractured faces .
num the percent of crushed material will be determined on the fraction of particles by mass retained on the num mm sieve having num mechanically fractured face .
num flat and elongated particles are those whose greatest mean dimension in the longitudinal axis compared to the least mean dimension in the plane perpendicular to the longitudinal axis exceeds a ratio of num .
num petrographic number to be determined using current department test procedures .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy aggregate num num num num excavation processing handling and stockpiling the contractor before commencing excavation of aggregate from any pit shall comply with provision num .
the contractor shall clear and grub pit areas and shall remove and stockpile topsoil and overburden pursuant to provision num to prevent infiltration of deleterious matter .
the contractor shall ensure that the pit is excavated and the aggregate stockpile is constructed in such a manner as to prevent flooding of the materials .
where necessary to satisfy the requirements of the type of materials specified aggregates shall be screened crushed washed and otherwise processed with equipment which is of adequate capacity and capable of consistently yielding an acceptable product .
aggregates shall be washed only in properly designed and constructed washing plants .
truck mixer or similar washing methods will not be permitted .
the water to be used for washing aggregate shall be clean and free from injurious amounts of oil alkali acid organic matter or other deleterious substances .
washed materials or materials excavated from underwater shall be stored for at least num hours or longer as determined by the engineer to allow all free water to drain and to attain a uniform water content .
aggregates shall be handled transported and stockpiled in such a manner and with such equipment that segregation andor contamination is avoided .
storage areas shall be level well drained free of all foreign materials and of adequate bearing capacity to support the stockpiles .
the storage area shall be situated on solid ground with a suitable haul road .
storage areas and haul roads must withstand heavy equipment and trucks .
the contractor will provide and ensure access for the department or its agents at any time .
stockpiles shall be either far enough apart or separated by substantial dividers to prevent intermingling .
stockpiles shall be built up in layers not exceeding num m in depth .
each layer shall be completed over the entire area of the stockpile before beginning the next layer .
special attention should be given that each layer interlocks with the underneath layer .
coning of the piles or spilling of material over the edges will not be permitted .
the use of bulldozers is not permitted to construct stockpiles other than to level spot dumped truck loads or to maintain haul roads .
it is the express responsibility of the contractor to ensure that stockpiles contain material of acceptable quality and of uniform distribution .
aggregates which are contaminated with foreign matter segregated or mixed with other aggregates shall not be used and shall be removed from the stockpiles immediately .
the contractor will provide for weighing of the aggregate in conformity with provision num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy bedding material num num num num scope this section outlines the gradation requirements for bedding material to be incorporated in department work or stockpiled for department use .
num quality of material bedding material shall meet the gradation requirements outlined in tables numand num .
samples will be taken on a regular basis during the work to ensure that the requirements of table num and num are met .
table numgradation requirement for bedding material sieve size passing num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm num num μm num num μm num num μm num num μm num notethere shall be a maximum of num difference between the percents passing consecutive sieves .
table num gradation requirement for crushed glass sieve size passing num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm num num num num num num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy bitumen num num asphalt cement num asphalt prime rescinded num num asphalt emulsions general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy asphalt cement num num num num scope this section is the material specification for performance graded asphalt cement pgac and performance graded asphalt cement with elastic recovery pgace .
performance graded asphalt cement pgac and performance graded asphalt cement with elastic recovery pgace shall be homogeneous free of water and any contamination and shall not foam when heated to the temperatures specified by the supplier for the safe handling and use of the product .
it shall be shipped used and handled at all times in accordance with the supplierss requirements .
num quality of material pgac and pgace shall conform to the requirements of aashto mnum table num performance graded asphalt binder specification for the performance grades specified in the contract for each hot mix type .
additionally pgace shall meet the following elastic recovery requirements when tested in accordance with astmdnum testing procedure b. pgace nume elastic recovery num .
num method of measurement the quantity to be measured for payment under this section shall be the number of tonnes of asphalt cement utilized by the contractor in producing hot mix asphaltic concrete as determined by calibrated asphalt cement pump metered settings logged by the department as metered into the mix and calculated for the tonnage of hot mix asphaltic concrete produced .
num basis of payment the supply and transportation of performance grade asphalt cement will be paid for at the contractors unit bid price per tonne of asphalt cement .
this price shall be full compensation for any and all expenses that may be incurred for the supply transport and delivery of the performance grade asphalt cement to the contractors plant including the cost of any antistripping additive required to meet design mix requirements as well as any storage heating and handling requirements .
the unit bid price per tonne of pg grade asphalt cement specified shall be adjusted using the pg grade num price index as posted num hours prior to closing of tender and the time when the asphalt cement is incorporated into the work .
the price index to be used for comparison shall be the price as determined in the maritime suppliers rack price or as artificially established by the department in the special provisions .
a link to the index can be found at httpsprinceedwardisland.caeninformationtransportationinfrastructuremonthlyaverageasphaltbinder rackpricenum the payment adjustment will be in dollars per tonne of asphalt binder .
a payment adjustment will be established for each month of paving in which the price index for the month differs by more than numtonne from the posted price index at the time in which tenders for the contract were opened .
when the price index differential is less than numtonne there will be no general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy asphalt cement num num num adjustment established for that month .
the payment adjustment for the month will be calculated as follows where pa payment adjustment for asphalt binder in dollars t posted pg asphalt binder price index at the time of tender opening p pg asphalt binder price index for month of paving q quantity of asphalt binder in tonnes when p t numtonne the contractor receives an additional payment from the owner as follows pa p t numtonne x q when p t numtonne the owner deducts from payments due to the contractor as follows pa t numtonne p x q examples num .
a contractors unit bid price for asphalt cement was num for a tender that closed in february .
the posted price index num hours prior to tender closing was num and the work was undertaken in may when the price index was num .
num num num num num num since the price index at time of paving num falls within the numtonne range of the price index num hours prior to tender closing there would be no adjustment to the unit price of the asphalt cement .
num .
a contractors unit bid price for asphalt cement was num for a tender that closed in february .
the posted price index num hours prior to tender closing was num and the work was undertaken in june when the price index was num and numt of cement was used .
num num num num num num since the price index at time of paving num falls outside the numtonne range of the price index num hours prior to tender closing an adjustment to the amount paid to the contractor would be required .
the price would be adjusted using the p t numtonne formula .
thus the owner will deduct the following amount from payment to the contractor pa num num num x num num num .
a contractors unit bid price for asphalt cement was num for a tender that closed in february .
the posted price index num hours prior to tender closing was num and the work was undertaken in august when the price index was num and numt of cement was used .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy asphalt cement num num num num num num num num num since the price index at time of paving num falls outside the numtonne range of the price index num hours prior to tender closing an adjustment to the amount paid to the contractor would be required .
the price would be adjusted using the p t numtonne formula .
thus the owner will add the following amount to the payment to the contractor pa num num num x num num section num rescinded num section num rescinded num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy asphalt prime num num num num scope this section is the material specification for asphalt prime .
num quality of material asphalt prime emulsion shall conform in all respects to table num .
asphalt prime cutback shall conform in all respects to table num .
table numrequirements for asphalt prime emulsion test min .
max .
astm tests on emulsion flash point tag open cup ec num dnum saybolt furol viscosity at numec mmnums num num dnum residue by distillation num dnum oil distillate by volume num dnum storage stability num hr num dnum tests on residue penetration at numec num g num s num mm num num dnum ductility at numec num cmmin cm num dnum solubility in trichloroethylene by mass num dnum num follow astm dnum except use high temperature distillation thermometer .
bring the final temperature to numec and terminate heating immediately .
num if the ductility at numec is less than num the material will be acceptable if its ductility at numec is more than num .
section num rescinded num section num rescinded num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy asphalt prime num num num table numrequirements for asphalt prime cutback test min .
max .
astm kinematic viscosity at numec mmnums num num dnum distillation tests of total to numec to numec num num dnum to numec num dnum to numec num dnum to numec num dnum distillation residue to numec difference by volume num dnum tests on residue penetration at numec num g num s num mm num num dnum ductility at numec num cmmin cm num dnum solubility in trichloroethylene by mass num dnum numif the ductility at numec is less than num the material will be acceptable if its ductility at numec is more than num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy asphalt emulsions num num num num scope this section is the material specification for asphalt emulsions .
num quality of material asphalt emulsions used for tack coats shall conform in all respects to the requirements of tables num or num .
table numrequirements for tack coat material type ssnum ssnum h test min .
max .
min .
max .
astm tests on emulsion saybolt furol viscosity at numec mmnums num num num num dnum residue by distillation num num dnum settlement in num days num num dnum retention by mass on an num μm sieve num num dnum cement mixing test num num dnum storage stability in num hr num num dnum tests on residue penetration at numec num g num s num mm num num num num dnum ductility at numec num cmmin cm num num dnum solubility in trichloroethylene by mass num num dnum general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy asphalt emulsions num num num table numrequirements for tack coat material type rsnum rsnum h test min .
max .
min .
max .
astm tests on emulsion saybolt furol viscosity at numec mmnums num num num num dnum residue by distillation num num dnum settlement in num days num dnum retention by mass on an num μm sieve num num dnum cement mixing test dnum storage stability in num hr num dnum tests on residue penetration at numec num g num s num mm num num num num dnum ductility at numec num cmmin cm num dnum solubility in trichloroethylene by mass num num dnum general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy pavement num num tack coat application num prime coat application rescinded num num hot mix asphaltic concrete num descriptionmaterial num mix design and job mix formula num handling of materials num equipment num plant calibrations num manufacture of the mixture num transportation of the mixturecommunication num seal course trial area num requirements for completed pavement courses num placing of asphalt concrete num construction of joints num compaction num smoothness num cleanup num method of measurementbasis of payment num chip seal rescinded num num double emulsified asphalt slurry seal num asphalt concrete curb num asphalt crack filling num cold mix bituminous patching material num hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num descriptionmaterials num mix design and job mix formula num construction num quality control testing num measurement for paymentpayment general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy tack coat application num num num num description this work shall consist of the supply and application of a bituminous emulsion as a tack coat on an existing asphaltic concrete surface or on a portland cement concrete surface .
num material tack coat material shall be asphaltic emulsion and shall be in accordance with section num .
num equipment the distributor shall be so designed equipped maintained and operated that asphaltic material at even heat may be applied uniformly on variable widths at readily determined and controlled rates with uniform pressure .
the distributor shall be capable of applying asphaltic material within plus or minus num of the desired rate and in a continuous and uniform manner both longitudinally and across the width of the spray bar .
the distributor shall be equipped with a rear mounted spray bar parallel to the surface to be sprayed .
the spray bar must be capable of being adjusted in width from num num m. the spray bar height shall be adjustable and shall be set at such a height that the spray fan from any nozzle overlays the spray fan from the adjacent nozzle by num so that a uniformly sprayed surface results .
all spray nozzles shall be in good condition of the same manufacture size and type .
nozzles shall have valves capable of instant full opening and positive cutoff .
all spray nozzles shall be set in the bar so that the nozzle slots make the same horizontal angle i.e .
num num with the longitudinal axis of the bar .
the distributor shall be equipped with a suitable thermometer with a minimum range of num num c placed to accurately show the temperature of the distributor contents .
tack coat material must be circulated during the entire heating process in the distributor .
the distributor shall be equipped with a tachometer registering mmin that is visibly located to enable the truck driver to maintain constant application speeds at specified rates .
the distributor pump shall be equipped with a tachometer registering rmin passing through the nozzles and shall be readily visible to the operator .
the distributor shall be equipped with an accurate distance measuring device .
the distributor shall be equipped with a sampling valve .
num construction method paved surfaces which are to be covered with hot mix asphaltic concrete shall be tack coated .
surfaces of asphaltic concrete courses which are to be covered by subsequent courses of asphaltic concrete shall also be tack coated .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy tack coat application num num num no tack coat shall be applied in wet weather or when the air temperature is less than num c unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
the surface to be treated shall be cleaned with a power broom air line or other approved equipment that will leave a clean dry surface free from dust dirt or other objectionable material .
the emulsion shall be heated and maintained at a temperature between num num c and shall be applied to the surface at a rate of num num rmnum ssnumand ssnumh and num rmnum for rsnum and rsnumh as specified by the engineer .
the ssnum and ssnumh emulsion shall be mixed with water to form a num mixture .
the material shall be applied evenly and shall form a thin unbroken film on the surface .
the application of tack coat shall not extend beyond the limit of asphaltic concrete to be spread and compacted in a day .
at the end of the day tack coat may be applied to accommodate paving operations on the following day .
after applying the tack coat the contractor shall by means of barricades signallers traffic convoys or other means prevent the passage of traffic upon the tack coat until it has dried to a proper condition of tackiness as determined by the engineer .
the engineer may direct that the contractor reapply tack coat material to any surface where the original tack coat placed by the contractor has been worn off by the traffic .
no asphaltic concrete shall be placed upon the tack coat until it has dried to a proper condition of tackiness as determined by the engineer .
the contractor is advised that the period required for such drying will depend upon weather conditions it will not be less than num minutes and could be as long as num hours .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of square metres of pavement to which tack coat is applied .
no measurement shall be made for the reapplication of a tack coat which has been worn off by traffic .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for material heating handling transportation tools labour equipment and incidentals necessary to carry out the work .
no payment shall be made under this section for the reapplication of a tack coat which may be directed by the engineer in the event of traffic wearing off the original application .
section num rescinded num section num rescinded num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy prime coat application num num num num description this work shall consist of the supply and application of bituminous prime and sand cover on a previously prepared surface .
num material prime coat material shall consist of an asphaltic emulsion or an asphaltic cutback in accordance with section num .
sand cover shall conform to the gradation specified in table num .
table numgradation requirement for sand sieve size passing num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm num num μm num num μm num num μm num numμm num num equipment the distributor shall be so designed equipped maintained and operated that asphaltic material at even heat may be applied uniformly on variable widths at readily determined and controlled rates with uniform pressure .
the distributor shall be capable of applying asphaltic material within plus or minus num of the desired rate and in a continuous and uniform manner both longitudinally and across the width of the spray bar .
the distributor shall be equipped with a rear mounted spray bar parallel to the surface to be sprayed .
the spray bar must be capable of being adjusted in width from num num m. the spray bar height shall be adjustable and shall be set at such a height that the spray fan from any nozzle overlays the spray fan from the adjacent nozzle by num so that a uniformly sprayed surface will result .
all spray nozzles shall be in good condition of the same manufacture size and type .
nozzles shall have valves capable of instant full opening and positive cutoff .
all spray nozzles shall be set in the bar so that the nozzle slots make the same horizontal angle i.e .
num nume with the longitudinal axis of the bar .
section num rescinded num section num rescinded num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy prime coat application num num num the distributor shall be equipped with a suitable thermometer with a range of num numec placed to accurately show the temperature of the distributor contents .
prime coat material must be circulated during the entire heating process in the distributor .
the distributor shall be equipped with a tachometer registering mmin that is visibly located to enable the truck driver to maintain constant application speeds at specified rates .
the distributor pump shall be equipped with a tachometer registering rmin passing through the nozzles and shall be readily visible to the operator .
the distributor shall be equipped with an accurate distance measuring device .
the distributor shall be equipped with a sampling valve .
cover sand shall be spread using an approved spreader .
num construction method unless otherwise directed by the engineer any roadway surface which is to be covered with hot mix asphaltic concrete shall be prime coated .
the engineer shall be notified at least num hours prior to the start of bituminous priming .
prime shall not be applied in wet weather or when the air temperature is less than numºc unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
the prime shall be heated prior to its application to temperatures between num num c for an emulsion and between num num c for a cutback .
the prime shall be applied to the surface at the rate of num num rmnum as specified by the engineer .
the prime shall be applied evenly and shall form a thin unbroken film at the surface .
following the application of prime a minium curing time of num minutes shall be provided before a sand cover is applied for the purpose of preventing tracking by vehicles .
this sand cover should be applied evenly at a rate not exceeding num kgmnum .
the engineer can waive the use of sand if conditions permit the contractor to control traffic so that it can be kept off the primed road until the prime has set up .
after applying the prime coat the contractor shall by means of barricades flagmen traffic cones or other means prevent the passage of traffic upon the prime coat until it has dried to a proper condition of tackiness as determined by the engineer .
the engineer may direct that the contractor reapply prime coat material to any surface where the original prime coat placed by the contractor has been worn off by traffic .
asphaltic concrete shall not be laid on the primed surfaces within num hours of an emulsified prime application and num hours after a cutback prime application .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of square metres of roadway to which prime coat is applied .
no measurement shall be made for the reapplication of a prime coat which has been worn off by traffic .
section num rescinded num section num rescinded num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy prime coat application num num num num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for material heating handling transportation application material tools labour equipment and incidentals necessary to carry out the work .
no payment shall be made under this section for the reapplication of a prime coat which may be directed by the engineer in the event of traffic wearing off the original prime coat .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete descriptionmaterial num num num num description this section defines the requirements for the materials equipment and methods to be followed for production transportation of hot mixed hot laid asphaltic concrete for pavement construction and other purposes .
num material all materials to be incorporated into the work will be subject to test by the engineer to determine suitability .
such tests may consist of chemical or physical analysis to determine wearability soundness density stability or any other property pertinent to the satisfactory completion of the work .
acceptance by the engineer based on the suitability tests shall not relieve the contractor of the responsibility of maintaining a uniform acceptable product throughout the contract period .
num asphalt cement the contractor shall supply as a bid item performance graded asphalt cement pgac or performance graded asphalt cement with elastic recovery pgace to be incorporated into the departments work .
unless otherwise specified the asphalt cement shall be pg num and shall conform in all respects to the performance grade requirements of aashto mnum table num performance graded asphalt binder specification .
when antistripping additives are required the asphalt cement shall meet the specified requirements of aashto mnum table num after the addition of the required additives .
when the selected wma technology requires that additives be added to the asphalt cement acceptance of the asphalt cement shall be based on the samples that contain the wma additive .
the contractor shall supply the applicable mixing and compaction temperatures for the performance graded asphalt cement specified in addition to the supplier documentation indicating current test results meeting the requirements of aashto mnum table num after the addition of required antistripping additives if necessary .
department staff shall have access to all asphalt binder delivery slips at the asphalt plant as the material is delivered .
if department staff are not present at the time of delivery then a copy of the delivery slips shall be retained in the asphalt plant control room for department staff .
the department will conduct quality assurance testing by testing random samples taken from the contractors asphalt cement storage tanks located at the hot mix plant for the purpose of ensuring that the material used in the work conforms to the requirements of aashto mnum table num .
num mineral filler mineral filler shall meet the requirements of astm dnum .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete descriptionmaterial num num num num asphaltic concrete stripping the contractor is hereby advised that if their aggregate for asphaltic concrete is moisture susceptible they shall have the option of either using a liquid antistripping additive from the departments list of acceptable products using hydrated lime or changing their source of aggregate .
the department may determine that an antistripping additive is required if one of the following conditions occurs the long term tensile strength ratio tsr of the asphaltic concrete as per the latest edition of aashto tnum average of conditioned freezethaw tsr values is less than num .
the conditioned freeze thaw tensile strength values shall not be less than num kpa .
material that has been conditioned per the latest edition of aashto tnum meets the num minimum requirement but a visual examination indicates there is evidence of stripping .
if based on past performance the aggregate source is known to be prone to stripping .
num antistripping agents any antistripping agent intended for use shall be incorporated in the mix design in the proportion to be used during production and in accordance with the manufacturers specifications .
the antistripping agents shall consist of one of the following hydrated lime caoh num meeting the requirements of astm cnum liquid antistripping additives from the approved list manufacturer product akzo nobel chemicals redicote c num akzo nobel chemicals redicote nums meadwestvaco corp evotherm mnum morton international pave bond t lite morton international pave bond lite travis chemicals travcor num arrmaz products adhere lof num ultrapave ultracote upnum zydex zycosil zydex zycotherm inclusion on this list does not attest to efficacy of use with any specific aggregate or approval for use on any specific project .
testing for each product shall be required for this purpose .
this list is subject to revision .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete descriptionmaterial num num num num approval of antistripping agents approval to use an antistripping agent will only be given if it is determined from the latest edition of aashto tnum that the longterm tsr of the mix with an antistripping agent equals or exceeds num conditioned freeze thaw tensile strength values meet or exceeds num kpa and the visual examination indicates there is no evidence of stripping .
the contractor shall also demonstrate the capability of properly adding hydrated lime to the mix at the hotmix plant if hydrated lime is proposed for use as an antistripping agent .
in all cases a minimum of num working days are required to perform the stripping test after the aggregates have been received by the materials lab .
an additional num working days will be required for retesting of aggregate with an anti stripping agent .
num addition of liquid antistripping additive the liquid antistripping additive shall be added at a rate as determined by the mix design minimum num or num arrmaz adhere lof num to the asphalt cement at the suppliers depot concurrently with loading of the asphalt cement into the carriers tanker .
num information sessions at a preconstruction meeting the contractor and the department will review the requirements for use of the liquid antistripping additive including proper procedures worker information use of protective clothing and equipment site supervision and contingency .
the contractor shall advise workers of the proper procedures to be followed when working with asphalt cement or asphaltic concrete containing antistripping additives .
num aggregates coarse aggregate to be supplied for the manufacture of asphaltic concrete shall consist of crushed gravel or crushed stone composed of clean sound hard and durable particles free from a coating of silt andor clay and shall not contain other deleterious materials .
coarse aggregate shall conform to the physical requirements for coarse aggregate shown in table num and num or as otherwise approved by the engineer .
irrespective of compliance with the physical requirements of table num and num a coarse aggregate may be rejected on the basis of past field performance .
fine aggregate to be supplied for the manufacture of asphaltic concrete shall consist of manufactured material processed by crushing quarried rock or natural sand and gravel the particles of which shall be clean hard durable and free from coatings of silt clay or other deleterious material .
fine aggregate shall conform to the physical and gradation requirements shown in table num or as otherwise approved by the engineer in writing .
the fraction between any num of the following consecutive sieves num mm num mm num mm num μm num μm num μm shall be a minimum of num .
a minimum of num fine aggregate processed by crushing quarried rock shall be incorporated into all asphaltic mixes .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete descriptionmaterial num num num table num gradation requirement for coarse aggregate astm cnum material size num mm num mm num mm sieve size passing passing passing num mm num num mm num num num mm num num num num mm num num num num mm num num mm num num num table num physical requirements for coarse aggregate test a base b seal c seal astm los angeles abrasion max .
loss num num num cnum magnesium sulfate soundness max .
loss num num num cnum absorption max .
num num num cnum crushed min .
num num num num flat and elongated max .
num num num num petrographic number max .
num num num num num mm sieve max .
passing num num num cnum num μm sieve with pi num max .
passing num num num cnum num crushed percentage is the fraction of particles by mass retained on the num mm sieve having two or more freshly fractured faces for classes a b c. num flat and elongated particles to be determined using current department test procedures .
num petrographic number to be determined using current department test procedures .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete descriptionmaterial num num num table num physical and gradation requirements for fine aggregate test a base b seal d sand seal astm magnesium sulfate soundness max .
loss num num num cnum num mm sieve min .
passing num num num cnum num μm sieve max .
passing num num num cnum num blending sand blending sand supplied for the manufacture of asphaltic concrete shall consist of clean tough durable particles free of silt clay or other deleterious material .
the gradation of the blending sand shall be such that when incorporated into the asphaltic concrete mix the resultant mix shall meet the requirements of tables num num num and num .
the blending sand shall have num percent passing the num mm sieve and a maximum of num passing the num μm sieve .
the physical requirements of the blending sand shall be as specified in table num with the exception of the limitation on the maximum passing the num μm sieve .
the maximum mass of blending sand to be used in the total mix shall not exceed num for all mixes except d mix .
num warm mix asphalt wma wma technologies must be approved by the engineer prior to its use .
technology approved for previous work is not guaranteed approval on all future work .
the contractor shall supply all materials required for the production of wma .
supporting documentation from the wma supplier for the proper preparation storage and handling of their product shall be obtained by the contractor and submitted to the engineer .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete mix design and job mix formula num num num num mix design and job mix formula num responsibility for design mix authority mix design the engineer shall be notified when stockpiles meeting minimum size requirements of coarse aggregate fine aggregate blending sand and performance grade asphalt cement representative of the material to be used in the work are available for sampling at the plant site .
the engineer will arrange for samples of each material to be taken and submitted to the departments laboratory for mix design purposes after stockpile requirements as specified in subsection num have been met .
the contractor will be notified of the composition of the mix design no later than three num weeks after the day on which all of the representative samples were received by the departments laboratory .
the contractor shall not commence mix production before such notification .
a new asphalt mix design shall be required if any change occurs in the nature or source of the aggregate andor the supplier of the performance graded asphalt cement .
contractor mix design preparation and submission of the asphalt mix design for the departments approval is optional to the contractor .
in conformance with this specification the contractor shall use professional engineering services and a qualified testing laboratory to assess the performance grade asphalt cement and aggregate materials proposed for use and to carry out the design of the asphalt mix .
num requirement for asphalt mix design the asphalt mix design shall follow the marshall method of mix design based on num blows and be in accordance with the latest edition of the asphalt institute publication mix design methods for asphalt concrete manual series no .
num msnum .
the asphalt cement grade shall be pg num unless otherwise specified .
the design percent of asphalt cement shall be that percent which yields design air voids of num½ ..
the job mix formula shall be the approved asphalt mix design specifying the aggregate blend proportions and the optimium percentage of asphalt cement that yields target air voids as determined by contract sadt summer average daily traffic .
sadt num num num num target air voids num num num num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete mix design and job mix formula num num num the percent passing the num mm sieve size num for the blended aggregate gradations for given mix types shall be as follows mix type a b c percent passing num mm sieve size num num the asphalt mix design data and the proposed job mix formula determined by the departments laboratory or submitted by the contractor for the departments review and approval shall include for each blend the following num the name of the testing firm responsible for the mix design .
num the specific locations of the sources of mineral aggregate .
num the source and type of mineral admixture and the percentage to be used .
num the percentage of aggregate passing each of the specified sieves for each aggregate to be incorporated into the mixture .
num the proportion of each material in percent of aggregate including hydrated lime if required as an antistripping additive .
num the composite gradation based on num and num above .
num the composite gradation plotted on a num power graph paper .
num the results of all aggregate testing determinations etc .
as defined in tables num num and num of section num of the general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction manual including bulk specific gravity and apparent specific gravity for both the coarse and fine aggregates .
the numµm material shall be removed prior to the determination of the specific gravities .
in addition aggregates shall be tested as per the latest edition of aashto tnum to determine if they are prone to stripping tensile strength ratio num and conditioned freeze thaw tensile strength values less than num kpa as well as no visual evidence of stripping .
provided an antistripping additive is required hydrated lime or an effective liquid antistripping additive shall be used and tested for compliance as per the latest edition of aashto tnum tensile strength ratio num and conditioned and freeze thaw tensile strength values meet or exceed num kpa with no visual evidence of stripping .
num the mix design with a minimum of four num different asphalt contents minimum num between each point with at least one point above and one point below the optimum asphalt percentage that reports the following i the percentage in units of one tenth of num of asphalt cement to beaded based on the total weight of the mixture .
ii the marshall test results for the individual and average bulk specific gravity stability and flow of at least three specimens at each asphalt content .
iii the maximum theoretical specific gravity at each asphalt content .
iv the percent of air voids in the mixture for each asphalt content .
v the percent voids in mineral aggregate vma at each asphalt content .
vi the percent voids filled with asphalt vfa at each asphalt content .
vii the design asphalt content as a percent of total mix .
num all marshal mix design characteristics including graphs used in arriving at the final mix design the bulk relative density of the combined aggregates and the asphalt absorption of the combined aggregates .
num the source and current test results of the performance graded asphalt cement general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete mix design and job mix formula num num num to be incorporated into the departments work meeting the requirements of ahsto mnum table num for performance graded asphalt cement including applicable mixing and compaction temperatures .
the contractor shall submit the following with the asphalt mix design for verification purposes a one num kg sample of each representative virgin aggregate .
b thirtytwo num kg samples of representative virgin aggregate blended to the design mix gradation of the asphalt mix aggregate .
c four litres of the type of performance grade asphalt cement to be used .
num design mix approval design mix approval will be based on the design mix tests and the corresponding requirements detailed in tables num and num of section num of the general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction .
a new asphalt mix design shall be required if any change occurs in the nature or source of the aggregate andor the supplier of the performance graded asphalt cement .
the engineer shall not accept any asphalt mix produced prior to the contractor receiving written approval of the asphalt mix design .
the job mix formula shall be the approved asphalt mix design specifying the aggregate blend proportions and the optimum percentage of asphalt cement that yields target air voids as determined by contract sadt summer average daily traffic .
sadt num num num num target air voids num num num num once the job mix formula has been designated by the engineer the contractor shall be required to produce an asphaltic concrete mixture conforming to the requirements specified in table num table num and table num .
the mix design and job mix formula shall remain in effect until changed in writing .
should the aggregate source change or when unsatisfactory results or other conditions make it necessary a new mix design will be required .
the departments laboratory shall require fifteen num working days from the time of receipt of contractor submitted asphalt mix design and samples to evaluate the asphalt mix design .
as part of the asphalt mix design evaluation the departments laboratory shall determine the following properties i combined aggregate gradation ii bulk specific gravity for the asphalt mix aggregate iii marshal density iv theoretical maximum specific gravity of the asphalt mix at the design asphalt general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete mix design and job mix formula num num num content and at each asphalt content considered by the contractor above and below the design asphalt content .
v the difference between the property values submitted by the contractor and the property values as determined by the departments laboratory shall not exceed the amounts shown as follows property maximum permissible variation bulk specific gravity of aggregate num marshall density num kgmnum theoretical maximum specific gravity num the asphalt mix design shall be rejected if the maximum permissible variations are exceeded .
table num blended aggregate gradation and asphalt content for asphaltic concrete mixes passing sieve size a base b seal c seal d sand seal num mm num num mm num num num mm num num num num mm num num num num num mm num num num num num mm num num num num num mm num num num num num μm num num num num num μm num num num num num μm num num num num num μm num num num num asphalt cement by mass of total mixture num num num num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete mix design and job mix formula num num num table num physical requirements for dense graded asphaltic concrete test a base b seal c seal d sand seal stability at numec n num num num num flow num mm num num num num air voids num num num num min .
vma num num num num vfa num num num num table num mix control tolerance variation from job mix formula sieve size allowable variation of passing num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm num num μm num num μm num num μm num num μm num asphalt cement num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete mix design and job mix formula num num num num physical requirements of the mixture the mixture shall be uniform and shall consist of a mixture of coarse andor fine aggregate together with any required blend sand mineral filler or lime and mixed with asphalt cement .
the mineral constituents shall be combined in such proportions as to produce a mixture conforming to the gradation requirements of table num .
the grading shall not show marked fluctuations from opposite extremes of the limiting sizes .
mixtures shall meet the physical requirements of the properties specified in table num .
current department test procedures will be used to determine these properties .
num mix control tolerances once the job mix formula has been designated by the engineer the contractor shall be required to produce an asphaltic concrete mixture conforming to the mix control tolerance as specified in table num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete handling of materials num num num num handling of materials num stockpile requirements stockpiling sites shall be level well drained free of all foreign materials and of adequate bearing capacity to support the mass of the stockpiled materials .
stockpiles shall be either far enough apart or separated by substantial dividers to prevent intermingling .
for all aggregates except where stockpiled on portland cement concrete asphaltic concrete or on otherwise acceptably stabilized areas the bottom num mm of the stockpile is not to be incorporated into the departments work .
stockpiles shall be built up in layers not exceeding num m in depth .
each layer shall be completed over the entire area of the stockpile before beginning the next layer .
coning of the piles or spilling of material over the edges of the pile will not be permitted .
traffic over the stockpile surface shall be limited to that required for adequate levelling or removal .
the minimum size of each coarse and fine aggregate stockpile shall be num tonnes .
the minimum size of the stockpiles of blending sand shall be num tonnes .
before any production of asphaltic concrete mixture has commenced aggregate stockpiles of the required size and gradation shall be provided at the asphalt plant site .
minimum stockpile requirements shall be maintained throughout the project .
aggregates brought to the site after production has commenced shall be stored in separate stockpiles .
a minimum of num working days between the arrival of asphalt aggregate and its incorporation into the asphaltic concrete mixture will be required to facilitate complete analysis of the aggregate prior to its use .
num handling feeding and drying of aggregate aggregate shall be loaded into the cold feed bins so as to prevent the mixing of separated sizes of aggregate .
mixing of materials on site or loading of more than one material into a single bin shall not be permitted .
where the contractor chooses to use a batch or continuous mix operation the aggregate shall be dried and heated in the drier and separated by screening into hot storage bins .
when the aggregate is delivered to the mixer it shall be at a temperature consistent with proper mixing and laying and shall in no case exceed numec .
surfaces of dried aggregate shall be free of carbon or unburnt fuel oil .
the aggregate shall be sufficiently dried as evidenced by the lack of noticeable steaming bubbling or foaming of the asphalt mixture and the absence of visible free water on the tailgate of the truck box .
if insufficient drying is evident the contractor shall take steps as deemed necessary to provide properly dried aggregates .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete equipment num num num num equipment num requirement of all mixing plants num air quality permit requirements the contractor must comply with all applicable sections of the departments environmental protection plan epp which forms part of these specifications .
the contractor must supply all asphaltic concrete from an asphalt plant that has a valid air quality permit issued by the pei department of environment labour and justice elj .
the contractor must supply the engineer with a copy of a valid air quality permit for each asphalt plant which will be used to supply asphaltic concrete to the contractor or project before production begins .
if the department receives a copy of a written notice from ejl to the owner of an asphalt plant that the asphalt plant does not posses a valid air quality permit or that the air quality permit for that plant has been revoked then the department will not accept asphaltic concrete from that plant .
num inspection requirements all equipment shall be on the site and available for inspection testing and approval before operations commence .
plants used for the manufacture of asphaltic concrete under this section shall conform to the requirements of astm dnum .
the engineer or authorized representative shall have access at all times to any or all parts of the plant and equipment pertaining to the work .
in order to ensure that the manufacture of the mixture is in strict accordance with the specifications the department may use whatever recording devices are deemed necessary for permanent records including audio and video records .
stairways to the mixer platform and to the asphalt cement storage tank manholes and ladders to other plant units shall provide accessibility to all plant operations .
ample and unobstructed space shall be provided on the mixing platform .
a platform shall be provided in the vicinity of the plant to permit inspection and sampling of the mixture before it is delivered to the work site .
num equipment for preparation of asphalt cement asphalt cement storage tanks shall be capable of heating the material under effective and positive control at all times and maintaining a range between num numº c. when the amount of asphalt cement added to the mixture is measured volumetrically the actual working temperature shall not vary by more than plus or minus numº c . a circulating system of adequate size shall be provided for the asphalt cement to ensure proper and continuous circulation between the working tank and the mixer during the entire operating period .
a sampling valve shall be between the working tank and the mixer .
all pipe lines and fittings shall be insulated to prevent heat loss .
there shall be a separate tank and circulation line for each grade of asphalt cement being general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete equipment num num num used in the work .
num cold feed system bin dimensions and geometry shall be such as to provide a free flow of material at all times .
an individual cold feed bin shall be provided for each size type or aggregate gradation .
each bin shall be equipped with individual gate controls to provide accurate and positive proportioning .
partitions of sufficient height to eliminate intermingling of the aggregate shall be provided between adjoining bins .
if the cold feed bins are being fed with a frontend loader the width of each bin must be at least num mm wider than the width of the loader bucket .
a variable speed control shall be permitted only if it is properly designed to give total and proportional control of the cold feed system .
num drier this clause is not applicable to drum mixers .
a rotary drier of sufficient capacity to heat and dry the aggregate to the required temperature shall be provided .
num screens this clause is not applicable to drum mixers .
plant screens capable of screening all aggregates to the sizes required for proportioning each type of asphalt mixture and capable of handling capacities in excess of the hourly mixer capacity shall be provided .
all screens shall have square openings unless otherwise specified by the engineer .
screens shall be kept clean and in good repair .
num hot aggregate storage bins this clause is not applicable to drum mixers .
the plant shall contain a minimum of two num hot aggregate storage bins arranged to ensure separate and adequate storage of appropriate aggregate fractions .
each bin shall be of a size and at a location to prevent material from backing up into other bins .
an oversize chute shall be provided to prevent oversize aggregate from becoming incorporated in the mix .
gates on hot storage bins shall be so constructed as to prevent leakage when they are closed .
each bin shall be provided with a safe and suitable device for obtaining test samples .
num asphalt cement control unit satisfactory means shall be provided to incorporate the required quantity of asphalt cement into the mixture .
all measuring devices shall be sensitive to a one percent num variation above or below the actual mass required .
suitable insulation shall be provided for maintaining the temperature of the asphalt cement in pipelines meters weigh buckets spray bars containers or flow lines .
the remainder of this clause is not applicable to drum mixers .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete equipment num num num the asphalt cement shall be delivered to the pugmill in a thin uniform sheet or in multiple streams over the full length or width of the mixer .
num thermometric equipment suitable thermometric equipment shall be provided to register the temperature of the asphalt as delivered to the mixer .
the indicator dial graduated from num numºc in numºc increments shall be mounted where it is clearly visible to the operator at all times .
each asphalt cement storage tank shall be equipped with a similarly graduated thermometer installed in the asphalt cement feed line near the mixers discharge pipe .
plants shall have approved recording thermometers pyrometers or approved recording thermometric instruments at the discharge chute of the drier to register and automatically record the temperature of the heated aggregate .
in drum mixers where the temperature of the hot bituminous mixture is registered and recorded with a printed recorder that can be monitored by the plant operator the printed record shall be available to the department .
num dust collectors this clause is not applicable to drum mixers .
all plants shall be equipped with a primary dry dust collecting system and a wet or dry secondary dust collecting system .
provisions shall be made to waste all of the collected materials or to uniformly return all or any portion of the dry material to the mixture as required to meet mix design .
num filler attachments should filler be required in the mixture the plant shall be equipped with all filler feeding equipment necessary to uniformly incorporate the prescribed proportion of filler into the mixture .
num hydrated lime should hydrated lime be required in the mixture the plant shall be equipped with all feeding equipment necessary to uniformly incorporate the prescribed proportion of lime .
the feeding equipment shall be mounted so as to permit thorough dry mixing with the aggregate prior to contact with the asphalt cement .
num hot mix surge bins if the contractor elects to use a hot mix surge bin it shall be designed constructed and operated so that there shall be no segregation of or damage to the mix due to the surge bin or its appurtenances .
the hot mix surge bin shall be operated in such a manner during draw down to prevent free discharge of hot mix from the conveyor belt to the truck .
the maximum allowable time which an asphalt mixture can be stored in a hot mix surge bin shall be num hours .
num hot mix storage silos if the contractor elects to use a hot mix storage silo it shall be designed constructed and operated so that there shall be no segregation of or damage to the mix .
the storage silo shall be equipped with an appropriate holding and batching system at the top of the silo coordinated with plant production to prevent complete discharge so that mix is not permitted to fall directly into the silo .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete equipment num num num storage silos equipped with a heating system shall be capable of maintaining the temperature without localized overheating .
storage silos shall be equipped with mix level indicators and when the plant is in continuous operation the minimum level of mix in the silo must be maintained above the onethird a capacity level .
storage in the silo up to num hours shall be permitted provided i that the penetration of the asphalt cement recovered from the stored asphalt concrete is equal to or greater than the penetration after the thin film oven test of the original asphalt cement before mixing and ii which when discharged from the storage silo was free flowing and without lumps and iii which when delivered to the paver was at or above numec num mix production control at all times during mix production a plant operator competent and familiar with the operation of the plant shall be at the control console .
the contractor shall designate a qualified person solely for this operation during the production of asphaltic concrete .
the department reserves the right to reject any mix produced during the plant operators absence .
num asphalt plant inspectors quarters at any asphalt plant the contractor shall provide at the contractors own expense working quarters for the asphalt plant inspector having the following dimensions and equipment .
a outside dimension min .
num x num x num m. b equipment num door and padlock num window that opens min .
num x num mm num chair num sturdy and well supported bench along the num m wall num mm wide x num mm high electricity num overhead light and at least num wall plug c the working quarters shall be located so that the inspector is able to observe the operation from the building .
d this building is to be for the sole use of the asphalt inspector .
the contractor is not to store equipment or supplies in it .
num special requirements for batch mixing plants num material level indicators a material level indicator shall be installed in each hot aggregate bin at the num full level and shall be connected to remote highlow indicator lights mounted at the operators station .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete equipment num num num num weigh hopper the equipment shall include a means to accurately weigh each bin size of aggregate in a weigh hopper suspended on scales and this weigh hopper shall be of ample size to hold a full batch without running over .
the hopper shall be supported on fulcrums and knife edges and constructed so that the fulcrums and knife edges are not easily thrown out of alignment or adjustment .
the hopper shall be dimensioned and constructed to prevent segregation of the dry aggregate prior to mixing .
gates on the hopper shall be constructed to prevent leakage when closed .
num plant scales scales for weighing aggregates and asphalt cement shall be the dial type and of a standard make and design .
scales for weighing aggregates shall be accurate and sensitive to num of the maximum load required and shall provide a positive means of balancing the tare mass of the hopper and asphalt bucket .
at the beginning of each construction season after each plant setup and prior to batching any materials and whenever it is deemed necessary by the engineer the contractor shall verify the accuracy of the scales .
num mixer unit the plant shall include an approved twin shaft pugmill type batch mixer that can produce a uniform mixture within the tolerances required .
the clearance of the blades from the inner surfaces of the pugmill liners shall not exceed num mm .
the mixer shall be constructed to prevent leakage of the contents .
the mixer shall be fitted with separate dry and wet mixing cycle timers and locking devices so that asphalt cement can not be discharged and the pugmill gate can not be opened until the desired mixing times have elapsed .
mixing time shall be determined as the minimum time required to fully coat all aggregate particles with a uniform coating of bitumen .
num special requirements for drum mixers num aggregate feed system a positive interlocked automatic shutoff shall be provided so that the plant shuts down automatically after a num second disruption in the flow of aggregate from any cold feed bin .
the contractor shall be responsible for obtaining aggregate moisture contents and adjusting the system accordingly to ensure the correct proportion of asphalt cement and aggregate are maintained .
a vibrating screen of adequate size and capacity shall be provided for oversize material and other debris from the combined cold feed .
the conveyor belt with the load cell shall be equipped with a positive means to prevent buildup of material .
num asphalt cement control unit a flow switch shall be installed in the delivery system which will automatically stop the plant if an interruption occurs in the asphalt cement flow .
the asphalt cement metering system shall have provision to compensate for fluctuations in specific gravity and temperature .
the contractor shall be responsible for calculating and adjusting specific gravity values for temperature fluctuations of numºc or a temperature general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete equipment num num num compensating system shall be installed in the asphalt cement line from the storage tank .
a positive means of controlling the delay time between initial aggregate flow and initial asphalt cement delivered shall be employed .
num calibration the asphalt feed system shall be equipped with a calibration system to allow asphalt cement to be bypassed into a container and weighed .
the asphalt cement metering system shall be calibrated to an accuracy of plus or minus num through the actual working range of the system at the start of the paving season whenever the weighing conveyor is moved and whenever deemed necessary by the engineer .
the aggregate belt scale on the cold feed conveyor shall be calibrated within an accuracy of plus or minus num through the actual working range of the system at the start of the contract whenever the weighing conveyor is moved and whenever deemed necessary by the engineer .
num placement equipment pavers shall be selfpropelled and capable of laying a consistent satisfactory mat which is true to the specified geometrics crosssection and alignment as directed by the engineer .
the term screed shall mean the unit of the paver which strikes off and imparts an initial compaction to the mix .
pavers shall be equipped with hoppers and distributing screws to place the mixture evenly in front of the screed .
pavers shall be equipped with screeds and shall be capable of spreading the mixtures without segregation in thickness from num num mm and in widths to at least num m in increments of num mm .
the screed shall be adjustable to level and crown and shall be heated in an approved manner .
pavers shall be equipped with automatic longitudinal and transverse grade and slope controls which are capable of being operated from either side of the paver .
the longitudinal grade control shall be adjustable for small mat thickness increments without stopping the paver and shall be equipped to operate from either a num m ski or floating beam a num m ski or a joint matching shoe as required .
where the ski is a flexible unit it shall be equipped with a springtensioned wire extending between brackets fitted on and slightly above each end of the ski .
the sensing grid shall ride on the wire and not on the ski .
the term screed extension shall mean the section of screed plate mould board tamperbarvibrator and spreading screw which are used to extend the basic screed to the desired paving width .
the term hydraulic strikeoff shall mean an extension to the mould board and strikeoff which can be extended beyond the screed while the paver is operating to place any strikeoff mixtures in narrow transitions or tapers .
vibrating hydraulic extendable screeds and vibrating bolton screed extensions shall be used in placing mat widths greater than three num m. only hydraulic extendable screeds shall be used for paving varying width such as transitions or tapers .
hot overlays using fixed screed extensions shall only be permitted with the approval of the engineer .
all extensions shall provide the same degree of heat and vibration as the main screed .
hydraulic strikeoff general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete equipment num num num extensions will not be allowed in the laying of regular or specified mat widths or when placing surface mixture .
a three num m straight edge shall be provided on each paver .
this straight edge shall be of metal or wood .
provided a remix paver has been permitted for use by the engineer the contractor shall be paid a cost of num per tonne premium for all nonsegregated uniformly textured smooth asphaltic concrete applied using an approved remix paver .
areas subject to repairs as a result of segregation and nonuniform texture or areas subject to negative smoothness price adjustments will not be eligible for the cost per tonne premium .
repairs if required shall be at the contractors expense and shall extend the full width and full depth of the mat in which the repair work is performed .
num compaction equipment all rollers shall be of types specifically designed for asphalt compaction .
rollers shall be in good condition and capable of reversing without backlash .
steel wheeled rollers shall be equipped with a means of supplying a controlled flow of water to the wheels to prevent adhesion of the asphalt mix .
pneumatictired rollers shall be selfpropelled with a mechanical means of adjusting the tire inflation pressure .
wheels shall be mounted with smooth tread rubber tires .
approved skirts or windbreaks shall be provided on rollers to protect tires from the cooling air .
all rollers with rubber tires shall be equipped with a means to prevent the asphalt mix from adhering to the rubber tires .
vibratory rollers shall be equipped with a device that accurately indicates the speed of the roller and the vibrating frequency .
all vibratory rollers shall be equipped with an accurate speedometer that indicates speed in increments of one num kmhr through the normal operating range .
all vibratory rollers shall be equipped with a gauge showing the frequency of vibration per minute when operating in vibratory mode .
the frequency of vibration shall not be less than num vibrations per minute .
all vibratory rollers shall be capable of automatically stopping the vibrations prior to stopping .
compaction equipment shall consist of at least one of each of the following a vibratory roller b pneumatic tire roller c steeldrum tandem finish roller .
num material transfer vehicle num material transfer vehicle provided a material transfer vehicle mtv has been permitted for use by the engineer the contractor shall be paid a cost per tonne premium for all nonsegregated uniformly textured smooth asphaltic concrete applied using an approved material transfer vehicle mtv .
material transfer vehicles mtvs proposed for use by the contractor must be evaluated and approved by the department .
material transfer vehicles mtvs shall be selfpropelled equipment capable of transferring asphaltic concrete from the hauling general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete equipment num num num equipment into the paver .
the mtv is not to come in direct contact with the paver and shall meet the following criteria i minimum storage capacity of num tonne .
ii a conveyor system to transfer asphaltic concrete from the hauling equipment to the aver hopper insert and iii an auger system in the mtv or paddle mixers in the storage hopper to remix the asphaltic concrete prior to discharge from the material transfer vehicle into the paver hopper insert .
provided a material transfer vehicle mtv has been permitted for use by the engineer the contractor shall be paid a cost of num per tonne premium for use on the surface course and paid a cost of num per tonne premium for use on the base course for all nonsegregated uniformly textured smooth asphaltic concrete .
areas subject to repairs as a result of segregation and nonuniform texture or areas subject to negative smoothness price adjustments will not be eligible for the cost per tonne premium .
repairs if required shall be at the contractors expense and shall extend the full width and full depth of the mat in which the repair work is performed .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete plant calibrations num num num num plant calibrations all asphalt plants must be calibrated to meet accuracy requirements in accordance with the departments plant calibration procedures at the commencement of each paving season and at each setup for portable plants using the truck scale certified by a scale company at the asphalt plant site .
the engineer shall be notified a minimum of num hours in advance by the contractor when the plant is ready for verification of the calibrated system .
calibration verification of the asphalt plant will occur during the daylight hours only .
the department at the discretion of the engineer shall randomly check the asphalt plant to ensure the mixture can be produced within the required plant calibration tolerances and if the plant does not meet the required tolerance a recalibration of the plant may be required .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete manufacture of the mixture num num num num manufacture of the mixture num batch and continuous mix for batch and continuous mixing the mix proportions of the hot aggregate including any blending sand from each individual hot bin filler and lime when required and the asphalt cement shall be measured separately and accurately .
in batch mixing the asphalt cement shall be added after the hot aggregate and filler and lime when required had been charged into the mixer and thoroughly dry mixed for at least num seconds .
mixing shall be continued for a period of not less than num seconds or longer if necessary to produce a uniform homogenous mixture in which all particles of the mineral aggregate are thoroughly and uniformly coated .
in continuous mixing the mixing period shall be as determined by the formula given in subprovision num but not less than num seconds and longer if necessary to produce a uniform homogenous mixture .
the temperature of the mixture as it is discharged from the mixer shall be controlled within plus or minus num c of the temperature designated by the engineer to be consistent with proper mixing and laying and in no case in excess of num c. num drier drum mixer the plant shall not be operated outside the production range established during plant weight cell calibration .
the heating coating and mixing of the asphalt mix shall be accomplished in an approved parallel flow driermixer .
the aggregate shall enter the drum at the burner end and travel parallel to the flame and exhaust gas stream .
heating shall be controlled to prevent fracture of the aggregate or excessive oxidation of the asphalt .
the system shall be equipped with automatic burner controls and shall provide for continuous printing of a temperature recording of the bituminous mixture at discharge to be monitored by the plant operator .
the printed record of mix temperatures shall also be available to the department for inspection .
the mixing period and temperature shall produce a uniform mixture in which all the particles are thoroughly coated .
facilities for sampling and observing the mix at this point shall be provided .
the temperature of the mix immediately after mixing shall not exceed num c. the method used to transfer the mixture from the drum mixer to the haulage units shall be designed constructed and operated so that no segregation of or damage to the mix occurs .
num moisture content the maximum moisture content allowed in the asphaltic concrete mix as it is discharged to the surge bin storage silo or plug mill shall not exceed num .
the aggregate shall be dried sufficiently so that visual evidence of moisture such as but not limited to the presence of foaming slumping or stripping of the mix does not occur .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete transportation of the mixturecommunication num num num num transportation of the mixture the mixture shall be transported from the asphalt plant to the work site in vehicles with smooth metal boxes in good and leakproof condition and previously cleaned of all foreign materials .
each vehicle shall be equipped with a tarpaulin of canvas or other suitable material .
such tarpaulins shall be on the truck at all times and shall be of sufficient size to overhang the fully loaded truck box and to be tied down on three sides .
tarpaulins shall prevent air flow from contacting the mixture as well as preventing water from entering the truck box .
tarpaulins shall be rolled off the hot mix before the load is dumped into the spreader .
truck boxes shall be lightly coated with a uniform application of a release agent just before each loading .
if liquid agent is used the truck boxes must be drained after each application and before each loading .
all release agents shall comply with occupational health and safety requirements and must not be detrimental to the mix .
delivery of hot mix to the work site shall be scheduled such that spreading and compacting of the hot mix complies with the time restraints imposed by provision num .
in no case shall temperature be increased at the plant to offset long distance hauling unless authorized by the engineer in writing .
num communication between road and plant direct communications between the paving operation and the plant shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
inability to control the delivery of the mixture shall not be cause for the acceptance of work which does not meet the requirements of the contract nor shall it relieve the contractors responsibility for rejected loads .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete seal course trial area num num num num seal course trial area on projects which require asphaltic concrete type b c the contractor shall be required to produce seal course mix for sampling and testing before placement commences .
at the discretion of the engineer the contractor shall place a minimum of num tonnes of seal course mix on a trial area .
the placement of seal course shall be typical of the entire contract and shall allow the evaluation of the equipment performance under normal operation .
locations such as interchange ramps or intersections are not suitable .
the trial area shall be a section which requires a covering seal course mix .
where the base course is num mm or greater in thickness the asphalt shall be laid in num lifts in the trial area so that the upper lift of num mm thickness may be constructed using seal course mix .
the placement of seal course shall not be permitted until the contractor has demonstrated in the trial area that the materials equipment personnel and methods of operation are capable of producing a satisfactory pavement meeting design and specification requirements .
the construction of the trial area may involve moving road equipment back and forth or changing methods of operation or changing plant facilities and operation until the engineer is assured that the trial area is satisfactory .
if deficiencies in the mixture equipment operations or end results are indicated during the construction of the trial area work on the trial area shall be suspended until the deficiencies are corrected .
no additional payment shall be made to the contractor for carrying out the operational work necessary for construction of the trial area as all associated costs are to be included in the contract unit bid price for seal course .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete requirements for completed pavement courses num num num num requirements for completed pavement courses after final compaction the surface of each course and across longitudinal joints other than at a crown shall be free from deviations exceeding num mm as measured with a num m straight edge .
each course after final compaction shall be smooth and true to the required crossslope and grade .
the contractor shall be responsible for the determination of mix course thicknesses unless otherwise specified by the engineer .
the minimum thickness for a mix shall not be less than num mm .
the minimum thickness for b c mix shall not be less than num mm .
the thickness of combined courses shall be within num mm of the specified design thickness .
each course shall be within num of the specified crossslope .
levelling courses shall not be subject to the num mm thickness tolerance .
the finished surface of any pavement course shall have a uniform texture and be free of visible signs of poor workmanship .
if the engineer determines that any load of asphalt concrete is visually unacceptable for reasons of being segregated or the aggregate being improperly coated it will be rejected for used in the work .
any obvious defects as determined by the engineer will be cause for rejection of the pavement .
such defects shall include but not necessarily be limited to the following i segregated areas ii areas of excess or insufficient asphalt cement iii roller marks iv cracking or tearing v improper matching of longitudinal and transverse joints vi tire marks vii sampling locations not properly reinstated viii improperly constructed patches ix improper cross slope and x fuel spills on the mat .
the department reserves the right to reject pavement not meeting the requirements of this specification and reserves the right to require that the contractor replace the pavement at no cost to the department .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete placing of asphaltic concrete num num num num placing of asphaltic concrete prior to placing any course of asphalt on a granular grade the contractor shall ensure that fine grading has been achieved and that the necessary planning with respect to mat widths or transitions has been conducted .
the mixture shall be laid only upon a base which is firm and free from standing water .
not less than num m of prepared grade shall be maintained ahead of the paver .
this requirement shall be waived at the end of the lane or at the end of the paving operation for that day .
prior to the delivery of the mix the prepared base shall be cleaned of all loose or foreign material by the use of a power broom or other suitable means .
a course shall not be placed upon a previously laid course until at least num hours following the final compaction of the previously laid course .
immediately after each course is laid and before roller compaction commences the surface shall be checked and any deficiencies in surface geometrics or texture shall be corrected .
irregularities in alignment and grade along the outside edges shall be corrected before rolling .
the contractor shall provide competent workmen who are capable of correcting all pavement irregularities .
the mixture shall be dumped in the centre of the spreader hopper and care shall be exercised to avoid overloading and spillage of the mixture .
the automatic screed controls and all compaction aids on the paver shall be in operation during placing of the mixture unless otherwise directed .
to ensure continuous operation pavers shall operate at uniform speeds to match the output of the plant provided that a consistent and satisfactory mat is being laid .
however in no case shall the speed of the paver exceed num mmin .
the longitudinal alignment of the paver shall be controlled by a string line set from the alignment stakes .
the stringline shall be set on the outer edges of the pavement so that the paver is directed at all times by the alignment stakes and not by the edge of the preceding courses .
the longitudinal grade of single pavers or the lead paver shall be controlled by an approved num m ski or a num m floating beam .
where such a ski is a flexible unit it shall be equipped with a spring tensioned wire extending between brackets fitted on and slightly above each end of the ski .
the sensing grid shall ride on the wire and not on the ski .
when placing a second or subsequent mat using a single paver joints shall be matched using an approved ski not less than num m in length or an approved joint matching shoe which would ride on the previously placed compacted mat .
automatic longitudinal grade controls shall be required to be used in combination with transverse slope controls or as otherwise approved by the engineer .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete placing of asphaltic concrete num num num in narrow base widening deep or irregular sections intersections turnouts or driveways where it is impractical to spread and finish the base levelling or seal mixtures by machine methods the contractor shall spread the mixture by hand .
during hand spreading loads shall not be dumped any faster than they can be properly handled .
when it is necessary to hand spread the mixture in areas adjacent to machine laid areas such hand spreading shall be carried out concurrent with machine laying in order to obtain a good joint .
a mixture which does not comply with the requirements or a mixture which can not be incorporated in the work shall be rejected .
the department shall charge the contractor the cost of those materials which are supplied by the department and that are contained in the rejected work or mixture .
when the contractor chooses to supply asphaltic concrete to the contract from more than one asphalt plant the asphaltic concrete mix supplied shall be required to be comprised of aggregates from the same aggregate sources unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
temperature requirements for placement num asphalt concrete mix shall not be placed unless the air temperature at the surface of the road is numºc or greater .
under no circumstances will asphalt concrete be placed on frozen base or subgrade .
num for hot mix the temperature prior to initial rolling shall be minimum numºc .
num for warm mix the temperature directly behind the screed shall be maximum numºc and minimum numºc prior to initial rolling .
placement temperatures may be altered depending on additive supplier recommendations and at the discretion of the engineer .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete construction of joints num num num num construction of joints all joints shall be so constructed to ensure a thorough and continuous bond and to provide a smooth riding surface .
all dirt foreign material and loose material shall be removed from all faces against which joints are to be made .
all faces at which joints are to be made shall be painted with a thin uniform coating of joint painting material with the exception of joints between adjacent lanes of mix d. joints not meeting requirements shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num requirements for longitudinal joints joints shall be properly set up with the back of a rake or lute at proper height and grade prior to rolling to form a correct clean and neat joint .
the width of subsequent courses shall be adjusted to an off set of num mm to ensure that longitudinal joints do not coincide vertically .
when matching a compacted joint the thickness of the uncompacted mat shall be set to allow for compaction and the paver shall overlap the adjoining mat by at least num mm .
after compaction the measured deviation across longitudinal joints other than at the crown shall not exceed num mm as measured with a num meter straight edge .
num requirements for transverse joints with new asphaltic concrete transverse joints between asphaltic concrete laid under this contract i.e .
new asphaltic concrete shall be constructed by cutting a straight vertical face to the full thickness of the proposed lift .
adjacent mats shall be staggered a minimum of num m to a maximum of num m. the excess material shall be removed to the full thickness of the proposed lift to maintain the required lift thickness .
the paver shall not move more than num m from any transverse joint until that joint has been compacted and measured with a straight edge by the contractor .
measurements of transverse joints shall be taken at right angles to the joint .
joint measurements shall be recorded at the centre and quarter points of the mat width .
the num m straight edge shall be positioned to record the greatest measured deviation in any of the following positions extending back num m from the joint on the previously placed mat projecting forward num m from the joint on the mat being placed .
centering the straight edge on the joint .
after compaction the measured deviation across the transverse joints for a mixes shall not exceed num mm as measured with a num m straight edge .
transverse joints exceeding this measured deviation shall be repaired immediately .
after compaction the measured deviation across the transverse joints for b and d mixes shall not exceed num mm as measured with a num m straight edge .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete construction of joints num num num transverse joints not meeting the measured deviation requirement shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the engineer at the contractors own expense the contractor may be required to meet the measured deviation requirement by cold planing and replacing .
any joints considered for cold planing and replacing shall be planed the full travel or passing lane width and a minimum of num m in length .
the depth of cold planing shall be the thickness originally specified for the mix being planed .
the entire cold planing and replacing operation shall be done at the contractors own expense .
replacement asphaltic concrete shall be with an approved asphaltic concrete mixture and shall be of the type originally specified .
materials removed by cold planing shall become the property of the contractor .
the materials shall be hauled and stockpiled in accordance with environmental regulations .
all costs associated with the hauling and stockpiling of this material shall be at the contractors own expense .
the repaired section shall be in accordance with section num .
num requirements for transverse construction joints with existing asphaltic concrete joints between asphaltic concrete laid under this contract and existing asphaltic concrete shall be constructed as follows .
when matching into an existing asphaltic concrete pavement the transverse joint for the first lift shall be prepared by cutting the existing pavement to a straight vertical face and removing such area and depth of the existing pavement as may be necessary to ensure the full depth of asphaltic concrete thickness to be placed .
successive lifts shall be offset from the previous joint by a minimum of num m and shall be prepared by cutting the existing pavement to a straight vertical face and removing such area and depth of the existing pavement as may be necessary to ensure the successive lift thickness .
adjacent mats on the final lift of asphalt base and on the asphalt seal shall be offset a minimum of num m. general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete compaction num num num num general requirements for compaction compaction equipment requirements shall be as per section num compaction equipment requirements .
in all cases the production and placement of mixture shall be controlled so that all rolling shall be completed a ½ hour before sunset .
num definitions lot a discrete quantity of material or work to which an acceptance procedure is applied .
mean x the arithmetic average of a group of test measurements .
random sample a sample selected in such a way that every element of the population has an equally likely opportunity to be included in the sample .
sample a subset of the lot measurements on which are used to assess the quality of the lot .
standard deviation the square root of the value found by adding the squares of the individual deviations of each test result from the mean of the test results and dividing by one less than the number of tests .
num sampling pavement sampling will be conducted using the stratified random sampling procedure .
the sampling frequency will be based on lots .
a lot will normally be one days production of each hot mix type .
a lot will be terminated when the operation changes from one pavement course to another or moves to a different contract .
each lot will be divided into four approximately equal sublots .
the engineer using random numbers will determine the sample location for each sublot .
random pavement core samples obtained from each sublot will not be taken within num mm of a longitudinal or transverse joint or pavement edge .
random pavement core samples shall be obtained not later than the next working day after the compaction of the lot .
each core shall have a minimum nominal diameter of at least num mm and a maximum nominal diameter of num mm and shall consist of the full layer being sampled .
the contractor with approval of the engineer may elect to arrange for independent core sampling in conformance with this specification .
care shall be taken to ensure that cores are not damaged during coring operations or in transit .
core samples shall be delivered within two hours of sampling to the tir laboratory for analysis .
holes resulting from the removal of pavement samples shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the engineer in conformance to the specification .
core samples shall be placed in a suitable container which will protect the sample integrity during transport and until testing .
each sample shall be labelled with the contractor contract number highway number date sampled mix type lot number sublot number lift number design lift thickness station location and offset of the highway .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete compaction num num num num determination of percent compaction the percent compaction will be determined by the department on the random samples using the following procedure compaction brd x num mmrd where mmrd the mean maximum theoretical relative density of the sublot random cores determined by astm dnum .
brd the bulk relative density of a random core obtained from the lot determined by astm dnum for specimens that contain moisture .
the mean percent compaction for the lot will be determined by calculating the mean of the four sublot random core percent compaction results .
num acceptance procedure acceptance for the lot will be based on the lot average compaction .
the lot mean and individual percent compaction value will be reported to one decimal place .
the price adjustment for a given lot based on the lot average method will be determined by reference to the appropriate price adjustment in table num provided num .
each sublot core shall meet or exceed num of the mean maximum theoretical relative density for the lot .
num .
each sublot core shall not exceed num of the mean maximum theoretical relative density for the lot .
num .
subject to the discretion of the engineer rejectable lotssublots shall be repairedre decisioned as per num or price adjusted .
the engineer will indicate what areas in the lot as determined by coring are to be repaired or subject to price adjustment for the value of reinstating the mix .
num .
provided the area subject to rejection is permitted to remain in the work as per the engineers discretion the area shall be subject to price adjustment .
this value will be determined by the engineer and shall be the value of the tendered asphalt mix plus the value of the tendered liquid asphalt to replace the asphalt in the rejected area .
the asphalt volume would be determined by using a depth equal to the mat thickness a width equal to lane width plus the paved shoulder width if applicable and a length defined by acceptable cores .
for the purpose of this exercise the density of the asphalt shall be num tonnes per cubic meter .
any sublot subject to rejection that has been covered with asphaltic concrete prior to the compaction results being determined shall be subject to numtonne price adjustment .
in addition the lower rejection limit of num or the upper rejection of num depending on the limit failed shall be used for the covered failed sublot to calculate the mean lot average for price adjustment for the lot .
either the price adjustment calculated for the failed sublot for asphaltic concrete remaining in the work as per the engineers discretion or the price adjustment calculated for the covered asphaltic concrete prior to the compaction results being determined for the sublot shall apply .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete compaction num num num table num price adjustment per tonne based on lot average percent of maximum theoretical relative density lot average price adjustment per tonne num reject num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num reject general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete compaction num num num num retesting each sample will be checked for validity in accordance with astm e num standard practice for dealing with outlying observations using a t test at a num percent significance level twosided .
num if the outlier test procedure shows that the test result is valid then the test result will be used in the calculations .
num if the outlier test procedure shows that the test result is not valid the test result will be discarded unless there is an obvious error in the calculations or in transposing of the numbers .
if there is no obvious error a replacement sample shall be obtained for retesting within num mm of the original randomly determined core location .
num the test results from the replacement sample will be binding on both the contractor and the engineer and will be used in the determination of the mean lot average .
provided the sublot has not been covered with asphaltic concrete num any sublot subject to rejection will automatically be resampled within num mm of the original randomly determined core location .
num if this verification sample confirms that the sublot sample is subject to rejection subsequent samples will be obtained at num metre increments .
these subsequent samples will be obtained in both directions within the sublot in order to establish the extent of the area subject to rejection a mean of the final sublot samples defining the rejection areas shall be utilized to calculate the mean lot average for price adjustment for the lot .
num if the verification sample does not confirm that the sublot sample is subject to rejection the verification sample will be substituted for the original sublot sample .
any sublot which has been covered with asphaltic concrete shall not be retested to num check for validity in accordance with astm e num standard practice for dealing with outlying observations using a t test at a num percent significance level twosided .
num verify rejection or to determine the extent of the rejection area .
covered rejectable sublots shall be subject to a numtonne price adjustment .
in addition the lower rejection limit of num or the upper rejection of num depending on the limit failed shall be used for the rejected sublot to calculate the mean lot average for price adjustment for the lot .
num repairing and redecisioning when the engineer requires a rejectable lotsublot to be repaired the engineer will indicate what areas in the lot are to be repaired .
these areas shall be repaired by removal and replacement or as approved by the engineer prior to redecisioning .
the minimum width of repair shall be the width of the lane andor shoulder being repaired .
the minimum length shall be sufficient for a paver to be used for carrying out the repair and shall not be less than num metres in length .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete compaction num num num when repairs are made to all or parts of a lot the lot shall be redecisioned .
replacement core samples shall be obtained for all sublots which were subject to rejection .
the test results from the replacement samples will be binding on both the contractor and the engineer and will be used in the determination of the mean lot average .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete smoothness num num num num smoothness num definitions international roughness index iri .
iri is a statistical measurement used to determine the amount of roughness in a measured longitudinal profile .
iri will be measured in mmm and reported to two num decimal places for all procedures relating to this specification .
reporting interval .
the reporting interval for this specification shall be num metres for overall iri and num metres for localized roughness .
localized roughness .
localized roughness is reported in num metre intervals where the iri exceeds an established value as set out in table num of this specification for a particular roadway category .
segment .
a segment of roadway shall be defined by the full lane width including paved shoulders over a defined length .
the segment length shall be num metres for localized roughness .
the segment length shall be num metres for overall iri however shorter segment lengths may exist as outlined in item num .
project chainage .
the distance as measured by the high speed profiler will be referenced to the contract stake chainage but will be the only chainage deemed accurate and acceptable for the smoothness specification .
num references all reference standards shall be current issue or latest revision at the first date of tender advertisements .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications astm e num standard test method for measuring the longitudinal profile of travelled surfaces with an accelerometer established inertial profiling reference peitir general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction .
num equipment a class num inertial laser profiler with moving average filter high pass num ft and low pass num ft will be used for all smoothness measurements under this specification .
the equipment will be installed and operated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and astm e num .
num smoothness testing procedures the department or its designated representative will conduct smoothness testing in accordance with astm e num .
the departments smoothness testing results will be used in determining payment adjustments and areas requiring corrective work .
num profile measurements the profiler will conduct three num complete passes in each lane recording the right and left wheel path iri values simultaneously at num metre intervals .
the final iri will be the average of the three passes reported at num metre intervals .
the num metre interval averages will then be computed from the num metre interval average iri values .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete smoothness num num num the profile measurements shall be collected in the direction of traffic .
the start and end location of measurement for each lane shall be num metres from the transverse construction joints or in the case of a tapered lane at the locations defined by which the full lane width occurs .
num exclusions the num metre segments at both ends of the section under contract defined by the transverse construction joints shall be excluded from smoothness calculations .
bridge structures excluding culverts and arches underpass structures and overpass structures located within any num metre segment including the num metre segments immediately before and after a structure will be excluded from payment adjustments under this specification .
num payment adjustments the engineer will provide the contractor with a copy of the smoothness test results including detailed payment adjustment summaries and compulsory corrective work requirements .
num num metre segments payment adjustments for num metre segments will be calculated based on the overall average iri in mmm for each num metre segment in each lane in accordance with table num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete smoothness num num num table num price adjustment for each num metre segment in each lane iri mmm pay adjustment num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete smoothness num num num num localized roughness with the exception of areas described in item num each num metre segment with an iri value greater than those shown in table num shall be defined as localized roughness resulting in negative payment adjustments .
the total localized roughness payment adjustment shall be the numerical summation of all the individual localized roughness payment adjustments for the defined section of roadway .
table num localized roughness localized roughness iri mmm for num metre segments payment adjustment for each occurrence num and num num num num or compulsory corrective work num total payment adjustments the total payment adjustment shall be the summation of all the individual payment adjustments for each num metre segment in each lane including localized roughness payment adjustments .
if the total num metre segment payment adjustment is a positive value bonus the contractor will be assessed the total num metre segment payment adjustment and the total localized roughness payment adjustment for the defined section of roadway .
if the total num metre segment payment adjustment is a negative value penalty the contractor will be assessed either the total num metre segment payment adjustment or the total localized roughness payment adjustment whichever is numerically less i.e .
whichever results in a greater penalty to the contractor .
the two penalties shall not be applied in summation .
num segments less than num metres for segments less than num metres in length price adjustments will be determined from num metre segments that are not subject to exclusions as described in item num .
payment adjustments under item num and item num shall apply to these areas based on the actual number of num metre segments that are not excluded .
price adjustments shall be prorated based on the number of nonexcluded num metre segments in the num metre segment as detailed in table num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete smoothness num num num example num num metre segment station num num exclusions apply in four num of the individual num m segments num m bridge num m at each end num metre segment iri mmm exclusion applies yesno localized roughness payment adjustment average iri over num metre segment iri payment adjustment see table num total payment adjustment for this num metre segment num num num no num num num num num num num x num num num num num num num num no num num num num no num num num num no num num num num no num num num num yes bridge approach num num num num yes bridge num num num num yes bridge num num num num yes bridge approach num num num num no num example num num metre segment station num num at end of paving section exclusions apply in one num of the individual num m segments num metre segment iri mmm exclusion applies yesno localized roughness payment adjustment average iri over num metre segment iri payment adjustment see table num total payment adjustment for this num metre segment num num num no num num num num num x num num num num num num num num no num num num num yes manhole num num mandatory penalty the contractor shall be subjected to a mandatory penalty of num for each num metre segment with an iri num mmm with exception of areas defined in section num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete smoothness num num num num the engineer reserves the right to require compulsory corrective work on any num metre segments with an iri num mmm .
in any num metre segments where compulsory corrective work is required the department will waive the num penalty .
the engineer shall notify the contractor if compulsory corrective work is required .
num compulsory corrective work procedures corrective work shall consist of removal and replacement of the surface course of asphaltic concrete pavement .
the minimum length of any repair area shall be num metres .
removal and replacement on each of the num metre segments affected the contractor shall remove by cold planing and replace the full width of the lane and the full depth of the surface course of asphaltic concrete pavement affected including paved shoulders .
compulsory corrective work requirements the asphaltic concrete repair shall conform with either section num or num of the departments specification as stated in the contract .
incidental corrective work corrective work may result in additional incidental costs including but not limited to tack coat additional shoulder gravelling guardrail adjustments reapplication of pavement markings etc .
such work shall be carried out in accordance with the departments specifications and at the contractors expense .
disposal of asphaltic concrete asphaltic concrete that has been removed as a result of corrective work undertaken by the contractor shall become the property of the contractor to haul stockpile or otherwise dispose of in an environmentally acceptable manner at the contractors expense .
num retesting following corrective work after corrective work has been completed each of the num metre segments containing corrective work will be retested using the same profiler used in the original testing .
the new iri values will be used and the recalculated results will be binding .
should the new iri results indicate further mandatory penalty num metre segments as stated in item num the contractor shall be subject to the mandatory penalty as stated in item num .
num costs for corrective work all costs associated with corrective work shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete cleanup num num num num cleanup in addition to complying with the terms of provision num the contractor shall thoroughly remove from all bridges culverts catch basins curbs gutters and other structures asphalt or other work materials .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete method of measurementbasis of payment num num num num method of measurement the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the number of tonnes of each class of asphaltic concrete acceptably placed .
cold planing of transverse construction joints shall be measured in accordance with section num .
tack and prime coat applications shall be measured in accordance with section num and num respectively .
no measurement shall be made for the remedial work outlined in subprovisions num and num .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per tonne for each type of hot mix asphaltic concrete and this price shall be full compensation for materials other than those supplied by the department handling hauling storing stockpiling cutting of existing pavement painting of joints mixing hauling placing and compacting hot mix asphaltic concrete tools labour equipment materials and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
payment for cold planing of transverse construction joints shall be in accordance with section num .
no extra payment shall be made for paving intersections aprons driveway entrances extra widths deep or irregular sections other than the number of tonnes of asphaltic concrete of each class acceptably placed .
tack and prime coat applications shall be paid in accordance with section num and num respectively .
no payment shall be made for the remedial work outlined in subprovisions num and num .
section num rescinded num section num rescinded num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy chip seal num num num num description this section covers the requirements for the design surface preparation application of bituminous binder and the supply and application of aggregate for either single or double chip seal surface treatments .
num single surface treatment a single chip seal surface treatment shall consist of a single application of binder followed by a single application of class e aggregate .
num double surface treatment a double chip seal surface treatment shall consist of a single application of binder followed by a single application of class e aggregate and a second application of binder followed by a single application of class e aggregate .
num material num chip seal aggregate the chip seal aggregate must be crushed quarried rock and shall be of high quality and free of soft disintegrated stone clay or other deleterious materials .
the screening and crushing of natural gravel deposits to produce chip seal aggregate shall not be permitted .
the crushed aggregate shall be screened and washed over a num mm screen .
aggregate shall be washed only in properly designed and constructed washing plants .
truck or mixer washing of aggregates and washing methods of like intent will not be permitted .
water used for washing aggregates shall be clean and free from injurious amounts of oil acid alkali organic matter or other deleterious substances .
where it is specified that the chip seal aggregate is to be stockpiled it shall be washed first .
the aggregates shall meet the requirements of tables num and num .
aggregate in stockpiles shall be free of all chlorides .
num asphalt emulsion asphalt emulsion shall be rsnumk or hpnum and shall meet the requirements of table num when delivered to the job site .
section num rescinded num section num rescinded num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy chip seal num num num table numgradation requirement for aggregate sieve size passing astm num mm num cnum num mm num cnum num mm num num cnum num mm num num cnum num μm num num cnum note a minimum of num of the material in the total gradation must pass the num mm sieve and be retained on the num mm sieve .
table numphysical requirements for aggregate test class e astm los angeles abrasion max .
loss num cnum magnesium sulfate soundness max .
loss num cnum crushed min .
num num flat and elongated max .
num num flakiness index max .
num petrographic number max .
num num num the percent of crushed material will be determined on the fraction of particles by mass retained on the num mm sieve having two or more mechanically fractured faces .
num flat and elongated particles are those whose greatest mean dimension in the longitudinal axis compared to the least mean dimension in the plane perpendicular to the longitudinal axis exceeds a ratio of num .
num petrographic number to be determined using current department test procedures .
num equipment the contractor shall supply all tools machinery and equipment required in the execution of all phases of the work .
such equipment shall at all times be maintained in first class working condition and shall at all time be operated by skilled and experienced operators .
section num rescinded num section num rescinded num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy chip seal num num num num pressure distributor the pressure distributor used for applying asphalt emulsion shall consist of a fully insulated tank permanently and rigidly mounted on a truck or trailer that is capable of accurately maintaining any speed required for spraying and capable of applying the binder with plus or minus num of the desired application rate .
the distributor shall be provided with the following minimum equipment hand spray attachments to uniformly apply emulsion to any areas missed by the distributor .
an efficient and positive means of uniformly heating emulsion and maintaining the contents at a constant selected temperature without local overheating and a satisfactory method of circulating the contents during the entire heating process .
an approved thermometer with a minimum range of numº numº c graduated in intervals of not more than numº c with subdivisions at every numº c placed to accurately show the temperature of the distributor contents .
an approved tachometer driven from a fifth wheel mounted so that it is readily visible to the driver .
the tachometer must clearly and accurately register distances travelled when spraying emulsion and must allow the driver to maintain the constant speed required to ensure the specified rate of application .
a bitumen pump tachometer with plus or minus num accuracy which registers pump speed .
a pressure gauge with plus or minus num kpa accuracy indicating the pressure in the spray bar .
a rear mounted adjustable spray bar set parallel to the surface to be sprayed to provide required spraying widths from num to num m. the distributor shall be equipped with a spray bar heating device .
the distributor shall circulate a uniform viscosity and pressure of the emulsion at each nozzle both before and during spraying operations .
the circulating system shall also have a strainer to prevent clogging of the bar and nozzles .
the spray bar height shall be adjustable and shall be set at such a height that the spray fan from any nozzle overlaps the spray fan from the adjacent nozzle by num to ensure a uniformly sprayed surface .
spray bar height adjustment shall be made by the height set when the distributor is ½ full .
spray bar nozzles shall be designed and set to ensure uniform fan shaped sprays .
the nozzles shall not produce such a fine mist that the emulsion will blow away resulting in a nonuniform emulsion coating .
all spray nozzles shall be of the same manufacture size type and in good condition and shall be provided with valves capable of instant full opening and positive cutoff .
all spray nozzles shall be set in the bar so that the nozzles slots make the same horizontal nume angle with the longitudinal axis of the bar .
before work commences and periodically as required during spraying operations the nozzles on the spray bar shall be removed and immersed in a solvent for a period of time sufficient to remove all congealed asphalt .
section num rescinded num section num rescinded num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy chip seal num num num a strainer shall be provided in the filling line to prevent entry of foreign material into the tank .
a sampling cock fitted on the spray bar or circulating line is required to allow samples of the emulsion to be obtained directly from the distributor .
table numrequirements for emulsified asphalt type rsnumk hpnum test min .
max .
min .
max .
astm tests on emulsion saybolt furol viscosity at numec mmnums num num num num dnum residue by distillation num num dnum settlement in num days num num dnum oil portion of distillate by mass num dnum retention by mass on an num μm sieve num num dnum coating num particle charge positive negative tests on residue penetration at numec num g num s num mm num num num num dnum ductility at numec num cmmin cm num num dnum solubility in trichloroethylene by mass num num dnum num follow astm dnum procedure for wet aggregate except that the limestone aggregate and dust is replaced by the test aggregate .
the stone should not be less than num coated both before and after washing .
section num rescinded num section num rescinded num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy chip seal num num num num mechanical aggregate spreader the selfpropelled aggregate spreader shall be capable of continuously and uniformly spreading closely regulated quantities of aggregate within plus or minus num of the application rate selected .
the spreader shall be equipped with a rearmounted aggregate hopper .
the spreader shall be equipped with a front hopper and an approved means of transferring the aggregate to this hopper from the rear .
the front hopper shall be equipped with an oversize reject screen and metering gauges .
the gates shall adjust the spreading width and shall be adjustable to obtain a uniform flow of aggregate across the spreading width .
these gates shall also be designed to provide simultaneous movement or closure from the operators position .
the flow of aggregate from the metering gates shall be further controlled by a spread roller the rotation of which shall automatically commence when the metering gates are opened .
num rollers steeltired rollers shall have tandem wheels and weigh at least num tonnes and shall exert a pressure on the compression roll of at least num kgmm per roll width .
pneumatictired rollers shall be selfpropelled and have a minimum ballasted weight of num tonnes .
a minimum of num pneumatictired rollers shall be used on each section of work .
num mechanical broom shall be of an approved type suitable for pavement use .
num construction num qualifications of contractor to be eligible as a bidder the contractor must have had previous experience of the application of chip seal of a similar nature in similar climatic conditions .
the contractors foreman on this project shall have a minimum of num years experience .
num design the contractor shall assess the roadway surface condition and design the required application rates for binder and aggregate for either single or double chip seal treatments .
a copy of which shall be forwarded to the engineer .
num guarantee the contractor will be required to guarantee the work and associated items for a period of num year after completion against all defects due either to defective workmanship andor material .
any repairs required will be carried out expeditiously at the contractors own expense .
num inspection section num rescinded num section num rescinded num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy chip seal num num num the engineer will have the right to inspect all or any of the materials at source manufacture or storage .
the contractor will arrange for the engineer to have the right of access to the suppliers premises for purposes of inspection .
num surface preparation before chip seal operations commence the contractor shall completely clean the pavement of all dirt and other debris .
cleaning shall be by the use of a power broom .
should there be any depressions not completely cleaned with the power broom then the contractor shall clean such spots with a hand broom .
num pavement restoration and crack filling pavement restoration and crack filling shall be carried out to repair pavement potholes and cracks prior to the carrying out of the chip seal surface treatment operations .
the pavement restoration shall be in accordance with section num .
crack filling shall be in accordance with section num .
num trail areas when required by the engineer trial areas shall be used to establish the correct rates of application of binder and aggregate .
a trial area shall be at least num m long and num lane wide .
the rates of application of the binder and aggregate shall be determined by carefully measuring the contents of the distribution before and after spraying the trial area and by carefully measuring the quantity of aggregate applied .
num application of emulsion all required patching and crack filling shall be carried out to the satisfaction of the engineer at least num hours prior to chip seal emulsion application .
the emulsion shall be applied at a temperature in the range num numº c. the emulsion shall be applied at the design rate as designed for either single or double chip seal treatments .
for any given area the emulsion shall be applied at the rate designed by the contractor .
during the application of the emulsion the distributor shall be operated by a minimum of num men one of whom shall be stationed on the rear platform to control the application .
the forward speed of the distributor shall not exceed num ms. num application of aggregate the crushing and stockpiling of chip seal aggregates must be num complete prior to application to the road surface .
the aggregate shall be uniformly distributed at the application rate designed by the contractor for both single and double chip seal treatments .
the aggregate application operation shall be coordinated with the emulsion application so that no more than num m separates the emulsion application and the aggregate spreading .
section num rescinded num section num rescinded num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy chip seal num num num application of aggregate operations for the day shall be completed at least num hours before sunset .
num rolling immediately after the application of the aggregate pneumatictired rolling shall be carried out in such a manner that the entire treated area received at least num passes .
final rolling shall consist of num pass of a steel wheel roller .
the rollers shall be operated at such a speed that there is no aggregate pick up but in no case shall the speed of the rollers exceed num kmhr .
all rolling shall be completed with num m of the aggregate spreader .
initial rolling shall occur within num minute of the application of the aggregate .
the minimum number of rollers required is num pneumatictired rollers and num steel roller .
if this combination of rollers is not sufficient to maintain the completed rate of progress additional rollers shall be provided .
num mechanical brooming the chip seal treated surfaced shall be swept with a power broom .
all excess aggregate shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor at the contractors own expense .
sweeping shall not be carried out until the treatment has set to a sufficient degree so that the chip seal is not damaged .
on chip seal treated surfaces open to traffic power brooming shall be carried out within num hours of the application of aggregate .
num temperature and weather chip seal operations shall not be carried out when in the opinion of the engineer road conditions high humidity imminence of rain wetness or dampness are present .
asphalt emulsion application operations shall not be carried out when the air temperature is less than numº c. chip seal treatment shall not be carried out before june num or after september num unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
num protection of work and traffic control when possible the traffic shall be kept off the treated surface until the chip seal is resistant to damage .
when traffic must go over the surface before it is fully cured the contractor shall control traffic speed by means of directing the traffic in convoys .
the contractor shall provide a lead vehicle to ensure that convoys proceed at low speed .
traffic control is to be maintained until power brooming has been completed .
num method of measurement section num rescinded num section num rescinded num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy chip seal num num num measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of square metres of acceptable chip seal applied .
measurement for pavement restoration shall be in accordance with section num .
measurement for crack filling shall be in accordance with section num .
num basis of payment payment for chip seal shall be at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for labour materials equipment roadway surface preparation supply and application of asphalt binder supply and application of aggregate rolling power brooming traffic control royalties and incidentals necessary to perform the work .
no compensation other than the contract price shall be made for variations in the rate of application or for the treatment of any areas as required by the engineer .
payment for pavement restoration shall be in accordance with section num .
payment for crack filling shall be in accordance with section num .
section num rescinded num section num rescinded num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy double emulsified asphalt slurry seal num num num num general num scope this section covers the requirements for the design testing surface preparation traffic control and quality control required for the proper application of a double emulsified asphalt slurry seal .
num description the slurry seal shall consist of a mixture of an approved emulsified asphalt mineral aggregate water and specified additive .
the slurry seal mix shall be proportioned mixed and uniformly spread over a properly prepared surface .
the completed slurry seal shall be a homogeneous mat adhered firmly to the prepared surface and with a skid resistant surface texture .
num applicable specifications the following specifications and all test methods therein dealing with mineral aggregates mineral filler and slurry seal form a part of this specification american society for testing materials and international slurry seal association .
all material equipment and construction procedures shall conform unless otherwise directed to the recommended slurry seal surface published by the international slurry seal association except as modified by the requirements of this project specification .
num qualifications of contractor the contractor must have had previous experience on the application of slurry seal of a similar nature in similar climatic conditions .
the contractor must list at least num similar jobs which on investigation will prove to have been completed in a satisfactory manner .
the contractors foreman on this project shall have a minimum of num years experience on similar projects .
num guarantee the contractor will be required to guarantee the work and all associated items for a period of num year after contract completion date against all defects due either to defective workmanship andor materials .
any repairs required will be carried out expeditiously at the contractors own expense .
num inspection the engineer will have the right to inspect all or any of the work materials at the source manufacture or storage .
the contractor will arrange for the engineer to have the right of access to the suppliers premises as may be necessary for the purpose of inspection .
section num rescinded num section num rescinded num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy double emulsified asphalt slurry seal num num num num mix design the contractor shall assess the contract roadway surface condition .
all materials shall be pretested by a qualified materials testing firm as to their suitability for use in slurry seal .
a complete laboratory analysis and mix design including the wet track abrasion test shall be submitted to the engineer prior to commencement of the work .
num material the emulsified asphalt shall conform to the requirements of astm dnum for cssnumh emulsion type .
the mineral aggregate shall consist of manufactured crushed quarried rock such as granite or other high quality aggregate .
the aggregate shall be clean and free from vegetable matter and other deleterious substances .
when tested according to astm cnum the aggregate shall show an abrasion loss of not more than num .
when tested according to astm cnum the aggregate shall show a loss of not more than num by use of magnesium sulphate .
mineral filler in the form of normal portland cement shall be considered part of the blended aggregate and shall be used in the proportion determined by the mix design .
when tested by astm cnum and astm cnum the aggregate and mineral filler shall meet the gradation of table num as specified by the international slurry seal association .
all water shall be potable and compatible with the slurry mix .
compatibility must be insured by the contractor .
additives may be used to accelerate or retard the breakset of the slurry seal or improve the finished surface .
the use of additives in the slurry mix or in individual materials shall be made initially in quantities predetermined by the mix design with field adjustments if required after approval by the engineer .
num equipment all equipment tools and machines used in the performance of this work shall be maintained in satisfactory working order at all times .
the slurry seal mixing equipment shall be a continuous flow mixing unit .
the unit must have suitable means of accurately metering each individual material being fed into the mixer .
all feeding mechanisms must be continuous feed and proportioning must remain constant at all times .
the unit shall be equipped with approved devices so that the machine can be accurately calibrated and the material quantities of materials used during any period can be estimated .
the spreader box shall be equipped to prevent loss of slurry seal from all sides and shall be equipped with a flexible rear strikeoff .
it shall be capable of producing a uniform surface its full width and shall be equipped with hydraulicallypowered augers to keep the slurry in motion and to help keep the mixture uniformly spread across the spreader box width .
section num rescinded num section num rescinded num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy double emulsified asphalt slurry seal num num num suitable crack and surface cleaning equipment barricading equipment hand tools and any support equipment shall be provided as necessary to perform the work .
table numgradation requirement for aggregate and mineral filler sieve size type ii passing num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm num num μm num num μm num num μm num num μm num num construction num traffic control the contractor will be responsible for all traffic control .
suitable methods including directing the traffic in convoys shall be used by the contractor to protect the slurry seal from traffic until the new surface will support the traffic without damage .
opening to traffic does not constitute acceptance of the work .
the engineer shall be notified of the methods to be used .
any damage to the new surface during the curing period done by traffic or the contractors equipment will be repaired at the contractors own expense .
num weather limitation the slurry seal shall not be applied if either the pavement or air temperature is below num c and falling but may be applied when both pavement and air temperatures are above num c and rising .
no slurry seal shall be applied when there is danger that the finished product will freeze before num hours .
the mixture shall not be applied when weather conditions prolong traffic opening to beyond a reasonable time .
num surface preparation immediately prior to applying the slurry seal the surface shall be cleared of all loose material silt spots vegetation oil spots and other objectionable material .
any standard cleaning method will be acceptable .
if water is used cracks will be allowed to dry thoroughly before slurry sealing .
the engineer shall approve the surface preparation prior to sealing .
section num rescinded num section num rescinded num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy double emulsified asphalt slurry seal num num num num application of the slurry surface the surface shall be prewetted by fogging ahead of the slurry box when in the opinion of the engineer it is required by local conditions .
water used in prewetting the surface shall be applied such that the entire surface is damp with no apparent flowing water in front of the slurry box .
the rate of application of the fog spray shall be adjusted during the day to suit temperatures surface texture humidity and pavement surface dryness .
the slurry mixture shall be of the desired consistency when deposited on the surface and no additional elements shall be added .
a sufficient amount of slurry shall be carried in all parts of the spreader at all times so that complete coverage is obtained .
no lumping balling or unmixed aggregate shall be permitted .
no segregation of the emulsion and aggregate fines from the coarse aggregate will be permitted .
if the coarse aggregate settles to the bottom of the mix the slurry will be removed from the pavement .
no excessive breaking of the emulsion will be allowed in the spreader box .
no streaks caused by oversized aggregate will be left in the finished pavement .
num joints no excessive buildup or unsightly appearance shall be permitted on longitudinal or transverse joints .
num handwork areas which can not be reached with the slurry seal machine shall be surfaced using hand squeegees to provide complete and uniform slurry seal coverage .
the area to be hand worked shall be lightly dampened prior to mix placement and the slurry shall be worked immediately .
care shall be exercised to leave no unsightly appearance from hand work .
the same finish as applied by the spreader box shall be required .
hand work shall be completed during the machine applying process .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of square metres of acceptable slurry seal .
num basis of payment payment for slurry seal surface treatment shall be at the unit bid price per square metre of application and this price shall be full compensation for materials preparation mixing application labour equipment tools test mix design traffic control and incidentals to complete the work .
no compensation other than the contract price shall be made for variations in the rate of application or for the retreatment of any areas as required by the engineer .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy asphaltic concrete curb num num num num description this work shall consist of the manufacture and placement of asphaltic concrete curb in accordance with the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num material the hot mix hot placed asphaltic concrete shall meet the requirements for asphalt curb and shall be approved by the engineer prior to placing .
the liquid asphalt cement shall be supplied by the contractor .
num construction the hot mix hot placed asphalt curb shall be placed on a clean area that has previously been coated with an approved bituminous tack coat at a rate as directed by the engineer .
asphaltic curb shall be placed using an approved asphalt curb spreader which will produce a standard num cm curb .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of linear metres of asphaltic curb acceptably constructed .
num basis of payment asphaltic concrete curb shall be paid for at the unit bid price per linear metre and this price shall be full compensation for the supply and placement of the curb all labour equipment materials tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy asphalt crack filling num num num num description this work shall consist of the routing and sealing of random and straight cracks in asphaltic concrete and portland cement concrete pavement .
num material material used for sealing shall be specifically designed to form resilient adhesive and effective seals for cracks and joints .
the material shall fully conform to the requirements of astm dnum or dnum and shall be subject to the engineers approval .
current recommended materials are hydrotech num or num .
num equipment routing equipment shall have selfcleaning vertical routing bits which are capable of producing joints num mm in width and num mm deep .
the melting kettle shall be a double boiler with indirect heating using a high flash point oil min .
numc as a heat transfer medium .
the kettle shall have an effective mechanically operated agitator and shall be equipped with a positive thermostatic temperature control .
the kettle shall be portable mounted on rubber tires and equipped with a metal shield beneath the fire box to protect the pavement .
num construction method the bags shall be stripped from the compound and the material shall be cut into blocks of approximately num kg before being placed in the melting kettle .
the kettle should be charged by adding a few sections of compound at a time .
the sealing compound shall be melted to the temperature specified by the manufacturer but any material heated in excess of num c at any stage of the melting or pouring operation shall not be used in the work .
the joint sealing compound shall be poured as soon as possible after the correct pouring temperature is reached .
only as much compound as can be poured in a day in accordance with provision num shall be melted .
cracks shall be routed to a depth of num mm and to the width of the crack or num mm whichever is less .
following the routing operation and immediately prior to placing new joint sealing compound all residual dust and debris created by the routing operation shall be thoroughly cleaned from the cut by a compressed a airhot lance .
the contractor is to sweep the debris to the gutter and dispose of it in accordance with provision num .
the joints shall be sealed in a neat manner so that upon completion of the work the surface of the sealing material shall be flush with or not more than num mm below the adjacent pavement surface .
the pouring of joints shall only be undertaken when the joint surfaces are dry and the air temperature in the shade is num c. general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy asphalt crack filling num num num num method of measurement the quantity to be measured for payment under this section shall be the number of linear metres of cracks filled to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per linear metre and this price shall be full compensation for routing of cracks or joints supply of crack filling compound disposal of routed material placement of crack filling material all tools equipment labour materials and incidentals required to perform the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy cold mix bituminous patching material num num num num description this section consists of supplying aggregates and engineered bituminous material to be blended together in a conventional asphalt plant or approved pugmill to produce a cold mix bituminous patching material .
num material num aggregates aggregate to be supplied for the manufacture of cold mix bituminous patching material shall consist of manufactured material derived from crushed stone or gravel the particles of which shall be clean hard durable and free from coatings of silt clay or other deleterious material .
aggregate shall meet the physical and gradation requirements of tables num and num .
table num physical requirements for aggregate test value astm magnesium sulphate soundness max .
loss num cnum relative density num num cnum absorption max .
num cnum moisture max .
num cnum table num gradation requirement for aggregate sieve size passing astm num mm num cnum num mm num cnum num mm num cnum num mm num cnum num mm num cnum num mm num cnum num μm num cnum num bituminous materials for cold mix the bituminous material shall be a modified cutback asphalt containing antistripping agents and additives designed to meet the following requirements general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy cold mix bituminous patching material num num num stripping resistance flexible and cohesive properties at cold temperatures adhesive quality in wet application long stockpile life of the cold mix bituminous patching material .
the bituminous material shall be in accordance with the requirements of table num .
engineered bituminous products not complying with the physical properties specified in table num may be approved for use upon review of documentation indicating the materials physical test properties .
table num requirements for bituminous material test min .
max .
astm kinematic viscosity at nume c mmnums num num dnum distillation tests of total to nume c to numec num num dnum to numec num num dnum to numec num num dnum distillation residue to numec difference by volume num dnum water content num dnum tests on residue penetration at numec num g num s num mm num num dnum ductility at numec num cmmin cm num dnum solubility in trichloroethylene by mass num dnum num cold mix production aggregates shall be predried and allowed to cool to a temperature between num numec prior to being utilized in the mix unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
the aggregate and bitumen shall be mixed to ensure a homogenous mixture with all particles of the mineral aggregate thoroughly coated with bitumen .
the temperature of the final mixture at discharge shall not exceed numec .
cold mix production shall occur during daylight hours only .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy cold mix bituminous patching material num num num num quality control quality control shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
the manufactured cold mix bituminous patching material must meet the following specification requirements .
the extracted bitumen content from the cold mix shall be in accordance with table num .
table num minimum requirements for extracted bitumen content aggregate absorption extracted bitumen min .
max .
min .
num num num num num num num num num extracted bitumen content by astm dnum the retained coating of bitumen on aggregate must be in excess of num when tested in accordance with the following test for stripping resistance num g of the cold mix will be placed in num mr of boiling distilled water in a num mr glass beaker .
it will be stirred with a glass rod at one revolution per second for num min .
the percentage coating retained will then be visually evaluated .
retained coatings of less than num shall constitute failure .
the estimated coated area shall be above num as specified in astm dnum .
the cold mix must remain flexible and cohesive to numec and must be capable of retaining adhesive qualities in place during wet application .
the cold mix must be capable of remaining pliable and usable in uncovered stockpiles for a minimum of num years .
num quality assurance at least num week prior to proposed production of the cold mix bituminous patching material the contractor shall notify the department to allow scheduling of moisture testing of the aggregate .
schedule a department representative to be at the site at the time of mixing .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy cold mix bituminous patching material num num num deliver to the department a sample of the proposed engineered bituminous material .
test documentation of the proposed engineered bituminous material indicating compliance with specification requirements .
aggregate test documentation indicating compliance with physical and gradation requirements .
the contractors shall provide to the department records of testing of the cold mixed bituminous patching material showing compliance .
the cold mixed bituminous patching material shall be randomly sampled by department representatives at the time of mixing .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of tonnes of cold mix bituminous patching material acceptably produced .
num basis of payment cold mix bituminous patching material shall be paid for at the unit bid price per tonne delivered to the stockpiles and this price shall be full compensation for all work material trucking to the stockpiles tools equipment labour and incidentals necessary to perform the work .
drying aggregates prior to mixing shall be considered incidental to the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num num description num general this item defines the requirements for the supply and placement of hot mixed conventional asphaltic concrete for pavement construction and other purposes .
the asphaltic concrete shall be identified by the following mix designations hot mixed conventional asphaltic concrete base mix a .
hot mixed recycled asphaltic concrete base mix hra .
hot mixed conventional asphaltic concrete surface mix b .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to provide an acceptable product as specified .
the contractor shall implement and maintain a quality control system that will provide assurance that all components as well as end result products submitted to the owner for acceptance conform to the contract requirements .
this responsibility is without regard to whether the products are manufactured by the contractor or purchased from suppliers or subcontractors .
quality assurance tests shall be performed by the engineer on random samples taken either at the job site or at the suppliers plant .
num definitions end result specification ers a specification under which the engineer monitors the contractors control of the process that produces the items of construction and accepts or rejects the end product according to a specified quality assurance plan the contractor is entirely responsible for quality control end product acceptance is the responsibility of the owner and includes a statistically oriented program of quality assurance testing .
design mix formula dmf the laboratory determination of the precise proportions of asphalt binder and aggregates to be blended together to meet the specified properties for the asphaltic concrete mix .
job mix formula jmf the establishment of the single definite percentage passing the num mm and num µm sieve fraction of aggregate the percentage of blending sand and the asphalt binder content that will produce the desired mix properties under field conditions .
percentage of materials constituting the jmf to be stated on the jmf sheet .
asphalt binder content design asphalt binder content the asphalt binder content established by the dmf .
approved asphalt binder content the asphalt binder content determined by the jmf .
actual asphalt binder content the amount of asphalt binder in the mix as determined by astm dnum or as per current tir test procedures manual series num bituminous materials ltpnum asphalt content of bituminous paving mixtures by the ingnition method .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num lot a portion of the work being considered for acceptance and is further defined as the following a plant production of num t num t where approved changes to the job mix formula have not occurred .
if it is the last time the mix is produced with this criterion the following shall apply if the plant production is num t or less the production will be added to the previous lot .
if the plant production is more than num t but less than num t the production will be designated as a lot .
a separate lot will be established if in the engineers opinion conditions of construction indicate that it is likely that a portion of a lot will be significantly different for the remainder of that lot .
stratified random sample the division of the lot into num or more areas or segments a random sample is taken from each area or segment in an unbiassed way .
sample mean the arithmetic mean of a set of num or more test results constituting the sample .
mean of the deviations the sum of the absolute values of the deviations from the jmf or the air voids num divided by the number of tests in the lot .
thickness the specified thickness as measured from the core samples .
num materials num asphalt binder the contractor shall supply as a bid item performance graded asphalt cement pgac or performance graded asphalt cement with elastic recovery pgace to be incorporated into the departments work .
unless otherwise specified the asphalt cement shall be pg num and shall conform in all respects to the performance grade requirements of aashto mnum table num performance graded asphalt binder specification .
provided asphalt concrete hra is used as per section num the contractor shall supply as a bid item performance graded asphalt cement to be incorporated into the departments work the total asphalt cement being comprised of both reclaimed asphalt cement and virgin asphalt cement shall meet the requirements of pg num unless otherwise specified and shall conform in all respects to the performance grade requirements of aashto mnum table num performance graded asphalt binder specification .
when antistripping additives are required the asphalt cement shall meet the specified requirements of aashto mnum table num after the addition of the required additives .
the contractor shall supply the applicable mixing and compaction temperatures for the performance graded asphalt cement specified in addition to the supplier documentation indicating current test results meeting the requirements of aashto mnum table num after general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num the addition of required antistripping additives if necessary .
num mineral filler mineral filler shall meet the requirements of astm dnum .
num asphaltic concrete stripping any antistripping agent intended for use shall be incorporated in the mix design in the proportion to be used during production and in accordance with the manufacturers specifications .
antistripping admixtures shall be supplied by the contractor .
the requirement for an antistripping admixture is determined at the asphaltic concrete mix design stage .
the antistripping agents shall consist of one of the following hydrated lime caohnum meeting the requirements of astm cnum liquid antistripping additives from the approved list table num approved antistripping admixtures manufacturer product akzo nobel chemicals redicote c num akzo nobel chemicals redicote nums meadwestvaco corp evotherm mnum morton international pave bond t lite morton international pave bond lite travis chemicals travcor num arrmaz products adhere lof num ultrapave ultracote upnum zydex zycosil zydex zycotherm inclusion on this list does not attest to efficacy of use with any specific aggregate or approval for use on any specific project .
testing for each product shall be required for this purpose .
this list is subject to revision .
the type and dosage of all asphalt binder antistripping admixtures shall be noted on the delivery slip .
the department may determine that an antistripping additive is required if one of the following conditions occurs the long term tensile strength ratio tsr of the asphaltic concrete as per latest edition of aashto tnum average of conditioned freezethaw tsr values is less than num .
the conditioned and freeze thaw tensile strength values shall not be less than num kpa .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num material that has been conditioned as per the latest edition of aashto tnum meets the num minimum requirement but a visual examination indicates there is evidence of stripping .
if based on past performance the aggregate source is known to be prone to stripping .
num addition of liquid antistripping additive the liquid antistripping additive shall be added at a rate as determined by the mix design to the asphalt cement at the suppliers depot concurrently with loading of the asphalt cement into the carriers tanker .
num information sessions at a preconstruction meeting the contractor and the department will review the requirements for use of the liquid antistripping additive including proper procedures worker information use of protective clothing and equipment site supervision and contingency .
the contractor shall advise workers of the proper procedures to be followed when working with asphalt cement or asphaltic concrete containing antistripping additives .
num aggregates num coarse aggregate coarse aggregate shall be supplied by the contractor .
the coarse aggregate shall be prepared by crushing rock or gravel and shall consist of hard sound durable particles free from adherent coatings shale clay loam schist and other soft or disintegrated pieces or other deleterious substances .
coarse aggregate is the portion retained on the num mm sieve tested in accordance with astm cnum and shall meet the physical requirements of table num .
coarse aggregate may be produced from pit run gravel by crushing the fraction retained on the num mm sieve provided that no more than num of the retained material passes the num mm sieve as determined by astm cnum and cnum .
coarse aggregate may be rejected on the basis of past performance .
num fine aggregate fine aggregate shall be supplied by the contractor .
fine aggregate shall be prepared by crushing rock or gravel or screening a manufactured sand and shall consist of hard sound durable particles free from adherent coatings shale clay loam schist and other soft or disintegrated pieces or other deleterious substances .
washed materials shall be stockpiled for at least num hours prior to use to allow free water to drain from the aggregate and to allow the material to attain a uniform moisture content .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num fine aggregate shall be that portion passing the num mm sieve when tested in accordance with astm cnum and cnum and shall meet the physical requirements of table num .
fine aggregate may be produced from pit run gravel by crushing the fraction retained on the num mm sieve provided that no more than num of the retained material passes the num mm sieve as determined by astm cnum and cnum .
fine aggregate may be rejected on the basis of past performance .
num blending sand blending sand shall be supplied by the contractor .
blending sand supplied for the manufacture of asphaltic concrete shall consist of clean tough durable particles free of silt clay or other deleterious material .
blending sand shall be used to obtain acceptable physical asphaltic concrete mix properties as outlined in table num .
the maximum mass of blending sand to be used in the total asphaltic concrete mix shall not exceed num of the total mass .
blending sand shall have num passing the num mm sieve prior to the introduction into the cold feed at the plant .
the gradation of the blending sand shall be such that when incorporated into the asphaltic concrete mix the resultant mix shall meet the requirements of table num num .
num rap if applicable to the contract rap shall be supplied by the owner in designated stockpiles or obtained by the contractor as per section num of peitir specifications .
the contractor shall be responsible for the incorporation of rap into the asphalt concrete base mix .
rap shall be free of contamination and shall be stockpiled and reintroduced back into the asphalt base mix within num days of the introduction into the cold feed at the plant in such a manner that all particles pass the num mm sieve for hra when tested in accordance with astm cnum .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num table num marshall asphaltic concrete mix requirements sieve size type ahra type b astm designation by mass passing each sieve coarse aggregate num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm num num num mm num num num mm num num fine aggregate num mm num num num mm num num num mm num num num µm num num num µm num num num µm num num num µm num a num hra num physical requirements for asphaltic concrete stability at numc n minimum num num flow num mm num num air voids num num vma min num num voids filled with asphalt num num tsr average of conditioned freezethaw tsr values min aashto tnum latest edition num num dust to binder ratio num num physical requirements for coarse aggregate los angeles abrasion max loss astm c num num num magnesium sulfate soundness max loss astm c num num num petrographic no.max tir method ltpnum num num flat elongated particle max num tir method ltpnum num num crushed particles min by wt .
two face tir method ltpnum num num absorption max astm c num num num plasticity index max tir method ltpnum num num note not mandatory the owner reserves the right to obtain a petrographic no .
physical requirements for fine aggregate magnesium sulfate soundness max loss astm c num num num uncompacted void content min astm cnum num num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num num mix design and job mix formula num responsibility for design mix formula preparation and submission of the asphalt dmf for the owners approval is the responsibility of the contractor .
the contractor shall use professional engineering services and a qualified testing laboratory to assess the aggregate materials proposed for use and to carry out the design of the asphalt concrete mix .
num requirement for asphalt mix design the asphalt mix design shall follow the marshall method of mix design based on num blows and be in accordance with the latest edition of the asphalt institute publication mix design methods for asphalt concrete manual series no .
num msnum .
the asphalt concrete mix design at the design asphalt content shall meet the requirements in table num for the asphalt concrete mix type specified .
the amount of rap in the hot mixed recycled asphalt concrete base mix shall be as specified in the contract documents .
num approval of design mix formula design mix approval will be based on the design mix tests and the corresponding requirements detailed in table num .
a new asphalt mix design shall be required if any change occurs in the nature or source of the aggregate andor the supplier of the performance graded asphalt cement .
the engineer shall not accept any asphalt mix produced prior to the contractor receiving written approval of the asphalt mix design .
the mix design and job mix formula shall remain in effect until changed in writing .
should the aggregate source or the asphalt binder source change or when unsatisfactory results or other conditions make it necessary a new mix design will be required .
all submissions shall include the contract number .
the material samples shall be tagged and indicate the contract number the location of the source pitquarry id number as indicated by the engineer the date sampled the sample location and the typesize of the material .
sampling of the current years production of aggregates for the dmf shall not be undertaken until at least num of each aggregate type is in stockpile when the tendered quantity for the mix designation is less than num tonnes or at least num tonnes of each aggregate type is in stockpile when the tendered quantity for the mix designation exceeds num tonnes .
the contractor shall submit the dmf including the following informationmaterials to the engineer for approval at a locations designated by the engineer .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num a list of all constituent materials including aggregate sourcess blending sand sourcess asphalt binder sources and antistripping admixture sources .
the average gradation of each aggregate to be used in the asphalt concrete mix .
the percentage by mass of each aggregate including blending sand to be used in the asphalt concrete mix .
provided asphalt concrete hra is used the abson recovery analysis and results per num tonnes of rap to be used .
extraction and gradation analysis and results per num tonnes of rap to be used .
the asphalt concrete mix design gradation of the combined aggregate including blending sand plotted on num power graph paper .
other characteristics of the combined aggregate specified in table num .
including the results of all aggregate testing determinations etc .
as defined in table num including the bulk specific gravity and the apparent specific gravity for both the coarse and fine aggregate .
the num µm material shall be removed prior to the determination of the specific gravaties .
in addition aggregates shall be tested as per latest edition of aashto tnum to determine if they are prone to stripping tensile strength ratio num and conditioned and freeze thaw tensile strength values less than num kpa as well as no visual evidence of stripping .
provided an antistripping additive is required hydrated lime or an effective liquid antistripping additive shall be used and tested for compliance as per latest edition of aashto tnum tensile strength ratio num and conditioned and freeze thaw tensile strength values meet or exceed num kpa with no visual evidence of stripping .
the mix design with a minimum of four num different asphalt contents minimum num between each point with at least one point above and one point below the optimum asphalt percentage that reports the following i the percentage in units of one tenth of num of asphalt cement to be added based on the total weight of the mixture .
ii the marshall test results for the individual and average bulk specific gravity stability and flow of at least three specimens at each asphalt content .
iii the maximum theoretical specific gravity at each asphalt content .
iv the percent of air voids in the mixture for each asphalt content .
v the percent voids in mineral aggregate vma at each asphalt content .
vi the percent voids filled with asphalt vfa at each asphalt content .
vii the design asphalt content as a percent of total mix .
all marshal mix design characteristics including bulk relative density specimen mass graphs used in arriving at the final asphalt concrete mix design the bulk relative density of each individual material and the combined aggregates and the asphalt absorption of the combined aggregates .
the source and current test results of the performance graded asphalt cement to be incorporated into the departments work meeting the requirements of table num for performance graded asphalt cement including applicable mixing and general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num compaction temperatures .
the contractor shall submit the following with the asphalt mix design for verification purposes i eightnum kg samples of coarse aggregate tennum kg samples of fine aggregate two num kg samples of blending sand .
ii thirtythree numg samples of representative virgin aggregate blended to the design mix gradation of the asphalt mix aggregate .
iii eight numg samples of representative virgin aggregate blended to the design mix gradation of the asphalt mix aggregate .
iv four litres of the type of performance grade asphalt cement to be used including the antistripping agent if required .
v onenum kg sample of representative rap per num ton of rap to be used .
in order to calibrate the ignition oven additional samples are required num kg samples of coarse aggregate num kg samples of fine aggregate numkg samples of rap num kg samples of blending sand and numlmix of asphalt binder will be required to be delivered to a lab designated by the engineer .
the engineer will require up to fifteen num days from the time of receipt of the dmf for evaluation by the owners laboratory .
the evaluation period will include verification of the asphalt concrete mix design moisture sensitivity testing and verification of the bulk relative densities of the coarse and fine aggregates and blending sands .
in case of discrepancy in the bulk relative density values of the aggregates or blending sands the engineers results shall prevail .
if the dmf does not meet the requirements of table num it shall be rejected .
the engineer shall provide a written explanation to the contractor that details why the dmf failed .
the contractor shall then provide another complete dmf and resubmit it to the engineer for approval .
the engineer will not accept any asphalt concrete mix produced prior to the contractor receiving written approval of the dmf from the engineer .
once the dmf has been approved the engineer shall prepare samples of the combined aggregates and a sample of the asphalt binder for calibration of the ignition furnace to be used for the quality assurance .
the engineer shall deliver the calibration samples to the quality assurance laboratory .
the engineer shall complete calibration of the ignition furnace within num days of approval of the dmf .
production of asphalt concrete mix shall not start until the ignition furnace has been calibrated for the dmf .
the contractor shall be responsible to pay the owners associated costs if the contractor general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num submits for evaluation more than one asphalt concrete mix design per contract conventional mix designation .
testing costs incurred by the owner shall be charged as per tir standard laboratory rate schedule .
num approval of job mix formula the contractor shall submit the jmf to the engineer for approval .
the contractors submission shall include the following information the percentage by mass of each aggregate including blending sand to be used in the asphalt concrete mix .
the percentage by mass passing the num mm and num µm sieves of the combined aggregates and blending sand .
the asphalt binder content as a percentage of the mass of the total mix .
the jmf when compared to the dmf shall be within the following limits num for material passing the num mm sieve .
num for material passing the num µm sieve .
num for asphalt binder .
the engineers written approval of the jmf will allow the contractor to begin production .
rejection of the jmf shall require the appropriate action based on the engineers assessment .
num jmf adjustments during production adjustments to the jmf shall only be made upon approval of the engineer .
in no case will changes to the jmf be accepted during production of the lot .
the contractor shall submit a revised dmf in accordance with num for a change in the aggregate source or the asphalt binder source used in the asphaltic concrete mix .
num submittals the contractor shall submit in writing the proposed sourcess of supply of coarse aggregate and fine aggregate for approval by the engineer .
the contractor shall notify the engineer three num days in advance of the commencement of the production of asphaltic concrete mix .
the contractor shall submit in writing the proposed supplier of the asphalt binder .
the contractor shall supply upon request a sample of the asphalt binder numlmix including any proposed admixtures in a volume proportional to the asphalt binder sample .
the contractor shall supply upon request the optimum mixing and compaction temperature for pg asphalt binders .
the contractor shall submit at the time of delivery to the plant the refinery certification and general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num delivery slip for each tanker load of asphalt binder .
if the source or supply of the asphalt binder changes during the work the contractor shall submit in writing this proposed change prior to using the new asphalt binder supply in the work .
other submittals are required for this item and are contained within the sections applicable to the specific phase of the work being undertaken .
submittals are required in accordance with any crossreferenced item forming part of this item .
num composition of asphaltic concrete mix num asphalt binder content for the purpose of establishing the unit price for asphaltic concrete the bidder shall assume an asphalt binder content for the asphaltic concrete mix as follows asphaltic concrete a num of the total specified tonnage .
asphaltic concrete b num of the total specified tonnage .
asphaltic concrete hra num of the total specified tonnage .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num num construction num general the contractor shall carry out the work as indicated in the contract documents andor as specifically directed by the engineer num air quality permit requirements the contractor must comply with all applicable sections of the departments environmental protection plan epp which forms part of these specifications .
the contractor must supply all asphaltic concrete from an asphalt plant that has a valid air quality permit issued by the pei department of environment labour and justice elj .
the contractor must supply the engineer with a copy of a valid air quality permit for each asphalt plant which will be used to supply asphaltic concrete to the contractor or project before production begins .
if the department receives a copy of a written notice from elj to the owner of an asphalt plant that the asphalt plant does not posses a valid air quality permit or that the air quality permit for that plant has been revoked then the department will not accept asphaltic concrete from that plant .
num equipment equipment shall be designated and operated to produce an end product complying with the requirements of this specification .
equipment used shall be of adequate rated capacity and shall be in good working order .
num mixing plant the asphalt mixing plant and its components shall meet the requirements of astm d num and the contract documents .
num hot mix surge bins if the contractor elects to use a hot mix surge bin it shall be designed constructed and operated so that there shall be no segregation of or damage to the mix due to the surge bin or its appurtenances .
the hot mix surge bin shall be operated in such a manner during draw down to prevent free discharge of hot mix from the conveyor belt to the truck .
the maximum allowable time which an asphalt mixture can be stored in a hot mix surge bin shall be num hours .
num hot mix storage silos if the contractor elects to use a hot mix storage silo it shall be designed constructed and operated so that there shall be no segregation of or damage to the mix .
the storage silo shall be equipped with an appropriate holding and batching system at the top of the silo coordinated with plant production to prevent complete discharge so that mix is not permitted to fall directly into the silo .
storage silos equipped with a heating system shall be capable of maintaining the temperature without localized overheating .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num storage silos shall be equipped with mix level indicators and when the plant is in continuous operation the minimum level of mix in the silo must be maintained above the onethird a capacity level .
storage in the silo up to num hours shall be permitted provided i that the penetration of the asphalt cement recovered from the stored asphaltic concrete is equal to or greater than the penetration after the thin film oven test of the original asphalt cement before mixing and ii which when discharged from the storage silo was free flowing and without lumps and iii which when delivered to the paver was at or above numec .
num asphalt plant inspectors quarters at any asphalt plant the contractor shall provide at the contractors own expense working quarters for the asphalt plant inspector having the following dimensions and equipment a outside dimension min .
num x num x num m. b equipment num door and padlock num window that opens min .
num x num mm num chair num sturdy and well supported bench along the num m wall num mm wide x num mm high electricity num overhead light and at least num wall plug c the working quarters shall be located so that the inspector is able to observe the operation from the building .
d this building is to be for the sole use of the asphalt inspector .
the contractor is not to store equipment or supplies in it .
num plant scales scales for weighing aggregates and asphalt cement shall be the dial type and of a standard make and design .
scales for weighing aggregates shall be accurate and sensitive to num of the maximum load required and shall provide a positive means of balancing the tare mass of the hopper and asphalt bucket .
at the beginning of each construction season after each plant setup and prior to batching any materials and whenever it is deemed necessary by the engineer the contractor shall verify the accuracy of the scales .
num calibration the asphalt feed system shall be equipped with a calibration system to allow asphalt cement to be bypassed into a container and weighed .
the asphalt cement metering system shall be calibrated to an accuracy of plus or minus num through the actual working range of the system at the start of the paving season whenever the weighing conveyor is moved and whenever deemed necessary by the engineer .
the aggregate belt scale on the cold feed conveyor shall be calibrated within an accuracy of plus or minus num through the actual working range of the system at the start of the contract whenever the weighing conveyor is moved and whenever deemed necessary by general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num the engineer .
num placing equipment pavers shall be selfpropelled and capable of laying a consistent satisfactory mat which is true to the specified geometrics crosssection and alignment as directed by the engineer .
the term screed shall mean the unit of the paver which strikes off and imparts an initial compaction to the mix .
the term hydraulic strikeoff shall mean an extension to the mould board and strikeoff which can be extended beyond the screed while the paver is operating to place any strikeoff mixtures in narrow transitions or tapers .
vibrating hydraulic extendable screeds and vibrating bolton screed extensions shall be used in placing mat widths greater than three num m. only hydraulic extendable screeds shall be used for paving varying width such as transitions or tapers .
hot overlays using fixed screed extensions shall only be permitted with the approval of the engineer .
all extensions shall provide the same degree of heat and vibration as the main screed .
hydraulic strikeoff extensions will not be allowed in the laying of regular or specified mat widths or when placing surface mixture pavers shall be equipped with hoppers and distributing screws to place mixture evenly in front of the screeds .
pavers shall be equipped with vibrating screeds and shall be capable of spreading mixtures without segregation and with a smooth and uniform textured surface to the required thickness and in widths from num m to num m. screeds shall be equipped with heaters which are capable of preheating the entire screed and screed extensions .
the contractor shall provide a num m straight edge with each paver .
pavers shall be equipped with automatic screed controls for the control of longitudinal grade and transverse slope .
the longitudinal grade control shall be equipped to operate from either side of the paver and be capable of providing longitudinal grade control as well as matching longitudinal joints .
the transverse slope control shall also be capable of operating from either side of the paver .
the contractor shall use a minimum num m skifloating beam or an approved equivalent for longitudinal grade control .
a joint matching shoe may be used to control longitudinal grade of subsequent mats placed adjacent to the original mat .
a calibrated slope indicator shall be installed in a readily visible location on each paver .
longitudinal grade control shall be used on all lifts and transverse slope controls shall be used on all lifts except surface course unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num vibrating hydraulic screed extensions and vibrating bolton screed extensions shall be used in placing mat widths greater than num m. hydraulic strikeoff extensions are only acceptable when laying mats or irregular widths outside of the driving lanes .
provided a remix paver has been permitted for use by the engineer the contractor shall be paid a cost of num per tonne premium for all nonsegregated uniformly textured smooth asphaltic concrete applied using an approved remix paver .
areas subject to repairs as a result of segregation and nonuniform texture or areas subject to negative smoothness price adjustments will not be eligible for the cost per tonne premium .
repairs if required shall be at the contractors expense and shall extend the full width and full depth of the mat in which the repair work is performed .
num compaction equipment all rollers shall be of types specifically designed for asphaltic concrete compaction .
compaction equipment shall consist of at least one of each of the following i vibratory roller ii pneumatictired roller iii a combination steeldrum vibratorypneumatic tire roller may be used in place of the vibratory and pneumatic rollers .
iv steeldrum tandem finish roller all rollers with rubber tires shall be equipped with a means to prevent the asphalt mix from adhering to the rubber tires .
hydrocarbon fuels or solvents shall not be used .
num material transfer vehicle provided a material transfer vehicle mtv has been permitted for use by the engineer the contractor shall be paid a cost per tonne premium for all nonsegregated uniformly textured smooth asphaltic concrete applied using an approved material transfer vehicle mtv .
material transfer vehicles mtvs proposed for use by the contractor must be evaluated and approved by the department .
material transfer vehicles mtvs shall be selfpropelled equipment capable of transferring asphaltic concrete from the hauling equipment into the paver .
the mtv is not to come in direct contact with the paver and shall meet the following criteria i minimum storage capacity of num tonne .
ii a conveyor system to transfer asphaltic concrete from the hauling equipment to the paver hopper insert and iii an auger system in the mtv or paddle mixers in the storage hopper to remix the asphaltic concrete prior to discharge from the material transfer vehicle into the paver hopper insert .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num provided a material transfer vehicle mtv has been permitted for use by the engineer the contractor shall be paid a cost of num per tonne premium for use on the surface course and paid a cost of num per tonne premium for use on the base course for all non segregated uniformly textured smooth asphaltic concrete .
areas subject to repairs as a result of segregation and nonuniform texture or areas subject to negative smoothness price adjustments will not be eligible for the cost per tonne premium .
repairs if required shall be at the contractors expense and shall extend the full width and full depth of the mat in which the repair work is performed .
num production and placing of asphaltic concrete mix num production of mix asphaltic concrete shall be produced to meet the requirements of table num .
num trial mix trial mixes are the property of the contractor and shall be placed outside the work site unless otherwise authorized by the engineer for the purpose of padding or patching .
num mixing and temperatures mixing temperature for all types of plants shall be such that the temperature of the asphaltic concrete mix when discharged from the mixer unit shall be controlled within numec of the temperature requirement of the dmf unless otherwise authorized by the engineer .
the minimum mixing temperature shall be numec .
the maximum mixing temperature shall be numec or the temperature recommended by the asphalt binder supplier .
the heating of the asphalt mix shall be controlled to prevent the fracture of the aggregate and damage to the asphalt binder .
the system shall be equipped with automatic burner controls and shall provide a printed record of the mix temperature at discharge .
the asphalt binder recovered by extraction from the asphalt mix shall meet the requirements of the pressure aging vessel pav as specified in aashto mnum .
table num performance graded asphalt binder specification .
overnight storage in silos will not be permitted .
num moisture content the maximum moisture content allowed in the asphaltic concrete mix as it is discharged to the surge bin storage silo or pug mill shall be num .
the aggregate shall be dried sufficiently so that visual evidence of moisture such as but not limited to the presence of foaming slumping or stripping of the mix does not occur .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num num transportation of asphaltic concrete num transportation of the mixture the mixture shall be transported from the asphalt plant to the work site in vehicles with smooth metal boxes in good and leakproof condition and previously cleaned of all foreign materials .
each vehicle shall be equipped with a tarpaulin of canvas or other suitable material .
such tarpaulins shall be on the truck at all times and shall be of sufficient size to overhang the fully loaded truck box and to be tied down on three sides .
tarpaulins shall prevent air flow from contacting the mixture as well as preventing water from entering the truck box .
tarpaulins shall be rolled off the hot mix before the load is dumped into the spreader .
truck boxes shall be lightly coated with a uniform application of a release agent just before each loading .
if liquid agent is used the truck boxes must be drained after each application and before each loading .
all release agents shall comply with occupational health and safety requirements and must not be detrimental to the mix .
delivery of hot mix to the work site shall be scheduled such that spreading and compacting of the hot mix complies with the time restraints imposed by provision num .
in no case shall temperature be increased at the plant to offset long distance hauling unless authorized by the engineer in writing .
hydrocarbon fuels or solvents shall not be used .
tarpaulins shall be rolled back and the hot asphaltic concrete shall be uncovered immediately prior to dumping the load into the paver .
num timing of paving operations paving operations shall only be conducted during the daylight hours unless specifically altered by written approval of the engineer .
if asphalt concrete hra is used per section num placement of new asphalt concrete shall commence within num days of the commencement of the cold milling operation .
num placing asphaltic concrete a course shall not be placed upon a previously laid course until at least num hours following the final compaction of the previously laid course .
immediately after each course is laid and before roller compaction commences the surface shall be checked and any deficiencies in surface geometrics or texture shall be corrected .
irregularities in alignment and grade along the outside edges shall be corrected before rolling .
the longitudinal grade of single pavers or the lead paver shall be controlled by an approved num m ski or a num m floating beam .
where such a ski is a flexible unit it shall be equipped with a spring tensioned wire extending between brackets fitted on and slightly above each end of the ski .
the sensing grid shall ride on the wire and not on the ski .
when placing a second or subsequent mat using a single paver joints shall be matched using an approved ski not less than num m in length or an approved joint matching shoe which would ride on the previously placed compacted mat .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num automatic longitudinal grade controls shall be required to be used in combination with transverse slope controls or as otherwise approved by the engineer .
when the contractor chooses to supply asphaltic concrete to the contract from more than one asphalt plant the asphaltic concrete mix supplied shall be required to be comprised of aggregates from the same aggregate sources unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
prior to placing any course of asphalt on a granular grade the contractor shall ensure that fine grading has been achieved and that the necessary planning with respect to mat widths or transitions has been conducted .
the contractor shall place asphaltic concrete on a dry surface .
asphaltic concrete shall not be placed under adverse weather conditions of precipitation .
when placing asphaltic concrete surface mix the surface temperature of the material to be overlaid shall be a minimum of num c. when paving on aggregate base the aggregate base must be free from standing water .
all prepared surfaces shall be cleaned of loose or foreign material prior to placing of the asphaltic concrete .
milled and aged asphaltic concrete surfaces shall be treated with bituminous tack coat prior to the placing of asphaltic concrete .
the removed material shall be disposed of and the exposed surfaces shall be prepared as identified in the contract documents or as directed by the engineer .
contact edges of existing mats and contact faces of curbs gutters manholes sidewalks and bridge structures shall receive an application of tack before placing the asphaltic concrete .
the temperature of the asphaltic concrete shall be a minimum of num c prior to initial compaction .
the maximum temperature of the asphaltic concrete shall be num oc or the temperature recommended by the asphalt binder supplier .
when laying base andor surface course the alignment of the paver shall be controlled by a standard method such as following a stringline placed by the contractor from an alignment designated by the engineer .
irregularities in alignment and grade along the outside edge of the asphaltic concrete shall be corrected by the addition or removal of asphaltic concrete before the edge is rolled .
the cross slope of the asphaltic concrete surface shall be within num num mm when measured over num m perpendicular to the centreline of the cross slope specified in the contract documents or provided by the engineer .
in narrow base widening deep or irregular sections intersections turnouts or driveways where it is impractical to spread and finish asphaltic concrete by machine methods the asphaltic concrete shall be spread by hand in accordance with standard hand placement practices .
paving of intersections extra widths and other variations from standard lane alignment and general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num as defined in the contract documents whether by hand spreading or machine laying shall be carried out concurrently with the machine laying operation of the regular mat unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
driveway entrances and aprons shall be paved concurrently or after the machine laying operation of the regular mat .
spreading of asphaltic concrete by hand shall be kept to a minimum and shall be carried out concurrently with the machine laying operation of the regular mat unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
adjacent asphaltic concrete mats including those placed on shoulders shall be completed to approximately the same location at the end of each days paving .
damage to the mat as a result of contaminant spills from the contractors equipment shall be immediately repaired by the contractor to the satisfaction of the engineer all placement spreading compacting and rolling shall occur only during daylight hours and any loads arriving at the work site such that these requirements can not be met shall be rejected by the engineer .
num construction of joints joints shall be constructed to ensure thorough and continuous bond and to provide a smooth riding surface .
dirt or other foreign and loose material shall be removed from the faces against which joints are to be made .
all faces at which joints are to be made shall be painted with a thin uniform coating of joint painting material .
joints not meeting requirements shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the engineer .
the contractor shall remove and dispose of waste materials resulting from joint construction or other work activity outside the work site before the end of each week .
num requirements for longitudinal joints the width of subsequent courses shall be adjusted to an off set of num mm to ensure that longitudinal joints do not coincide vertically .
when matching a compacted joint the thickness of the uncompacted mat shall be set to allow for compaction and the paver shall overlap the adjoining mat by at least num mm .
after compaction the measured deviation across longitudinal joints other than at the crown shall not exceed num mm as measured with a num metre straight edge .
the following requirements shall apply when constructing longitudinal joints all longitudinal joints shall receive an application of tack coat .
longitudinal joints shall not be permitted between the edges of driving lanes in the final lift of asphalt concrete .
longitudinal joints shall be constructed to ensure that maximum compression under rolling is achieved .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num on surface courses the method of making joints shall be such that excess material is not scattered on the surface of the freshly laid mat and all excess material shall be carefully removed .
num requirements for transverse joints with new asphaltic concrete transverse joints between asphaltic concrete laid under this contract i.e .
new asphaltic concrete shall be constructed by cutting a straight vertical face to the full thickness of the proposed lift .
adjacent mats shall be staggered a minimum of num m to a maximum of num m. the excess material shall be removed to the full thickness of the proposed lift to maintain the required lift thickness .
the paver shall not move more than num m from any transverse joint until that joint has been compacted and measured with a straight edge by the contractor .
measurements of transverse joints shall be taken at right angles to the joint .
joint measurements shall be recorded at the centre and quarter points of the mat width .
the num m straight edge shall be positioned to record the greatest measured deviation in any of the following positions extending back num m from the joint on the previously placed mat projecting forward num m from the joint on the mat being placed .
centering the straight edge on the joint .
after compaction the measured deviation across the transverse joints for a mixes shall not exceed num mm as measured with a num m straight edge .
transverse joints exceeding this measured deviation shall be repaired immediately .
after compaction the measured deviation across the transverse joints for b mixes shall not exceed num mm as measured with a num m straight edge .
transverse joints not meeting the measured deviation requirement shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the engineer at the contractors own expense the contractor may be required to meet the measured deviation requirement by cold planing and replacing .
any joints considered for cold planing and replacing shall be planed the full travel or passing lane width and a minimum of num m in length .
the depth of cold planing shall be the thickness originally specified for the mix being planed .
the entire cold planing and replacing operation shall be done at the contractors own expense .
replacement asphaltic concrete shall be with an approved asphaltic concrete mixture and shall be of the type originally specified .
materials removed by cold planing shall become the property of the contractor .
the materials shall be hauled and stockpiled in accordance with environmental regulations .
all costs associated with the hauling and stockpiling of this material shall be at the contractors own expense .
the repaired section shall be in accordance with section num .
a transverse construction joint shall be constructed at the end of each days work and at other times when paving is halted for a period of time which will permit the asphaltic concrete to cool below numc .
where the asphaltic concrete surface andor base course has been terminated due to the conditions noted previously a smooth numm long taper shall be paved .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num when paving resumes tapers from surface courses previously laid shall be cut back to full mat thickness to expose fresh straight vertical surfaces free from broken or loose material and tacked .
num requirements for transverse construction joints with existing asphaltic concrete joints between asphaltic concrete laid under this contract and existing asphaltic concrete shall be constructed as follows .
when matching into an existing asphaltic concrete pavement the transverse joint for the first lift shall be prepared by cutting the existing pavement to a straight vertical face and removing such area and depth of the existing pavement as may be necessary to ensure the full depth of asphaltic concrete thickness to be placed .
successive lifts shall be offset from the previous joint by a minimum of num m and shall be prepared by cutting the existing pavement to a straight vertical face and removing such area and depth of the existing pavement as may be necessary to ensure the successive lift thickness .
adjacent mats on the final lift of asphalt base and on the asphalt seal shall be offset a minimum of num m. if a transverse key is cut in advance of paving the joint area the contractor shall immediately construct with hot mixed asphaltic concrete a smooth num m long taper at the joint area .
prior to the placement of the asphalt mix all transverse key joint surfaces shall be cleaned of loose foreign material and a tack coat applied .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num num quality control testing num general the contractor shall be totally responsible for quality control testing throughout every stage of the work from the crushing and production of aggregates to the final accepted product to ensure materials and workmanship conform with the requirements of this specification .
num inspection testing plan itp the contractor shall submit in writing to the engineer an itp covering all phases of the contract performance and the name of the party retained to conduct the itp within ten num days after the contract award .
the itp shall include but not be limited to identification and description of inspection and required test procedures to be used during the entire life of the contract .
the itp shall be sufficiently comprehensive and detailed to assure the engineer of the contractors willingness and ability to control the construction production and processes .
once accepted by the engineer the plan becomes a part of the contract and shall be enforced accordingly .
the itp may have to be updated and revised by the contractor as conditions warrant .
num sampling and test results where specified random sampling procedures shall be followed and where no specific random sampling procedure is specified the sampling procedure shall be as identified by the contractor .
the contractor shall be responsible for the interpretation of the test results and the determination of any action to be taken to ensure that all materials and work conform to the requirements of the contract .
at no time will the engineer issue instructions to the contractor as to setting of dials gauges scales and meters .
however the engineer may advise the contractor against the continuance of any operations or sequence of operations which will result in noncompliance with specification requirements .
the contractor shall maintain records of all inspection and tests .
results of all quality control tests shall be available for examination by the engineer at all times and copies shall be provided to the engineer on a daily basis .
num quality assurance testing and adjustments the contractor shall provide an end product conforming in quality and accuracy of detail to the dimensional and tolerance requirements of the plans and specifications .
while the contractor shall be fully and exclusively responsible for producing the end product acceptance testing is the responsibility of the engineer .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num certain requirements limits and tolerances are specified regarding the quality of materials and workmanship to be supplied .
the engineer shall test for compliance with these requirements as described in num .
the test methods indicated in table num will be used to determine material characteristics .
table num test methods test description test method sampling mixes tir test method ltpnuma astm d num coring astm d num ignition method tir test method ltpnum percent fracture tir test method ltpnum sieve analysis tir test method ltpnum astm cnumastm c num bulk relative density tir test method ltpnum astm d num theoretical maximum relative density tir test method ltpnum astm num voids calculations asphaltic concrete specimens ti r test method ltpnum astm d num percent compaction asphaltic concrete pavement tir test method ltpnum forming marshall specimens field method tir standard plant procedures moisture content oven method asphaltic concrete mix tir test method ltpnum astm d num smoothness of pavements profiler method astm e num stratified random test sites for ers projects astm d num appeal testing as outlined in specifications asphalt binder flash and fire points viscosity rheological properties rolling thin film oven accelerated aging pav flexible creep stiffness aashto t num or astm d num aashto tnum or astm d num aashto tnum aashto t num aashto rnum aashto tnum tsr average of conditioned freezethaw tsr values aashto tnum latest edition in all test methods used as reference in this specification metric sieves as specified in astm enum shall be substituted for any other specified wire cloth sieves .
the engineer reserves the right to inspect andor test any of the contractors operations or materials and those of subcontractors and suppliers regardless of location .
such inspections and tests shall not relieve the contractor of his responsibilities to control quality .
the engineers approval of any materials or mixture shall in no way relieve the contractor from his obligation to provide materials mixtures and workmanship in accordance with the specifications .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num the loose and core samples shall be taken by the contractor in the presence of the engineer .
the random locations shall be determined by the engineer .
pavement sampling will be conducted using the stratified random sampling procedure .
the engineer will be responsible for the labeling storing and transporting of the loose samples to the owners laboratories .
the engineer shall be responsible for labeling the cores .
each sample shall be labelled with the contractor contract number highway number date sampled mix type lot number sublot number lift number design lift thickness station location and offset of the highway the contractor shall be responsible for the storage and transportation of the cores to the owners laboratory within num hours of coring for testing .
core samples shall be placed in a suitable container which will protect the sample integrity during transport and until testing .
each core shall have a minimum nominal diameter of at least num mm and a maximum nominal diameter of num mm and shall consist of the full layer being sampled .
the contractor shall reinstate the pavement at each core sample location in conjunction with removal of the core by dewatering the core hole and filling it with hot mixed asphaltic concrete in num mm lifts to the pavement surface elevation compacting each lift with num blows using a standard compaction device .
the engineer will provide the contractor with a copy of the results of acceptance tests within one num working day of their availability .
acceptance test results for a given lot will not be reported to the contractor until the quality control results for that lot have been reported to the engineer .
if any one of the control characteristics of a lot is outside the acceptance limits as listed in table num then the lot will be rejected automatically regardless of the values of the other control characteristics .
tests performed by the engineer will not be considered to be quality control tests .
random sampling methods will not be applied to the following areas areas of obvious surface defects as indicated in num which shall be marked and repaired in accordance with num .
small areas such as tapers aprons bridge approaches gores and areas of handwork and asphalt mix used for isolated levelling and repair of failed areas .
the procedure for dealing with an outlier test result shall be as follows when an individual test result from a lot is questionable the validity of the test result in question will be determined in accordance with astm e num standard practice for dealing with outlying observations using a t test at a num percent significance level .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num if the outlier test procedure shows that the challenged test result is valid then the test result will be used in the calculations .
num asphalt density compaction testing shall be based on a lot average method .
pavement samples will be taken on the road by coring using stratified random sampling procedures .
four tests per lot will be selected as follows the lot will be divided into num segments of approximately equal length .
in each segment a test site will be located by using random numbers to determine the longitudinal distance from the end of the segment and the lateral distance from the edge of the segment .
in no case will a lateral distance be less than num m from the edge of a mat .
cores will not be taken within num m of a loose sample location .
cores shall be obtained in accordance with astm dnum within a minimum of num hours and a maximum of num hours after the placement of the lot .
the maximum may be extended to num hours in order to exclude saturday and sunday unless the contractor is placing asphaltic concrete on either day .
the percent compaction will be determined by the department on the random samples using the following procedure compaction brd x num mmrd where mmrd the mean maximum theoretical relative density of the sublot random cores determined by astm dnum .
brd the bulk relative density of a random core obtained from the lot determined by astm dnum for specimens that contain moisture .
the mean percent compaction for the lot will be determined by calculating the mean of the four sublot random core percent compaction results .
num asphalt content gradation and air voids loose samples will be taken on the road behind the paver before compaction with num samples per lot selected as follows a lot will be divided into num segments of approximately equal quantity .
for each segment random numbers will be used to determine the tonnage at which to obtain the sample .
each sample will be split in two equal portions one portion will be tested and the general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num other will be set aside in the event that an appeal is requested by the contractor .
if the plant production is num t or less one additional random loose sample will be obtained and the production will be added to the previous lot .
num smoothness the profile requirements shall be specified in the contract documents .
the smoothness of the final lift of newly placed asphaltic concrete pavement will be checked with a high speed profiler as soon as possible after final rolling .
num definitions international roughness index iri .
iri is a statistical measurement used to determine the amount of roughness in a measured longitudinal profile .
iri will be measured in mmm and reported to two num decimal places for all procedures relating to this specification .
reporting interval .
the reporting interval for this specification shall be num metres for overall iri and num metres for localized roughness .
localized roughness .
localized roughness is reported in num metre intervals where the iri exceeds an established value as set out in table num of this specification .
segment .
a segment of roadway shall be defined by the full lane width including paved shoulders over a defined length .
the segment length shall be num metres for localized roughness .
the segment length shall be num metres for overall iri however shorter segment lengths may exist as outlined in item num .
project chainage .
the distance as measured by the high speed profiler will be referenced to the contract stake chainage but will be the only chainage deemed accurate and acceptable for the smoothness specification .
num references all reference standards shall be current issue or latest revision at the first date of tender advertisements .
this specification refers to the following standards specifications or publications astm e num standard test method for measuring the longitudinal profile of travelled surfaces with an accelerometer established inertial profiling reference peitir general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction .
num equipment a class num inertial laser profiler with moving average filter high pass num ft and low pass num ft will be used for all smoothness measurements under this specification .
the equipment will be installed and operated in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and astm e num .
num smoothness testing procedures the department or its designated representative will conduct smoothness testing in accordance with astm e num .
the departments smoothness testing results will be used in determining payment adjustments and areas requiring corrective work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num num profile measurements the profiler will conduct three num complete passes in each lane recording the right and left wheel path iri values simultaneously at num metre intervals .
the final iri will be the average of the three passes reported at num metre intervals .
the num metre interval averages will then be computed from the num metre interval average iri values .
the profile measurements shall be collected in the direction of traffic .
the start and end location of measurement for each lane shall be num metres from the transverse construction joints or in the case of a tapered lane at the locations defined by which the full lane width occurs .
num exclusions the num metre segments at both ends of the section under contract defined by the transverse construction joints shall be excluded from smoothness calculations .
bridge structures excluding culverts and arches underpass structures and overpass structures located within any num metre segment including the num metre segments immediately before and after a structure will be excluded from payment adjustments under this specification .
areas requiring hand work tapers intersections gore areas aprons etc .
will be excluded from this specification .
individual num metre segments exhibiting roughness which can be directly attributed to physical features of the roadway including iron works or curbgutter matchins may be excluded from payment adjustments as determined by the engineer .
num mandatory penalty the contractor shall be subjected to a mandatory penalty of num for each num metre segment with an iri num mmm with exception of areas defined in section num .
num the engineer reserves the right to require compulsory corrective work on any num metre segments with an iri num mmm .
in any num metre segments where compulsory corrective work is required the department will waive the num penalty .
the engineer shall notify the contractor if compulsory corrective work is required .
num compulsory corrective work procedures corrective work shall consist of removal and replacement of the surface course of asphaltic concrete pavement .
the minimum length of any repair area shall be num metres .
removal and replacement on each of the num metre segments affected the contractor shall remove by cold planing and replace the full width of the lane and the full depth of the surface course of asphaltic concrete pavement affected including paved shoulders .
compulsory corrective work requirements the asphaltic concrete repair shall conform with either section num or num of the departments specification as stated in the contract .
incidental corrective work corrective work may result in additional incidental costs including but not limited to tack coat additional shoulder gravelling guardrail adjustments reapplication of pavement markings etc .
such work shall be carried out in accordance with the departments specifications and at the contractors expense .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num disposal of asphaltic concrete asphaltic concrete that has been removed as a result of corrective work undertaken by the contractor shall become the property of the contractor to haul stockpile or otherwise dispose of in an environmentally acceptable manner at the contractors expense .
num retesting following corrective work after corrective work has been completed each of the num metre segments containing corrective work will be retested using the same profiler used in the original testing .
the new iri values will be used and the recalculated results will be binding .
should the new iri results indicate further mandatory penalty num metre segments as stated in item num the contractor shall be subject to the mandatory penalty as stated in item num .
num costs for corrective work all costs associated with corrective work shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
num asphalt binder asphalt binder samples shall be obtained and packaged as follows samples shall be a minimum size of one num litre and shall be taken from the contractors storage tank in accordance with astm dnum .
the sample containers shall be supplied by the engineer .
the contractor shall obtain one num asphalt binder sample per num t of asphaltic concrete mix production taken in accordance with astm dnum from the contractors asphalt binder storage tanks .
if asphalt concrete hra is used per section num the contractor shall obtain one num asphalt binder sample per num t of asphaltic concrete mix production taken in accordance with astm dnum from the contractors asphalt binder storage tanks .
the engineer shall label the samples with the contract number date time grade and type of asphalt binder supplier refinery and the name and the proportions of any additives added to the asphalt binder .
if a sample test result falls outside of the material requirements specified in num the engineer may require that the contractor suspend the asphaltic concrete mix production .
compliance shall be verified by the engineer before the asphaltic concrete mix production is allowed to continue .
num thickness the contractor shall place the asphaltic concrete in lifts at the thickness indicated in the contract documents andor as specifically directed by the engineer .
thickness shall be evaluated on a lot by lot basis .
the pavement thickness shall be determined from the test results of the cores obtained according to num .
if the thickness does not meet the requirements of table num then the deficient area general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num shall be repaired as indicated in num .
table num acceptancerejection requirements by lot measurement types of mix sieve size lot payment repair replace reject increased full reduced bulk relative density as of theoretical maximum relative density all num num num num num asphalt content mean of deviations of lot from jmf a hra b n.a .
n.a .
num num num num num num num num num num gradation mean of deviations of lot from jmf see note num a hra nummm num µm n.a .
n.a .
num num num num num num num num num num b num mm num µm n.a .
n.a .
num num num num num num num num num num cores with thickness within tolerance see note num all n.a .
num of num n.a .
num of num air voids mean of deviations from target value of num all n.a .
num num num num note num additional requirements for gradation a if the average of lot test results for the num mm sieve size falls outside the gradation limits of table num the lot will be rejected .
b if the average of lot test results for the num µm sieve size exceeds the upper gradation limit of table num the following will apply exceeds by num the lot payment will be reduced by numt exceeds by num the lot will be rejected .
note num thickness a thickness measured thickness obtained from core samples .
b lift thickness tolerance by type of mix tolerance num x specified thickness hra tolerance num x specified thickness ab c if the thickness of either lift of base mix is less than the tolerance the contractor shall place the next lift of asphaltic concrete to achieve a thickness equivalent to the total thickness of the two lifts as specified in the contract .
the total thickness of the two lifts for the deficient lot shall be verified by coring the two lifts in the area of the deficient lot .
num surface defects the finished surface of any pavement course shall have a uniform texture and be free of visible signs of poor workmanship and bumps andor dips exceeding num mm as measured with a num m straight edge .
any obvious defects as determined by the engineer will be cause for rejection of the pavement course .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num such defects shall include but not necessarily be limited to the following segregated areas .
areas of excess or insufficient asphalt binder .
roller marks .
cracking or tearing .
improper matching of longitudinal and transverse joints .
tire marks .
sampling locations not properly reinstated .
improperly constructed patches .
improper coss slope .
contaminant spills on the mat .
flushed areas num appeal of lot test results the contractor may appeal the results of acceptance testing of the density asphalt content gradation and thickness for any rejected or penalized lot only once .
appeals shall only be considered for all tests within the lot .
any attempt to improve density on the appealed lot after the engineer has tested the lot for acceptance shall void the appeal and the original test results will apply .
the following procedures will apply for an appeal the contractor shall serve notice of appeal to the engineer in writing within num hours of receipt of the test results .
the contractor and the engineer shall agree on a time at which the cores for the appeal of the lot will be taken .
the cores for the appeal of the lot shall be taken within num hours of the submission of the notice for the appeal .
if the density or thickness of the lot is appealed the contractor shall take num more cores at random locations as determined by the engineer .
these cores will be tested by the owner .
if the asphalt content gradation or air voids is appealed the engineer will take the remaining portion of the samples obtained in num and test them at the owners laboratory .
the contractor may have a representative present during the period of the testing the contractors representative shall comment on anything concerning the testing which he does not consider to be valid and the engineer shall respond to all comments in order to resolve them .
prior to leaving the testing laboratory any unresolved comments regarding the testing procedures are to be given to the engineer in writing .
any comments with respect to the testing procedures which are made subsequent to the contractors representative leaving the laboratory will not be considered .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num the test results from the original lot will be combined with the test results of the new samples .
a new sample mean or the mean of the deviations for the combined test results will be determined and this value will be used for acceptance and unit price adjustment .
for thickness appeals num of the num test results must meet or exceed the lift thickness tolerance specified in table num .
the new lot test results so obtained shall be binding on both the contractor and the owner .
num repairs num general repairs to the work to improve smoothness shall be carried out in accordance with item num and within thirty num days from the time the contractor receives the engineers written assessment of the work .
repairs to correct surface defects shall be carried out in accordance with this item within one num year from the time the contractor completes placement of the asphaltic concrete .
the asphaltic concrete used for replacement or overlay to correct surface defects shall be the same asphaltic concrete mix designation as that which is removed or overlaid .
any asphaltic concrete which does not conform to the requirements of this item shall not be incorporated in the work .
repairs required in accordance with num shall be carried out for the full width of the driving lane including the paved shoulders .
num removal and replacement the full thickness of the appropriate lift of pavement in the rejected lot shall be removed by cold milling or other means as approved by the engineer .
all joints shall be tackcoated .
repaired areas will be retested for acceptance those failing will be rejected and shall require further repair .
material removed shall become the property of the contractor who shall dispose of the material outside the work site .
num overlaying the overlay shall extend the full width of the underlying pavement surface and have a finished compacted thickness of not less than num mm for a base course and num mm for a surface course .
a key shall be constructed at each end of the overlaid section .
if an overlay results in the need for repairs or adjustments to the adjacent materials within the general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num work area the contractor shall carry out the repairs and adjustments at his own expense and to the satisfaction of the engineer .
repaired areas will be retested for acceptance .
those failing will be rejected and a second overlay will not be permitted .
the contractor shall then carry out repairs in accordance with num .
removal depth shall be sufficient to remove the full thickness of the overlay lift and the original unsatisfactory surface lift .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num num measurement for payment num method of measurement asphaltic concrete the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the number of tonnes of each class of asphaltic concrete acceptably placed subject to payment adjustments .
the quantity of asphaltic concrete for a lot shall not exceed that calculated as follows specified length x specified width x specified thickness x density x num .
num unit price adjustment upa of the lot the upas for asphaltic concrete are as shown in tables num num num and num .
if repairs are carried out by removal and replacement or overlay of the asphaltic concrete the upa for the lot will be based on quality assurance testing carried out on the repaired lot .
the unit price up for asphaltic concrete base or surface mixes will be adjusted for each lot as follows uplot up num upadensity upa asphalt content upagradation upa air voids num payment adjustment for smoothness the engineer will provide the contractor with a copy of the smoothness test results including detailed payment adjustment summaries and compulsory corrective work requirements .
num num metre segments payment adjustments for num metre segments will be calculated based on the overall average iri in mmm for each num metre segment in each lane in accordance with table num .
num localized roughness with the exception of areas described in item num each num metre segment with an iri value greater than those shown in table num shall be defined as localized roughness resulting in negative payment adjustments .
the total localized roughness payment adjustment shall be the numerical summation of all the individual localized roughness payment adjustments for the defined section of roadway .
num total payment adjustments the total payment adjustment shall be the summation of all the individual payment adjustments for each num metre segment in each lane including localized roughness payment adjustments .
if the total num metre segment payment adjustment is a positive value bonus the contractor will be assessed the total num metre segment payment adjustment and the total localized roughness payment adjustment for the defined section of roadway .
if the total num metre segment payment adjustment is a negative value penalty the contractor will be assessed either the total num metre segment payment adjustment or the total localized roughness payment adjustment whichever is numerically less i.e .
whichever results in a greater penalty to the contractor .
the two penalties shall not be applied in summation .
num segments less than num metres for segments less than num metres in length price adjustments will be determined from num metre segments that are not subject to exclusions as described in item num .
payment adjustments under item num and general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num item num shall apply to these areas based on the actual number of num metre segments that are not excluded .
price adjustments shall be prorated based on the number of non excluded num metre segments in the num metre segment as detailed in table num .
example num num metre segment station num num exclusions apply in four num of the individual num m segments num m bridge num m at each end num metre segment iri mmm exclusion applies yesno localized roughness payment adjustment average iri over num metre segment iri payment adjustment see table num total payment adjustment for this num metre segment num num num no num num num num num num num x num num num num num num num num no num num num num no num num num num no num num num num no num num num num yes bridge approach num num num num yes bridge num num num num yes bridge num num num num yes bridge approach num num num num no num example num num metre segment station num num at end of paving section exclusions apply in one num of the individual num m segments num metre segment iri mmm exclusion applies yesno localized roughness payment adjustment average iri over num metre segment iri payment adjustment see table num total payment adjustment for this num metre segment num num num no num num num num num x num num num num num num num num no num num num num yes manhole num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num num method of measurement asphalt cement the quantity to be measured for payment under this section shall be the number of tonnes of asphalt cement utilized by the contractor in producing hot mix asphaltic concrete as determined by the extractions from the random samples provided by the contractor to the department and calculated for the tonnage of hot mix asphaltic concrete produced .
provided asphalt concrete hra is used as per section num the quantity to be measured for payment under this section shall be the number of tonnes of asphalt cement supplied by the contractor in producing hot mix asphaltic concrete as determined by the extractions extractions adjusted for the mean reclaimed asphalt cement content of rap as per section num from the random samples provided by the contractor to the department and calculated for the tonnage of hot mix asphaltic concrete produced .
table num unit price adjustment for density upad of theoretical maximum relative density lot average unit price adjustment per tonne of theoretical maximum relative density lot average unit price adjustment per tonne num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num reject num num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num table num unit price adjustment for asphalt content upaa mean of the deviations of actual asphalt content from the approved asphalt content unit price adjustment for asphalt content per tonne num to num num num to num num num to num num type ahra num to num num num to num num num to num num num reject num to num num num to num num type b num to num num num to num num num to num num num reject general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num table num unit price adjustment for gradation upag sieve size astm designation mean of the deviations of the gradation from the jmf unit price adjustment for gradation type ahra type b per tonne num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num mm num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num num reject num to num num to num num num num num num num num num µm num num num num num num num num num num to num num to num num num num reject in addition to the above acceptancerejection requirements for gradation the following shall apply a the lot will be rejected if the average of the lot test results for the num mm size falls outside the gradation limits specified in table num. b the lot payment will be reduced by num per tonne if the average of the lot test results for the num µm size exceeds up to a maximum of num the upper gradation limit specified in table num. c the lot will be rejected if the average of the lot test results for the num µm size exceeds by more than num the upper gradation limit specified in table num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num table num payment adjustment for smoothness iri mmm pay adjustment num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num table num localized roughness localized roughness iri mmm for num metre segments payment adjustment for each occurrence num and num num num num or compulsory corrective work table num unit price adjustment for air voids upaav mean of deviations of air voids from target value air voids num unit price adjustment t num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num reject num payment num payment adjustment for use of remix paver or material transfer vehicle a unit price adjustment as defined in num or num shall apply to the total quantity of asphaltic concrete acceptably placed using either a remix paver or material transfer vehicle in accordance with this item with prior written approval for use by the engineer .
num basis of payment asphaltic concrete payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per tonne for each type of hot mix asphaltic concrete and this price shall be full compensation for materials other than those supplied by the department handling hauling storing stockpiling cutting of existing pavement painting of joints mixing hauling placing and compacting hot mix asphaltic concrete tools labour equipment materials and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num basis of payment asphalt cement the supply and transportation of performance grade asphalt cement will be paid for at the contractors unit bid price per tonne of asphalt cement .
this price shall be full compensation for any and all expenses that may be incurred for the supply transport general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num and delivery of the performance grade asphalt cement to the contractors plant including the cost of any antistripping additive required to meet design mix requirements as well as any storage heating and handling requirements .
the unit bid price per tonne of pg grade asphalt cement specified shall be adjusted using the pg grade num price index as posted num hours prior to closing of tender and the time when the asphalt cement is incorporated into the work .
the price index to be used for comparison shall be the price as determined in the maritime suppliers rack price or as artificially established by the department in the special provisions .
this index can be found at httpwww.gov.pe.catirindex.phpnumnumbernumlange the payment adjustment will be in dollars per tonne of asphalt binder .
a payment adjustment will be established for each month of paving in which the price index for the month differs by more than numtonne from the price index for the month in which tenders for the contract were opened .
when the price index differential is less than numtonne there will be no adjustment established for that month .
the payment adjustment for the month will be calculated as follows where pa payment adjustment for asphalt binder in dollars t pg asphalt binder price index for the month of tender opening p pg asphalt binder price index for month of paving q quantity of asphalt binder in tonnes when p t numtonne the contractor receives an additional payment from the owner as follows pa p t numtonne x q when p t numtonne the owner deducts from payments due to the contractor as follows pa t numtonne p x q examples num .
a contractors unit bid price for asphalt cement was num for a tender that closed in february .
the posted price index num hours prior to tender closing was num and the work was undertaken in may when the price index was num .
num num num num num num since the price index at time of paving num falls within the numtonne range of the price index num hours prior to tender closing there would be no adjustment to the unit price of the asphalt cement .
num .
a contractors unit bid price for asphalt cement was num for a tender that closed in february .
the posted price index num hours prior to tender closing was num and the work was undertaken in june when the price index was num and numt of cement was used .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num num num num num num num since the price index at time of paving num falls outside the numtonne range of the price index num hours prior to tender closing an adjustment to the amount paid to the contractor would be required .
the price would be adjusted using the p t numtonne formula .
thus the owner will deduct the following amount from payment to the contractor pa num num num x num num num .
a contractors unit bid price for asphalt cement was num for a tender that closed in february .
the posted price index num hours prior to tender closing was num and the work was undertaken in august when the price index was num and numt of cement was used .
num num num num num num since the price index at time of paving num falls outside the numtonne range of the price index num hours prior to tender closing an adjustment to the amount paid to the contractor would be required .
the price would be adjusted using the p t numtonne formula .
thus the owner will add the following amount to the payment to the contractor pa num num num x num num compensation to the contractor or the owner for differences between the asphalt binder content as determined by extracted asphalt content and the assumed asphalt binder content specified in num for the total payable tonnage will be as follows payment to the contractor will be made for asphalt content in excess of the assumed asphalt binder content specified in num for the total payable tonnage subject to the following limitations the maximum amount of asphalt content used in the above calculation will be the approved asphalt binder content from the jmf and subsequent approved adjustments plus num for type ahra mix and num for type b mix .
credit shall be given to the owner for all asphalt binder content below the assumed asphalt binder content for the total payable tonnage .
payments and credits will be based on the actual price per tonne as bid to the contractor by the supplier for the work .
payments and credits will be determined on a day by day basis .
this determination is independent from and has no relationship to calculations for determining unit price adjustments as determined under num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hot mix asphaltic concrete end result specification ers num num num in the case that the contractor initiates an appeal under num the following shall apply if the new test results after the appeal process indicates that a penalty no longer applies then the testing costs incurred by the owner during the appeal procedures for that lot will be borne by the owner .
payment to the contractor will be made for the sampling costs .
if the new test results after the appeal process verify that a penalty still applies or rejection remains valid for that lot the testing costs incurred by the owner during the appeal procedure shall be charged in accordance with table num to the contractor .
if the contractor carries out improvements for smoothness as outlined in item num the smoothness shall be retested .
the contractor shall be charged for the smoothness retesting in accordance with table num .
table num fixed rates item reference description unit fixed rate num smoothness retesting per hour num num payment of appeal testing costs density per core num num approval of numnd and subsequent mix designs per mix design num num payment of appeal testing costs density asphalt content asphalt content and gradation thickness air voids lump sum num num num num num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hma driveway mix num num num num description this section defines the requirements for the materials equipment and methods to be followed for production transportation of hot mixed hot laid asphaltic concrete for driveway pavement construction and other purposes .
num material hot mix asphaltic concrete used under this section shall be in accordance to section num .
asphalt cement used under this section shall be in accordance to section num .
num method of measurement measurement for this item shall be the number of tonnes of each type of asphaltic concrete acceptably placed for driveway hookups measured from the outside pavement edge of the mainline paving work to a location determined by the department for each driveway .
num basis of payment payment under this item shall be at the unit bid price per tonne for each type of hot mix asphaltic concrete acceptably placed and this price shall be full compensation for labour materials equipment preparation supply of hot mix asphalt compacting and all other incidentals required to perform the work .
asphalt cement used in this item shall be paid in accordance with section num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy rehabilitation num num pulverize in place num pulverize stockpile and replace rap num pulverize and stockpile rap num cold plane stockpile and replace rap num cold plane construction joint num cold plane and patch num transverse crack repair with reinforcement mesh num polystyrene foam board placement num pavement restoration num cutting asphalt num excavate and patch num cold plane stockpile and replace rap as shoulder material num longitudinal cold plane construction joint num curb removal num cold plane transport and pave num cold plane transport and stockpile general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy pulverize in place num num num num description this work shall consist of pulverizing asphaltic concrete portland cement soilcement or combinations thereof in place and utilization of the pulverized material as a base course .
num construction method the contractor is responsible for determining the depth of pulverization required for the pavement structure .
the contractor shall cut back shoulder material along the edge of the asphaltic concrete to be pulverized to the depth specified by the engineer to prevent contamination of the pulverized material .
the contractor will pulverize the existing materials to its full depth using an approved method .
after being pulverized the material shall conform to the gradation specified in table num .
table numgradation requirement for pulverized material after processing sieve size passing num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm num num μm num num μm num num μm num the pulverized material shall be uniformly graded to the specified lines and grades within a tolerance of num mm and thoroughly compacted in accordance with section num to num standard proctor density .
limit shoulder and pulverizing operation to what can be graded daily to allow safe passage of traffic .
when num mm or less of new granular material is to be added it must be thoroughly mixed with the pulverized roadbed .
grading and compaction shall be in accordance with this section .
maintain the grade and compaction of entire roadbed until the project is complete .
the pulverized material may be spread across an area smaller or larger than the original pavement .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy pulverize in place num num num num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of square metres of pavement pulverized inplace .
new granular material added to the roadbed will be measured for payment as specified in accordance with section num .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for cutting back shoulders pulverizing grading compacting maintaining the graded base course tools labour equipment water for compaction and incidentals necessary to carry out the work .
new granular material added will be paid for in accordance with section num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy pulverize stockpile and replace rap num num num num description this work includes pulverizing the existing asphaltic concrete stockpiling pulverized material and placing the reclaimed asphalt pavement rap on the roadbed as a base material .
num construction method the contractor shall cut back shoulder material along the edge of the asphaltic concrete to be pulverized to the depth specified by the engineer to prevent contamination of the rap .
the contractor shall break the existing asphaltic concrete to its full depth using an approved method .
the contractor shall prevent soilcement subbase material or other contaminants from mixing with the broken asphaltic concrete .
the contractor shall limit shoulder and pulverizing operation to what can be graded daily to allow safe passage of traffic .
the contractor shall provide a suitable stockpile site and submit a proposed site plan and stockpile procedures to the engineer for review strip and stockpile the topsoil and overburden .
the contractor shall provide security for the stockpile which may involve a gate with lock and key to prevent losses and ensure the rap stockpile site meets all safety and environmental regulations .
at the completion of the contract the contractor will reinstate the topsoil and overburden and be responsible for seeding the area of the stockpile site .
the rap shall meet the gradation specified in table num .
table numgradation requirement for rap sieve size passing num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm num num μm num num μm num num μm num the pulverized material shall be uniformly placed and graded to the specified lines and grades within a tolerance of num mm and thoroughly compacted in accordance with section num to num standard proctor density .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy pulverize stockpile and replace rap num num num num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of square metres of asphalt actually removed from the road .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for cutting back shoulders pulverizing asphaltic concrete preparing cleaning and reinstating stockpile sites providing the necessary environmental and safety protection security transporting rap crushing placing grading compacting maintaining the replaced material tools labour equipment water for compaction and incidentals necessary to carry out the work .
new granular material added to the roadbed shall be paid for in accordance with section num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy pulverize and stockpile rap num num num num description this work includes pulverizing the existing asphalt concrete transporting the reclaimed asphalt pavement rap and constructing a rap stockpile .
num construction method the contractor shall cut back shoulder material along the edge of the asphalt concrete to be pulverized to the depth specified by the engineer in order to prevent contamination of the rap .
the contractor shall break the existing asphaltic concrete to its full depth using an approved method .
the contractor shall prevent soilcement subbase material or other contaminants from mixing with the broken asphaltic concrete .
the size of the rap shall not be greater than the maximum size that can be efficiently loaded into trucks .
the rap shall be transported to a designated site and the rap shall be crushed by an approved method so that all material will pass a num mm sieve .
the crushed rap shall be placed in a stockpile in such a manner that it does not become contaminated with other material .
the contractor shall provide security for the rap stockpile which may include a gate with lock and key to prevent losses .
after the broken asphalt concrete has been removed the roadbed shall be graded to provide safe passage for traffic .
the shoulder and pulverizing operation shall be limited to what can be graded daily to allow safe passage of traffic during nonworking hours in accordance with section num .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of square metres of road actually pulverized and stockpiled .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for cutting back shoulders breaking asphaltic concrete rap transportation to stockpile site providing for the necessary environmental and safety protection security rap crushing construction of rap stockpiles all tools material equipment and incidentals necessary to carry out the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy cold plane stockpile and replace rap num num num num description this work includes the cold planing removal and stockpiling of asphaltic concrete from the roadway and placement of the reclaimed asphalt pavement rap on the roadbed .
num construction method the cold planer shall be a selfpropelled commercially designed unit equipped with automatic longitudinal and transverse grade and slope controls .
minimum planing width capability shall be num m. all rap material shall pass a num mm sieve .
the cold planer shall be further equipped with a loading conveyor to facilitate the removal and transportation of the rap directly by truck .
depositing of the rap directly on the roadway shall not be permitted .
the longitudinal and transverse grade and slope controls shall be equipped to operate from a ski or matching shoe and capable of maintaining a profile grade elevation or cross slope .
the contractor will reshape or remove any material required to establish proper drainage at the end of each days milling production .
with full depth removal care shall be taken in the removal of the asphaltic concrete not to contaminate the rap with the underlying base material .
if the contractor removes the specified thickness in more than one layer then material from each layer must be stockpiled separately as directed by the engineer .
for partial depth removal the loose material remaining after removal of the rap shall be cleaned from the surface prior to opening to traffic .
the contractor shall provide a suitable stockpile site and submit a proposed site plan and stockpile procedures to the engineer for review .
the contractor shall strip and stockpile the topsoil and overburden in accordance with section num and provide security for the stockpile which may involve a gate with a lock and key to prevent losses .
at the completion of the contract the contractor will reinstate the topsoil and overburden and be responsible for seeding the area located at the stockpile site .
proper stockpiling procedures shall be followed in constructing rap stockpiles .
stockpiles shall be built up in num m deep layers .
rap placed in stockpiles by trucks shall be uniformly stopdumped to prevent segregation .
the use of heavy equipment in constructing the stockpiles shall be such to prevent compaction of the rap .
the contractor must ensure stockpile site meets all safety and environmental regulations .
stockpiles shall be placed on a level well drained base capable of supporting the entire weight of the stockpile and in such a manner to ensure maximum recovery of the rap without contamination .
the rap shall be uniformly placed and graded to the specified lines and grades within a tolerance of num mm and thoroughly compacted in accordance with section num to num standard proctor density .
when num mm or less of new granular material is to be added it must be thoroughly mixed with the rap .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy cold plane stockpile and replace rap num num num num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of square metres of asphaltic concrete cold planed .
num basis of payment cold planing of asphaltic concrete shall be paid for at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for cold planing preparing the site for stockpiling and reinstating security construction of rap stockpile providing environmental and safety protection necessary transporting placing mixing and compacting cold planed rap equipment tools labour and incidentals necessary to compete the work .
new granular material added to the road bed shall be paid for in accordance with section num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy cold plane construction joint num num num num description work under this section includes cold planing existing asphalt concrete across the width of the road at the beginning and end of the contract limits .
the purpose of this work is to allow the proper grade transition with the existing pavements .
the depth to cold plane shall be determined by the new overlay thickness .
cold planed material will be removed and placed as directed .
num construction method the contractor shall cold plane the existing asphaltic concrete surface to satisfy the paving requirements for transverse construction joints as detailed in subprovision num .
all areas which have been cold planed shall be swept and tacked .
subject to section num the rap material resulting from this work shall be deemed surplus or waste by the engineer .
num method of measurement the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the number of square metres of pavement which have been cold planed and tacked .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for all work tools equipment disposal of waste material labour tack and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy cold plane and patch num num num num description this work shall consist of cold planing designated areas to a depth determined by the engineer and patching with hot mix asphaltic concrete .
num construction method the contractor shall cold plane areas to be patched to a depth determined by the engineer .
the cold planed edges are to be vertical and the area shall be broomed clean prior to tack coat application .
the areas shall be patched with an approved asphaltic concrete mix determined by the engineer .
the asphaltic concrete production and placement shall be in accordance to section num .
work shall be scheduled so that at the end of each day all patches are flush with the adjacent pavement and so that no planed areas are left open .
subject to section num the rap material resulting from this work shall be deemed surplus or waste by the engineer .
num method of measurement the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the number of square metres of patch completed .
if the contractor is required to cold plane to a depth greater than num mm as designated by the engineer then the additional depth beyond num mm shall also be measured for payment under this section .
num basis of payment payment for this work shall be at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be adjusted for cold planing depths greater than num mm according to the following formula num mm additional depth in mm x unit bid price num mm the unit price bid shall be full compensation for planing preparation and cleaning supply and placement of tack coat material supply and placement of asphaltic concrete compaction and all equipment tools labour and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy asphalt reinforcement mesh placement num num num num description this item relates to the strengthening of cracks or joints to be treated .
the engineer shall designate the cracks or joints to be treated .
all relevant sections of division num shall be in effect .
num material the road reinforcement mesh must be self adhesive type made of glass fibre strand glasgrid numr or equivalent in terms of tensile strength area weight elongation melt point and bond .
asphaltic concrete for patching shall be class c or class b in accordance with section num .
tack coat shall be in accordance with section num .
num coordination with other work successful completion of this work requires coordination with the asphaltic concrete levelling course placement .
the timing and order of individual tasks may be affected .
num construction method a sectional view shall be shown on the drawings that illustrates the location of the reinforcement in the pavement .
num transverse cracks and longitudinal cracks a the crack shall be cold planed to a width of num mm and to a depth of num mm .
all planed asphaltic concrete shall be reclaimed and spread on a designated road .
b the planed area shall be thoroughly cleaned in preparation for patching .
c tack coat shall be applied to the planed area .
d the planed area shall be repaved full depth and width with asphaltic concrete class c or class b. patch smoothness is important to ensure a successful bond with the reinforcement mesh .
e immediately prior to placement of the levelling course the contractor shall supply and install the reinforcement mesh over the patches according to the manufacturers instructions .
unless otherwise directed by the engineer the contractor shall arrange to have a manufacturers representative on site to provide technical support and assistance to the work crews on the first day of application .
f reinforcement mesh shall be bonded to the pavement by rolling in place with a pneumatic roller weighing no less than ten num tonnes .
g a second course of reinforcement mesh may be placed as directed by the engineer between subsequent layers of asphaltic concrete at the crack location .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy asphalt reinforcement mesh placement num num num num longitudinal joints a tack coat shall be applied to the longitudinal joint .
b immediately prior to placement of the levelling course the contractor shall supply and install the reinforcement mesh over the joint according to the manufacturers instructions .
unless otherwise directed by the engineer the contractor shall arrange to have a manufacturers representative on site to provide technical support and assistance to the work crews on the first day of application .
c reinforcement mesh shall be bonded to the pavement by rolling in place with a pneumatic roller weighing no less than ten num tonnes .
d a second course of reinforcement mesh may be placed as directed by the engineer between subsequent layers of asphaltic concrete at the joint location .
num method of measurement the quantities to be measured for payment under this section shall be the number of square metres of reinforcement mesh acceptably placed .
num basis of payment reinforcement mesh shall be paid at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for preparing the pavement surface supplying placing and rolling the mesh .
cold planing and patching shall be paid for in accordance with section num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy polystyrene foam board placement num num num num description this section applies to the supply and placement of polystyrene foam boards num mm x num m for the purpose of roadbed insulation .
the material shall be polystyrene foam board num mm x num m having a compressive strength rating equal to or greater than num kpa and meeting or exceeding cgsb nummnum type iv .
num construction method the foam boards shall be placed as shown in the contract drawings and plans .
for the most part the boards shall be placed directly on the existing paved surface except for a nominal num mm extension beyond the edge of the existing paved shoulder and except for the transition zones at either end of the job in which case the foam boards shall be placed on grade as shown in the detailed contract drawings .
the foam boards shall be placed in areas designated in the contract lengthwise and parallel to the centreline of the roadway to obtain tight butt joints and staggered transverse joints .
the boards should be secured during the backfilling process by placing small piles of the specified granular material on the boards immediately after installation .
placement of granular base shall be in accordance with section num except that when placed over the polystyrene foam boards it shall be placed in num lift by end dumping and spreading .
traffic shall not be permitted on the polystyrene foam board sections until the full depth of the granular base course has been placed and compacted in accordance with section num .
at the end of each working day the polystyrene foam board placement shall have progressed to the same station on both sides of the centreline and a minimum num m temporary ramp of granular material shall be constructed to provide traffic a smooth transition between existing and granular base grades .
when placement resumes care shall be taken during the removal of the temporary ramps to ensure that the foam boards are not damaged and that a true edge is exposed and available to join on to .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of square metres of road surface covered with polystyrene foam boards based on board count for the various thicknesses used .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for all of the work and for all labour equipment materials polystyrene foam boards and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy pavement restoration num num num num description the work carried out under this section shall include the restoration of pavement surfaces cut or damaged during the course of other work .
num construction method the contractor shall excavate level and clear the area to be restored to a depth of num mm if the adjacent pavement is asphaltic concrete combined with soilcement stabilization or to the subgrade if the adjacent pavement consists of full depth asphaltic concrete or asphaltic concrete combined with a granular base course .
each layer shall be compacted in accordance with section num to num standard proctor density except the top num mm which shall be compacted to num standard proctor density .
where the adjacent pavement includes a granular base course the contractor shall place equivalent granular material by hand in the area to be restored in layers not exceeding num mm and shall compact each layer in accordance with section num to num standard proctor density .
the granular material shall be placed to the top of the granular base course in the adjacent pavement .
the contractor shall clean and apply tack coat to the edges of adjacent pavement .
the contractor shall place hot mix base course asphaltic concrete class a approved by the engineer by hand in uniform layers not exceeding num mm in thickness in accordance with section num .
subsection num general requirements for compaction shall not apply to asphalt placed under this section .
the contractor shall place a layer of hot mix seal course asphaltic concrete classc on top of the base course asphalt in layers not exceeding num mm and shall compact it in accordance with section num .
subsection num general requirements for compaction shall not apply to asphalt placed under this section .
num method of measurement the quantity to be paid for under this section shall be the number of square metres of pavement restored as authorized by the engineer .
no measurement shall be made for granular base course material tack coat or hot mix asphaltic concrete placed under this section .
no measurement for payment shall be made under this section for pavement restoration required as a result of the contractors negligence in performing any components of the work .
num basis of payment pavement restoration shall be paid for at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for excavation supply and placement of granular base course material supply and placement of tack coat material supply and placement of hot mix asphaltic concrete compaction warranty of the work equipment tools labour and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy cutting asphalt num num num num description this work shall consist of cutting pavement in neat and straight lines or as directed by the engineer .
num construction method the contractor shall cut to the full depth of pavement using a saw or jackhammer the lines on the pavement surface as designated by the engineer .
the contractor shall ensure that all such cuts are neat straight vertical and that pavement to be left in place is not damaged .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall only apply to pavement cut with the engineers approval .
the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the number of linear metres of pavement cut to full depth .
if the depth of cut is greater than num mm than the additional depth beyond num mm shall also be measured for payment under this section .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per linear metre of cut pavement and this price shall be adjusted for cuts greater than num mm according to the following formula num mm additional thickness x unit bid price num mm the unit bid price shall be full compensation for equipment tools labour and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy excavate and patch num num num num description this work shall consist of the restoration of the pavement to the lines as directed by the engineer .
num construction method the contractor shall cut to the full depth of the pavement excavate and level .
the contractor shall clean and apply tack coat to the edges of the adjacent pavement .
the contractor shall place an approved asphaltic concrete mix determined by the engineer in the excavated area in accordance with section num .
subject to section num the rap material resulting from this work shall be deemed surplus or waste by the engineer .
num method of payment the quantity to be paid for under this section shall be the number of square metres of pavement excavated and patched .
num basis of payment the number of square metres of pavement excavated and patched shall be paid for at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for excavation supply and placement of tack coat material supply and placement of asphaltic concrete compaction and all equipment tools labour and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy cold plane stockpile and replace rap as shoulder material num num num num description this work includes the cold planing removal and stockpiling of asphaltic concrete from the roadway and placement of the reclaimed asphalt pavement rap as shoulder material .
num construction method the cold planer shall be a selfpropelled commercially designed unit equipped with automatic longitudinal and transverse grade and slope controls .
minimum planing width capability shall be num m. all rap material shall pass a num mm sieve .
the cold planer shall be further equipped with a loading conveyor to facilitate the removal and transportation of the rap directly by truck .
depositing of the rap directly on the roadway shall not be permitted .
the contractor will reshape or remove any material required to establish proper drainage at the end of each days milling production .
the longitudinal and transverse grade and slope controls shall be equipped to operate from a ski or matching shoe and capable of maintaining a profile grade elevation or cross slope .
with full depth removal care shall be taken in the removal of the asphaltic concrete not to contaminate the rap with the underlying base material .
if the contractor removes the specified thickness in more than one layer then material from each layer must be stockpiled separately as directed by the engineer .
for partial depth removal the loose material remaining after removal of the rap shall be cleaned from the surface prior to opening to traffic .
the contractor shall provide a suitable stockpile site and submit a proposed site plan and stockpile procedures to the engineer for review .
the contractor shall strip and stockpile the topsoil and overburden in accordance with section num and provide security for the stockpile which may involve a gate with a lock and key to prevent losses .
at the completion of the contract the contractor will reinstate the topsoil and overburden and be responsible for seeding the area located at the stockpile site .
proper stockpiling procedures shall be followed in constructing rap stockpiles .
stockpiles shall be built up in num m deep layers .
rap placed in stockpiles by trucks shall be uniformly stopdumped to prevent segregation .
the use of heavy equipment in constructing the stockpiles shall be such to prevent compaction of the rap .
the contractor must ensure the stockpile site meets all safety and environmental regulations .
the stockpiles shall be placed on a level well drained base capable of supporting the entire weight of the stockpile and in such a manner to ensure maximum recovery of the rap without contamination .
the contractor should provide security for the stockpile which may include a gate with lock and key to prevent losses .
the contractor shall prepare the shoulder as provided for elsewhere in the contract and shall ensure that any debris has been removed from the shoulder .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy cold plane stockpile and replace rap as shoulder material num num num the rap material shall be placed by a shouldering machine previously approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall produce a final graded surface having a uniform num crossslope towards the ditch except on the outer edge of a superelevated curve where the contractor shall consult with the engineer for direction .
where shoulder material is to be placed after paving compaction of aggregate shall be achieved by using an appropriate rubbertired roller in accordance with section num to num of the standard proctor density .
the engineer may approve the use of an alternative type of roller if safe operation of a rubbertired roller can not be achieved .
excess shoulder material shall be removed at the contractors own expense .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of square metres of asphaltic concrete cold planed .
num basis of payment cold planing of asphaltic concrete shall be paid for at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for cold planing preparing the site for stockpiling reinstatement of stockpile site security of stockpiled material providing environmental and safety protection necessary placing cold planed rap equipment tools labour and incidentals necessary to compete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy longitudinal cold plane construction joint num num num num description work under this section includes cold planing along the longitudinal edge of the existing asphalt .
the purpose of this work is to add additional width of asphalt to the existing structure in multiple lifts of varying thickness as directed by the engineer .
the depth and width to cold plane will be determined by the engineer .
cold planed material will be removed and placed as directed .
the longitudinal cold planing will correspond with the placement of the individual lifts of asphalt .
as directed by the engineer the cold planing may be required to be completed over a period of days due to safety concerns for the travelling public .
num construction method the contractor will cold plane the existing asphaltic concrete surface to satisfy the paving requirements for longitudinal construction joints as detailed in subprovision num .
all areas which have been cold planed will be swept .
the rap material resulting from this work may be used in other work as directed by the engineer or otherwise disposed of by the contractor .
num method of measurement the quantity to be measured under this section will be the number of square metres of pavement which has been cold planed .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for all work tools equipment labour and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
no additional payments will be authorized for float charges if the cold planer is removed and returned to site .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy curb removal num num num num description this work includes the removal disposal of the existing concrete curb or asphaltic concrete curb and the adjacent material .
num construction methods the contractor shall remove the existing curb along with the adjacent material to a maximum of num metres behind the existing curb .
the work will include loading the curb adjacent material and disposing of the material sweeping and cleaning of the area as required .
num method of measurement measurement of payment under this section shall be the number of linear meters of curb removed .
num basic of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per linear meter and this price shall be full compensation for removing and disposing of the curb and adjacent material sweeping general clean up tools labour equipment and incidentals necessary to carry out the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy cold plane transport and pave num num num num description this work includes the cold planing removal and transporting of asphaltic concrete from the roadway and placement of the reclaimed asphalt pavement rap on a roadbed as a paving operation .
num construction method the cold planer shall be a selfpropelled commercially designed unit equipped with automatic longitudinal and transverse grade and slope controls .
the longitudinal and transverse grade and slope controls shall be equipped to operate from a ski or matching shoe and capable of maintaining a profile grade elevation and cross slope .
the cold planer shall have a minimum planing width capability of num m. all rap material shall pass a num mm sieve .
the cold planer shall be further equipped with a loading conveyor to facilitate the removal and transportation of the rap directly by truck .
the contractor will deliver the rap directly to an alternate site directed by the engineer and place with an approved asphalt spreader and compaction equipment in accordance with section num .
with full depth removal care shall be taken in the removal of the asphaltic concrete not to contaminate the rap with the underlying base material .
if the contractor removes the specified thickness in more than one layer then material from each layer must be placed as directed by the engineer .
for partial depth removal the loose material remaining after removal of the rap shall be cleaned from the surface prior to opening to traffic .
the length of haul from the cold planing operation to the placement operation will be specified by the engineer .
the rap shall meet the gradation specified in table num .
table num gradation requirement for rap sieve size passing num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm num num μm num num μm num num μm num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy cold plane transport and pave num num num num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of square metres of asphaltic concrete cold planed .
num basis of payment the cold planing of asphaltic concrete shall be paid for at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for cold planing transporting placing cold planed rap compacting equipment tools labour and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
open haul rates shall apply to this item .
should the actual haul distance differ from the specified distance a price adjustment increase and decrease shall apply based on the actual haul distance .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy cold plane transport and stockpile num num num num description this work includes the cold planing of the existing asphalt concrete transporting the reclaimed asphalt pavement rap and constructing a rap stockpile .
num construction method the cold planer shall be a selfpropelled commercially designed unit equipped with automatic longitudinal and transverse grade and slope controls .
minimum planing width capability shall be num m. all rap material shall pass a num mm sieve .
the cold planer shall be further equipped with a loading conveyor to facilitate the removal and transportation of the rap directly by truck .
the longitudinal and transverse grade and slope controls shall be equipped to operate from a ski or matching shoe and capable of maintaining a profile grade elevation or cross slope .
the contractor will reshape or remove any material required to establish proper drainage at the end of each days milling production .
with full depth removal care shall be taken in the removal of the asphaltic concrete not to contaminate the rap with the underlying base material .
if the contractor removes the specified thickness in more than one layer then material from each layer must be stockpiled separately as directed by the engineer .
for partial depth removal the loose material remaining after removal of the rap shall be cleaned from the surface prior to opening to traffic .
the engineer shall provide a stockpile location for the rap .
the contractor shall provide equipment to construct the stockpile .
proper stockpiling procedures shall be followed in constructing rap stockpiles .
stockpiles shall be built up in num m deep layers .
rap placed in stockpiles by trucks shall be uniformly stopdumped to prevent segregation .
the use of heavy equipment in constructing the stockpiles shall be such to prevent compaction of the rap .
the contractor must ensure stockpile site meets all safety and environmental regulations .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of square metres of asphaltic concrete cold planed .
num basis of payment cold planing of asphaltic concrete shall be paid for at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for cold planing transporting and preparing the site for stockpiling construction of rap stockpile providing environmental and safety protection necessary equipment tools labour and incidentals necessary to compete the work .
this shall be an open haul .
should the actual haul distance differ from the specified distance a price adjustment increase or decrease shall apply based on the actual haul distance .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation and infra structure renewal environment num num check dams num water for dust control num hydro seeding num seeding num mulching num silt fence num erosion control mats num sediment trap num sodding num rescinded num num straw bale barrier num compost num gabions general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy check dams num num num num description this work shall consist of the inplace construction of rip rap or straw bale check dams or flow checks .
they shall be constructed across roadside drainage ditches and throughout cut sections to trap sediment and to prevent erosion of a small gully or ditch bottom and to trap sediment by reducing velocity and concentration .
refer to section num check dams for ties environmental protection plan .
num material and construction method general all materials are to be supplied by the contractor .
geotechnical fabric shall be in accordance with the requirements of section num .
random rip rap shall be supplied in accordance with the requirements of section num .
check dams are to be installed during construction and after the ditches are brought to final grade .
check dams are to be constructed along any new ditching of the highway at spacings determined in sensitive areas by dividing num metres by the ditch grade in percent .
this spacing provides for the placement of the check dams so that the crest of the downstream structure is at the same elevation as the toe of the upstream structure .
spacing may be increased where site conditions warrant for example in long stretches where the ditches are very flat .
in these instances the maximum spacing shall not exceed num metres .
num maintenance the contractor shall maintain check dams in a functional condition until the grass on seeded slopes and ditch bottom is sufficiently established to be an effective deterrent to erosion .
this includes inspections after each rainfall immediate repairs to structures found not functioning properly and removal of sediment deposits .
the contractor shall dispose of the sediment deposits at a location at least num m away from a watercourse and in such a manner that the sediment will not be returned to the work area or watercourse .
the contractor shall remove the sediment deposits prior to the level of sedimentation reaching a point within num mm of the crest of the notch .
the engineer may require that some or all check dams be maintained after substantial completion of the work .
num decommissioning the contractor shall remove the check dams after the site has been stabilized and level and seed the areas that are disturbed during the removal .
num rip rap check dam check dams in this section are to be installed as indicated on figures num and num .
rip rap check dams are to be used in ditches where the ditch slope is greater than num two percent .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy check dams num num num the contractor shall comply with the following procedure excavate a sediment pit just upstream of where the check dam is to be constructed .
key the check dam num mm into the slopes and ditch surface to prevent undermining .
place geotechnical fabric on the prepared area starting at the toe of slope of the sediment pit and overlap edges by num mm .
roll out the fabric in the direction of flow and extend underneath the apron .
note that the aprons in these structures are not keyed into the soil .
place riprap for the check dam and apron on the fabric being careful not to cause any damage .
make the top of the check dam at least num mm wide .
the crest of the spillway on the dam is to be located num mm below the elevation at the ends of the dam to ensure flow over the spillway and to avoid overtopping at the edges where erosion may occur .
the height of the spillway shall be a minimum of num mm .
num straw bale check dams straw bale check dams are more suitable for treating runoff from small drainage areas or where ditches have relatively flat gradients equal to or less than num two percent and have low velocities .
straw bale check dams shall be comprised of a minimum of num bales with additional bales installed as required .
check dams in this section are to be installed as indicated on figures num and num .
the contractor shall comply with the following procedure remove rocks roots logs and other debris and grade as required .
prepare num mm deep trench along entire footprint of check dam .
embed straw bales in trench and place the bales tightly together .
drive two sturdy wooden stakes through each bale deep enough to anchor them securely .
drive the stakes in each bale toward the previously laid bale to force the bales together .
wedge loose straw between any cracks or openings the subsequent movement of the loose straw tends to seal any undetected openings in the barrier .
on both sides of the check dam the bales shall extend up the ditch side slope to ensure flow over the spillway and to avoid overtopping at the edges of the check dam where erosion may occur .
the crest of the spillway on the dam is to be located a minimum of num mm below the elevation where the upper most bale and the ditch intersect .
a sediment collection pit shall be excavated upstream of the check dam .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy check dams num num num num method of measurement the quantity to be measured for payment shall be the number of check dams that are constructed and maintained as per this specification .
num basis of payment payment for work under this item shall be a unit price for each type of check dam and shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material to install maintain and decommission the check dams including the disposal of all surplus materials and accumulated sediments and site reinstatement to a condition acceptable to the engineer .
maintenance and decommissioning is the responsibility of the contractor until the end of the warranty period .
payment forrip rap required under this section shall be in accordance with section num random rip rap .
payment for geotechnical fabric required under this section shall be in accordance with section num geotechnical fabric .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy water for dust control num num num num description this work shall consist of supplying and placing water to be used for dust control .
num construction method locations where water is to be applied the amount of water to be applied and the times at which it shall be applied shall be determined by the engineer .
at least one mobile water application unit of at least num kr capacity for applying water shall be available on the work site at all times .
water shall be applied by means of a pressure type distributor equipped with a spray system of nozzles that will ensure a uniform application of water .
the intake hose to the tank shall be equipped with a device satisfactory to the engineer to prevent fish from being pumped into the tank .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the volume of water applied as directed by the engineer measured in kilolitres .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per kilolitre of water applied and this price shall be full compensation for supply transportation and placement of water for dust control tools labour equipment materials and incidentals necessary to perform the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hydro seeding num num num num description this work shall consist of hydraulically seeding areas designated by the engineer adjacent to the highway to produce a uniform cover of grasses .
once established the grasses will protect against erosion and sedimentation reduce runoff flow velocities and improve infiltration and provide for sediment removal buffer strip .
refer to section num seeding and hydroseeding of ties environmental protection plan .
num material the composition of seed shall be canada no .
num mixture as defined by table num .
the following proportion of seeds should be added as a nurse crop to the canada no .
num mixture of table num .
may num july num add num oats minimum seed purity num minimum germination num .
aug. num sept num add num winter rye minimum seed purity num minimum germination num .
a nurse crop is a quick growing annual added to permanent mixtures that germinates and grows rapidly holding the soil until the slower growing perennial seedlings become established .
table numcomposition of seed mixture mixture composition canada no .
num proportion germination purity creeping red fescue num num num red top canada num num num timothy num num num kentucky blue grass num num num white dutch clover num num num perennial rye grass num num num the mixture for mulching and seeding shall for each num r of water consist of num kg of seed mixture num kg of num fertilizer num kg of dolomitic lime and num kg of hydraulic mulch material .
the hydraulic mulch material shall be capable of dispersing rapidly in water to form a homogeneous slurry and of remaining in this state when agitated or mixed with other specified materials .
when applied the hydraulic mulch shall be capable of forming an general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hydro seeding num num num absorptive mat which will allow moisture to percolate into the underlying soil .
it shall contain no growth or germination inhibitor .
the mulch shall be dry be free of weeds and all other foreign material and shall be supplied in packages indicating the weight .
the hydraulic mulch shall be a mixture consisting of cellulose pulp and natural sundried fibres processed in num mm minimum and num mm maximum lengths .
num construction method after the areas to be treated have been brought to grade they shall be harrowed to bring the top num mm to a loose friable condition .
this area shall be left with a true uniform smooth surface .
any stones greater than num mm shall be removed and disposed of .
hydro seeding shall not be permitted on hardened or crusted soil .
areas to be hydro seeded shall be dressed as above or otherwise left in a loosened condition free of ruts ridges or deleterious materials such as sticks roots or large rocks .
hydro seeding shall be carried out as soon as possible after completing surface preparation .
depending on conditions and the size of the project the engineer may require that hydro seeding be done in stages as the work progresses .
the hydraulic method of seeding and mulching shall be used .
the work shall be done with an approved machine operated by a competent crew .
the materials shall be mixed with water in the tank of the machine and kept agitated to ensure a uniform mix and suspension at all times during the operation .
the equipment must be designed and operated to uniformly distribute seed fertilizer and mulch on the designated areas at the rates specified .
the rate of application shall be num kr of mixture per hectare .
on a trial basis beginning in num tie will provide a representative of the department to be present during the preparation of the hydroseed mix to ensure that the composition as identified in the specification manual is being met .
additionally tie will provide a representative to measure the application of the hydroseed to ensure that the specification is being met .
this effort and the results will be used to determine whether or not changes need to be made to the specification of the hydroseed .
seeded shoulders shall be rolled to the satisfaction of the engineer .
areas of poor growth which exceed five percent of the total area seeded shall be re seeded .
the success of the seeding will be judged on its growth at the end of the growth season .
no work under this section shall be carried out prior to may num or after september num without written approval from the engineer .
hydro seeding should not be performed under windy conditions or during periods of rainfall in standing water or under adverse conditions as determined by the engineer .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy hydro seeding num num num within num m of a watercourse the following schedule will apply if hydro seeding prior to june num or after september num the hydro seed shall be completely covered with an erosion control material within num hours .
this material shall be either a mulching num as per section num covered with jute mat as per section num or b erosion control blanket as per section num. if due to lateness of the season hydro seeding is not possible the exposed area shall be completely covered for overwintering with an erosion control material being either a mulching num as per section num covered with jute mat as per section num or b erosion control blanket as per section num .
then early in the next growing season the erosion control material shall be removed the area shall be harrowed smoothed and stones removed as described above and then hydro seeded .
num maintenance the contractor shall inspect regularly and after rainfalls of num mm or more accumulation and reseed areas as required until the area has stabilized .
additional fertilizer may be applied to facilitate thicker growth .
the contractor shall not remove sediment control structures until the seeded area has been properly stabilized .
disturbed areas shall be levelled and seeded .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the area of land hydro seeded and measured in square metres .
measurement for payment for any required erosion control material shall be as per the applicable sections i.e .
section num mulching and section num erosion control mats for specified materials .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for preparation of the area to be hydro seeded supply of the hydro seed mixture placement of the mixture all tools labour equipment materials and other incidentals necessary to perform the work .
payment for any required erosion control material shall be as per the applicable sections i.e .
section num mulching and section num erosion control mats for specified materials .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy seeding num num num num description this work shall consist of seeding areas as designated by the engineer .
refer to section num seeding and hyrdroseeding of ties environmental protection plan .
num material grass seed shall be certified no .
num grade government of canada seeds regulation with a minimum germination of num and a minimum purity of num .
the grass seed mixture shall be as recommended by the department of agriculture .
fertilizer shall be completely synthetic slow release fertilizer with maximum num water soluble nitrogen .
fertilizer to contain proportions of nitrogen phosphoric acid and potash as recommended for the area by the department of agriculture .
num construction method the contractor shall cultivate areas to be seeded to num mm depth and shall fine grade the area free from humps and hollows and free of deleterious and refuse material .
waste material shall be disposed of in accordance with provision num .
commercial fertilizer shall be spread and raked at a rate of num kg per num mnum on areas to be seeded .
the contractor shall seed the designated area during early spring or between august num and october num .
sow during calm weather using suitable equipment to the approval of the engineer .
spread seed evenly at a rate of num kg per num mnum .
sow half of the required amount of seed in one direction and the remainder at right angles .
incorporate seed into soil to a minimum depth of num mm .
mix carefully with a light chain harrow or wire rakes and roll area immediately afterward with a water ballast type lawn or agricultural type roller .
lawns planted during the spring season shall be maintained after planting and as long as is necessary to establish a close stand of grass free of weeds and undesirable grasses .
lawns planted during the fall planting season shall be maintained in the same manner as for spring planting but they shall not be deemed acceptable until the following july numst provided a lawn of close stand of grass of varieties specified free of weeds and undesirable grasses is established .
the contractor shall apply water immediately after rolling with a fine spray to a depth penetration of at least num mm .
water shall be potable and free of impurities that would inhibit germination .
num method of measurement the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the number of square metres of seeding deemed acceptable by the engineer .
num basis of payment seeding shall be paid for at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for materials equipment tools labour and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy mulching num num num num description this item consists of the supply and application of hay as a mulch on slopes and other exposed ground including selected sensitive ditch locations as directed by the engineer .
this is a temporary measure to control erosion and thereby minimizing the transfer of sediment laden runoff to watercourses by protecting the soil surface from raindrop impact reducing the velocity of overland flow fostering the growth of vegetation by reducing moisture loss and providing insulation against extreme heat and cold .
refer to section num mulching of ties environmental protection plan .
num material hay mulch shall be supplied by the contractor .
it shall be reasonably free of noxious weeds as per the weed control act and other undesirable materials .
it shall not be so wet decayed or compacted that it inhibits even and uniform spreading .
num construction method and maintenance prior to mulching complete the required grading surface roughening and seeding .
remove large rocks and other debris that may prohibit uniform coverage .
to avoid the mulch from being blown around the length of hay should be chopped to num num mm .
mulching should be spread by the use of mechanical means such as a bale buster unless the job is small enough to be done by hand .
hay mulch shall be spread evenly and uniformly over the designated areas at a rate of num kg per hectare with a coverage rate of num as deemed acceptable by the engineer .
at the request of the engineer the contractor shall be required to provide weigh scale documentation showing that the specified spread rate is being met .
mulch shall be applied immediately after the area is shaped and seeded to the engineers satisfaction to minimize the amount of exposed soil at any one time .
mulch may also be placed as temporary erosion control on unseeded areas .
anchoring of the mulch shall be done immediately after the mulch is applied by application of a binder or tackifier or by mechanically incorporating the mulch into the soil surface .
rough ground and steep slopes require more mulch and binder than finished or flatter ground and the contractor shall adjust application rates to ensure the soil is covered with an appropriate thickness of mulch .
mulched areas should be inspected regularly and after rainfalls of num mm or more accumulation and repaired as required until the area has stabilized .
the contractor shall maintain the mulch by repairing all damaged mulch and by remulching bare spots resulting from the shifting of mulch by wind water or other means .
this shall include additional mulch as required .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy mulching num num num num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of square metres of ground surface acceptably mulched .
num basis of payment mulching shall be paid for at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for all materials tools labour equipment and incidentals necessary to perform and maintain the work .
remulching of bare spots caused by the shifting of the mulch by wind water or other cause beyond the control of the contractor will also be measured for payment at the unit bid price at the discretion of the engineer .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy silt fences num num num num description work under this section will consist of the construction of silt control fences at locations as indicated on plans or by the engineer .
silt fencing is commonly used to surround a disturbed work site .
num type num silt fence refer to section num silt fences on land of ties environmental protection plan .
type num silt fences are used on land as a temporary sediment control measure in situations where sheet or overland flows are expected .
straw bale barriers may be required to reinforce .
the silt fence shall be installed just upslope of the area to be protected in order to prevent silt from being conveyed to an adjacent property or watercourse wetland .
the silt fence may be setback from the toe of slopes provided that sufficient area is available .
this provides for more sediment storage area and locates the fence where runoff velocities are lower .
num material geotextile filter fabric shall be num mm in width and conform to the minimum requirements of table num .
wooden stakes shall be num mm square and a minimum length of num m. staples will be heavy duty wire staples of num mm minimum length .
table numrequirements for geotextile filter fabric for type num silt fence property min .
astm grab tensile strength n num dnum elongation at break point num max .
dnum permativity cms num dnum apparent opening size μm num dnum uv degradation num dnum general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy silt fences num num num num construction method at designated locations the contractors will excavate a num mm x num mm trench on the up slope side of the fence as shown in figure num .
the silt fence may be set back from the toe of slopes area permitting and provided setbacks are maintained .
this provides more sediment storage area and lowers runoff velocities .
the contractor shall drive the sturdy num mm square wooden stakes spaced num m apart at least num mm into the ground along the downslope side of the trench .
the filter fabric will be in a continuous roll cut to the length of the barrier to avoid joints .
when joints are unavoidable filter fabric will be spliced together on a support stake with a minimum num mm overlap .
the filter fabric will be attached to the stake on the upstream side extending the bottom num mm into the trench as shown on figure num using num mm heavy duty wire staples .
the contractor shall backfill and compact the excavated soil in the trench over the filter fabric .
prefabricated silt fence systems at the discretion of the engineer may be used if they meet the above material requirements .
they will be installed as per the manufacturers instructions should they differ from the above method .
num maintenance the contractor shall contain sediment runoff and maintain the silt fence in a functional condition as long as necessary as follows inspect all silt fences after each rainfall and at least daily during periods of prolonged rainfall all silt fences or parts thereof that are damaged will be repaired immediately to the satisfaction of the engineer trapped sediment will be removed when it has accumulated to a level half the height of the fence and will be disposed of at a location approved by the engineer in consultation with the county environmental officer and in compliance with the terms and conditions of the ems approval to proceed see section num silt fences on land of tirs epp .
the engineer may require that some or all silt fences be maintained after substantial completion of the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy silt fences num num num num decommissioning if specified by the engineer the contractor shall remove the silt fence at the completion of the job and dress and seed the area to the satisfaction of the engineer .
at the discretion of the engineer the contractor shall gather silt fencing and stakes that are no longer required and place these in neat piles for collection and reuse by the engineer .
num method of measurement measurement for payment for type num silt fence under this section will be the number of linear metres of silt fence installed .
num basis of payment type num silt fences will be paid for at the unit bid price per linear metre .
this price will be full compensation for supplying placing maintaining and decommissioning of all items required to carry out the work as specified herein and as instructed by the engineer .
maintenance and decommissioning that is required after substantial completion of the site work shall be paid for under section num .
num type num silt fence refer to section num silt containment in water of ties environmental protection plan .
type num silt fences are used in or alongside aquatic environments .
the type num silt fence is similar to the type num silt fences used on land .
they are typically used along the toe of slopes of embankments that are constructed in a tidal zone of a river or an estuary .
they will be configured in accordance with figure num .
num materials the geotextile filter fabric for the type num silt fence and the silt boom will conform to the minimum requirements of table num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy silt fences num num num table num requirements for geotextile filter fabric for type num silt fences and silt booms property woven nonwoven test method grab tensile strength n num num can nummnum mullen burst kpa num num can nummnum tear strength n num num can nummnum elongation at break num num can nummnum filtration opening size um num num mot ont .
note because of the smaller filtration opening size of the nonwoven material it is recommended that this material be used in dredging projects .
for the type num silt fence all posts will consist of a local species nontreated timber .
the posts will be planed smooth and be straight and true to line .
post lengths will vary and be num mm x num mm as a minimum .
the geotextile material will be fastened to the posts by wooden laths .
num construction method the contractor shall for type num silt fence drive posts along the required alignment to a point where support for the fence is attained and cut posts off num mm above hhw .
the contractor shall install geotextile fabric to the posts using the wooden laths overlap fabric as required to ensure connections are tight and place rip rap along the bottom of the geotextile fabric as shown in figure num .
num maintenance the type num silt fence will be maintained in a like new condition .
repairs required because of damages will be made immediately or as instructed by the engineer .
a sufficient amount of replacement geotextile filter fabric and posts will be maintained on site for emergency repairs .
num decommissioning following completion of all construction activities in the contract the contractor will dismantle the type num silt fence .
this work will include the removal of all posts bracing rip rap fabric and all other items incorporated into the work .
if the posts are unable to be removed they should be cut off num mm below the mudline .
at the discretion of the engineer the contractor shall gather silt fence materials including fabric posts riprap and bracing that are no longer required and place these in neat piles for collection and reuse by the engineer .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy silt fences num num num num method of measurement measurement for payment for type num silt fence under this section will be the number of linear metres of silt fence installed .
num basis of payment measurement for payment for type num silt fence under this section will be on a linear metres basis for the supply placing maintaining and decommissioning of all items required to carry out the work as specified herein and as instructed by the engineer .
there will be no separate payment for the supply and placing of posts bracing geotextile filter fabric rip rap connections or any other items .
num silt boom refer to section num silt containment in water of tirs environmental protection plan .
refer to section num.prevention of the transportationintroduction of invasive species in appendix num environmental requirements silt booms are used in aquatic environments and are anchored at the bottom but have a floating boom at the top to keep the boom or containment structure above the water level .
silt booms are particularly used in dredging projects or bridge replacement projects .
they minimize sediment transport from a disturbed area of work so as to provide a stagnant area .
they will be in accordance with figure num .
num materials the geotextile filter fabric for the silt boom will conform to the minimum requirements of table num .
flotation whether pvc pipe or foam will have sufficient buoyancy to provide continuous support and a minimum num mm freeboard .
typical flotation should be a minimum num mm diameter .
silt curtain load lines attached along the flotation material will be num mm steel cable or num mm nylon or polypropylene rope .
silt curtain ballast should be num or num mm steel chain .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy silt fences num num num num construction method the silt curtain of the boom will have a sleeve sewn along the entire top edge so as to contain the flotation and the load line within the sleeve .
a sleeve is also sewn along the bottom edge so as to contain the ballast .
the ballast will hold the fabric down and prevent sediment laden water from seeping out under the bottom of the curtain .
the silt boom should be placed a minimum of num metres beyond the work area .
the silt curtain depth should be num mm slack deeper than the water depth during high tide .
anchors kedge anchors concrete blocks danforth anchors will be used to provide positive positioning to ensure the silt curtain will not be dislocated .
num maintenance the silt boom will be maintained in a like new condition .
repairs required because of damages will be made immediately or as instructed by the engineer .
a sufficient amount of replacement geotextile filter fabric and floatation material will be maintained on site for emergency repairs .
num decommissioning following completion of all construction activities in the contract the contractor will dismantle the entire silt boom .
this work will include the removal of all flotation silt curtains fabric steel cable steel chain anchors and all other items incorporated into the work .
num method of payment measurement for payment under this section will be on a linear metre basis for the supply placing maintaining and decommissioning of all items required to carry out the work as specified herein and as instructed by the engineer .
num basis of payment work done under this section will be paid for at the linear metre bid price .
the bidder will include in the linear metre bid price all costs of labour tools equipment materials installation maintenance decommissioning and incidentals to complete the work to the satisfaction of the engineer .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy erosion control mats num num num num description the work in this section consists of the installation of temporary erosion control mats either jute mat or erosion control blankets to protect newly seeded soils from erosion caused by overland flows or to provide cover for overwinter protection of late season grading work .
note that throughout this section the term erosion control mat pertains to both a jute mat and b the various types of erosion control blankets .
these mats are for application on steep slopes and stream banks where erosion hazard is high in newly constructed ditch areas located just upstream of watercourses that are seeded outside of the normal construction period refer to section num hydro seeding in areas where moving water is likely to wash out new vegetation e.g .
in grassed waterways diversion ditches and drainage ditches and where mulch is applied and wind protection is important .
as well erosion control material is recommended for the back slope fore slope and bottom of ditches where the ditch is located within num m of a watercourse and the ditch gradient is greater than num .
refer to section num erosion control mats of ties environmental protection plan .
num material types the selection of erosion control mat type is dependant upon many factors including slope water flow volume and velocity the length of time that temporary protection is required and area sensitivity .
for all erosion control mat types staples for anchoring the mat shall be ushaped no .
num gauge wire or heavier .
their length shall be num mm to num mm with the longer staples used on loose sandy or unstable soils .
jute mat num for low to moderate embankment slopes and for low flow channels where protection is required for a short period before vegetation is established jute mat is recommended .
num jute mat is useful as a cover material for mulched areas .
jute mat shall be a cloth of uniform plain weave of undyed and unbleached single jute yarn num mm in width plus or minus num mm and weighing an average of num gper linear metre with a tolerance of plus or minus num .
the yarn shall be of a loosely twisted construction having an average twist of not less than num turns per num mm and shall not vary in thickness by more than ½ its normal diameter .
erosion control blanket straw blanket for moderate to steep embankment slopes and low flow channels where protection is required for a short period before vegetation is established a straw blanket is recommended .
depending on the erosion conditions the straw blanket will be sewn together by either a single biodegradable net on top or by a straw filter matrix between two biodegradable nets .
erosion control blanket strawcoconut fibre blanket for severe embankment slopes and medium flow channels requiring longterm protection before vegetation is established a strawcoconut fibre blanket is recommended .
this blanket general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy erosion control mats num num num shall include ultraviolet stabilized netting and a high quality straw either single or double matrix supplemented with coconut fibre or an excelsior blanket of curled wood excelsior of num num mm or longer fibre covered on top with a biodegradable plastic mesh .
erosion control blanket coconut blanket for extreme embankment slopes and high velocity flow channels and for applications requiring semipermanent to permanent protection and vegetal reinforcement a coconut blanket is recommended .
this blanket shall include a num coconut filter matrix between two heavy duty ultra violet stabilized nets or curled wood excelsior blanket of num num mm or longer fibre and with each side covered with black extra heavy duty extruded plastic mesh netting .
num construction method figures num and num correspond to the text in this section and are applicable for both jute mat and erosion control blanket installations .
after the site has been shaped and graded to the approved design the contractor shall prepare a uniformly even seedbed relatively free from gullies large roots rocks greater than num mm in diameter and other debrisobstructions that will prevent uniform contact of the protective covering with the soil surface .
the most critical aspect of installing erosion control mats is obtaining firm continuous contact between the material and the mulch andor the soil .
without good contact erosion may occur .
the contractor shall not stretch the mat material but allow it to lay loosely on the soil .
in ditches or channels the erosion control mat is to be laid out in the direction of flow .
on steep slopes the mat is to be laid out with its length extending from the top to the bottom of the slope .
the contractor shall start laying the mat from the top of the ditch or slope and unroll down grade .
anchor slots at the up slope end of the site the contractor shall construct a num mm deep trench and staple the upper edge of the matting into the trench using staple spacing of num mm then backfill and firmly compact the trench i.e .
anchor slot .
overlap where the erosion control mat lengths are laid side by side on the down slope the sides will be overlapped by a minimum of num mm and the overlapped materials will be stapled down the centre of the overlap every num mm making sure the mat material is smooth and in firm contact with the soil .
where mat lengths are installed with no overlap staple spacing along their outside edges can be num mm .
joining lengths of erosion control mat where two mat lengths must be joined endtoend the down slope mat shall be first stapled into an anchor slot trench which shall be backfilled and compacted as outlined above .
then the up slope mat shall be laid overtop of the finished anchor slot overlapping the slot and the exposed down slope mat by num mm .
the overlap shall be then stapled at num mm spacing on centre .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy erosion control mats num num num additional erosion check slots on slopes or ditches more than num m long there should be an erosion check slot installed at num m intervals .
check slots are trenches num mm deep by num mm wide .
during the mat lay out process the mat shall be installed in the trench stapled at num mm spacing along the down slope side of the trench and then the mat will continue to be laid on the down slope side of the ditch or slope .
the trench shall be backfilled and the soil compacted firmly .
it may be beneficial to determine the need for erosion check slots and construct the trenches accordingly before laying the erosion control mat .
all staples are to be flush with the ground and secured as per the manufacturers specifications .
additional staples may be required to secure the erosion control mat in depressions .
the contractor shall make sure that the erosion control mat is well anchored so that it does not slip or wash out .
any water that may accumulate underneath the fabric must be prevented from moving downward with sufficient velocity to cause erosion .
if a berm or dyke is located at the top of the slope the contractor shall extend the erosion control mat over the berm and anchor it behind the berm .
at a point where the erosion control mat is discontinued or where the mat meets a structure the contractor shall fold num mm of the material underneath and staple at a minimum interval of every num mm across the width of the mat .
if the manufacturers installation requirements are more stringent than those identified above then the manufacturers requirements are to be followed .
num maintenance inspect regularly and after rainfalls of num mm or more accumulation and repair areas ifas required until the area has stabilized .
do not remove sediment control structures until the area has been properly stabilized .
num method of measurement the areas covered with the erosion control mat as outlined in provision num shall be measured for payment in square metres and no compensation for mat overlap will be considered .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per square metre for the erosion control mat as specified and this price shall be full compensation for all labour equipment material mats or blankets staples maintenance materials and incidentals necessary to perform the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy sediment traps num num num num description work under this section consists of the construction of a temporary sediment trappond by building an earthen embankment with a stone outlet to detain siltladen runoff from small disturbed areas generally less than num ha long enough to allow the majority of sediment to settle .
these sediment traps receive concentrated runoff flows and are commonly installed in newly constructed road ditches at the down gradient point of the ditch work or immediately adjacent to this point of the ditch to function as a last location for sediment settling prior to release of the runoff water .
refer to section num sediment traps of ties environmental protection plan .
num material the random rip rap for the stone outlet shall be class rnum in accordance with section num .
the geotechnical fabric shall have the minimum specifications as shown in table num .
table numrequirements for geotechnical fabric property min .
nonwoven tensile strength n num tear strength n num equivalent open size eos μm num elongation at break num num construction sediment traps should be an initial installation at a work site constructed prior to grubbing the site .
sediment traps should not be located within num metres of an inlet or an outlet of a cross road drainage structure .
the sediment trap should be designed to ensure that the ponding behind the structure achieves the purpose of providing adequate opportunity for suspended solids in the runoff water to settle .
the trap length should be at least twice the average width and the trap depth should be approximately num m to provide adequate sediment retention capacity and to lessen the frequency of cleanout .
the trap depth can be increased should a greater retention volume be desired .
the trap shall have earthen embankments berms that will form an impoundment area .
the area under the embankments shall be cleared grubbed and stripped of any vegetation or roots before clean excavated fill is placed and compacted in num mm layers .
the embankment side slopes should be no steeper than num .
the top and outside slopes of the general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy sediment traps num num num earthen embankments shall be hydro seeded or seeded and covered with jute mat immediately after installation .
immediately beyond the downstream end of the stone outlet an apron area shall be excavated to a depth of approximately num mm below the bottom of impoundment elevation to receive the overflow water and to minimize associated erosion .
following preparation of the impoundment embankments and the apron area the stone outlet area shall be prepared .
the outlet shall be located at the downstream end of the trap with its main spillway elevation approximately num mm below the top of the impoundment embankments to ensure that discharge occurs through the spillway .
the spillway shall have a minimum width of num mm in accordance with figure num .
once the subgrade for the base and side slopes of the outlet as well as the apron are brought to grade the geotechnical fabric shall be placed on these prepared earthen surfaces .
the edges of the fabric will overlap onto the earthen embankment areas at least num mm .
at the upstream side of the outlet the fabric shall be securely toedin to the earthen base of the impoundment .
at the downstream side of the outlet the fabric shall extend into the apron area and be securely toedin to its earthen base material .
the riprap for the spillway core will then be placed on the fabric being careful not to damage the fabric .
the top of the spillway shall be num mm lower than the adjacent embankments and the spillway core will extend across the full width of the outlet .
the core riprap then needs to be wrapped with geotechnical fabric .
at the upstream side of the outlet the fabric shall again extend down to the impoundment base and be securely toedin to the earthen base of the impoundment .
this will avoid undermining at the upstream side of the outlet .
the fabric will wrap overtop of the spillway riprap core down the downstream side of the core and will extend into the apron and be securely toedin to its earthen base material .
this fabric will extend at least as far into the apron as the previously installed fabric so that runoff flows overtop of the fabric and undermining of the apron is avoided .
finally place remaining riprap on the side slopes of the outlet and on the downstream side of the spillway covering the fabric in these locations and in the apron area including overtop of the fabric in the apron .
num maintenance the contractor shall inspect regularly and after rainfalls of num mm or more accumulation and repair any damaged areas .
sediment shall be removed and the trap restored to its original dimensions when the trap is b full of sediment in accordance with section num .
the contractor shall dispose of sediment at a location approved by the engineer in consultation with the county environmental officer and in compliance with the terms and conditions of the ems approval to proceed see section num sediment traps and sediment collection areas of ties epp .
the contractor shall remove the sediment trap after the area has stabilized and the trap is no longer needed for siltation control .
then the site should be levelled and revegetated .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy sediment traps num num num the engineer may require that some or all sediment traps be maintained after substantial completion of the work .
num measurement of payment measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of sediment traps constructed and maintained .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per sediment trap and this price shall be full compensation for the excavation embankment construction placement of filter fabric placement of riprap labour and incidentals necessary to build install maintain dispose of all surplus materials including sediments and level and revegetate the site to a condition acceptable to the engineer .
payment forrip rap required under this section shall be in accordance with section num random rip rap .
payment for geotechnical fabric required under this section shall be in accordance with section num geotechnical fabric .
maintenance and decommissioning is the responsibility of the contractor until the end of the warranty period .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy sodding num num num num description this section specifies the requirements for the supply transportation and placement of sod behind curbs as indicated on drawings or for the maintenance of sodded areas .
refer to section num sodding of ties environmental protection plan .
num source quality control obtain engineers approval of sod at the source of supply .
when the proposed source of sod is approved use no other source without written notification .
num delivery and storage schedule deliveries in order to keep storage at the work site to a minimum without causing delays .
deliver unload and store sod on pallets .
deliver sod to the site within num hours of being lifted and lay sod within num hours of being lifted .
do not deliver small irregular or broken pieces of sod .
during wet weather allow sod to dry sufficiently to prevent tearing during lifting and handling .
during dry weather protect sod from drying and water sod as necessary to ensure its vitality and prevent dropping of soil in handling .
dry sod will be rejected .
num scheduling schedule sod laying to coincide with the topsoil operations of section num andor num .
num material nursery sod shall provide sod with good cover of living or growing grass including grass that is seasonally dormant during the cold or dry seasons and that is capable of renewing growth after the dormant period .
cut sod from living thickly matted turf relatively free from weeds or other undesirable foreign plants stones or roots .
topsoil shall be in accordance with section num andor num .
fertilizer shall be num grade uniform in composition free flowing and suitable for application with approved equipment .
the fertilizer shall be supplied in unopened waterproof bags fully labelled .
fertilizer other than the standard for grades specified must be approved by the engineer and must not have less than the minimum requirements for the grades specified .
at least num of the fertilizers components are to be derived from organic sources .
lime shall be ground agricultural or dolomitic limestone containing not less than num total carbonates .
it shall be ground so that num will pass a nummesh screen and num will pass general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy sodding num num num a nummesh screen .
lime may be substituted for ground agricultural limestone at the discretion of the engineer .
water shall be potable .
num construction method num spreading topsoil do not spread topsoil until engineer has inspected subgrade .
apply num mm topsoil to areas to be sodded .
spread topsoil with adequate moisture in uniform layers during dry weather over approved dry unfrozen subgrade where sodding is indicated .
the topsoil shall be graded so that the finished grade for sodded areas matches the surrounding landscape .
remove stones roots grass weeds construction materials debris and foreign nonorganic objects from topsoil .
roll topsoil with num kg roller num mm wide to compact and retain surface .
num soil additives apply lime or other soil additives at a rate determined from the soil sample .
mix soil additives well into full depth of the topsoil by cultivating or rotortilling prior to the application of fertilizer .
num fertilizer apply fertilizer at least one week after lime application and at least six num days before sodding .
spread fertilizer with mechanical spreaders over entire area at manufacturers recommended rate of application .
mix fertilizer thoroughly into upper num mm of soil .
num laying of sod obtain approval of topsoil grade and depth before starting sodding .
lay sod during growing season .
sodding during dry summer period at freezing temperatures or over frozen soil is not acceptable .
lay sod in rows perpendicular to slope smooth and even with adjoining areas and with staggered joints .
butt sections closely without overlapping or leaving gaps between sections .
cut out irregular or thin sections with a sharp knife .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy sodding num num num provide close contact between sod and soil by means of light rolling .
heavy rolling to correct grade irregularities is not permitted .
water immediately after sod laying to obtain moisture penetration in top num mm of topsoil .
provide adequate protection of sodded areas against erosion and mechanical damage .
remove protection after lawn areas have been accepted .
num maintenance take care and maintain all sodded areas until final acceptance of the work .
water all sodded areas throughout the twelve num month maintenance period .
repair damaged areas to the approval of the engineer .
mow sodded areas an average of three num cuts per month during the entire growing season .
cut grass to height of num mm .
use equipment that is in good working order with sharp cutting blades .
remove grass clippings from sodded areas .
hand trim or use trimmer for grass adjacent to structures curbs trees fences or where necessary .
ensure clippings do not get on to hard surfaces .
apply weed killer in accordance with manufacturers instructions if broadleaf weeds start to develop .
num acceptance grassed areas will be accepted by the engineer at the end of the maintenance period provided that grassed areas are properly established turf is free of bare and dead spots and without weeds areas grassed in the fall will be accepted the following spring one num month after the start of the growing season provided the conditions specified are fulfilled .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of square metres of sod placed .
num basis of payment payment for sodding shall be at the unit bid price per square metre and this price shall be full compensation for the supply and placement of nursery sod soil additives watering maintenance and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy sodding num num num topsoil shall be paid according to section num andor num .
section num rescinded num section num rescinded num general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy maintenance and decommissioning of sediment control structures num num num num description this work shall consist of the maintenance and decommissioning of check dams silt fences sediment traps and straw bale barriers and the removal of sediment therefrom after substantial completion of the work .
the work requires prior approval by the engineer all work under this section will be considered as extra work .
refer to section num removal of nonpermanent erosion control devices of ties environmental protection plan .
num monitoring to ensure that erosion and sediment control measures are in effective working order their condition must be monitored prior to forecasts of storm events during a storm event and following a storm event .
num maintenance sediment that is accumulated by check dams and settlement traps shall be removed in a manner that avoids escape of silt to the downstream side of the structure so as to avoid damage to the control structure .
accumulated sediment shall be removed when it reaches a depth of onehalf the effective height of the control structure .
accumulated sediment shall be removed immediately prior to the removal of the control measures .
the sediment removed shall be disposed of as per the engineers instructions .
for all control structures accumulated sediment shall be removed as necessary to perform repairs .
maintenance of the sediment control structure shall comply with the appropriate section .
num decommissioning decommissioning of the sediment control structure shall comply with the appropriate section .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the time spent for the extra work as directed by the engineer .
num basis of payment payment for extra work will be full compensation for all labour equipment and materials required to do the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy straw bale barrier num num num num description this work shall consist of the installation and maintenance of straw bales or hay bales as directed by the engineer to control sedimentladen runoff and prevent sediments from leaving the construction site .
they shall be installed as perimeter containment for temporary material stockpiles as reinforcement for perimeter silt fencing or down gradient of disturbed areas where erosion occurs in the form of sheet or rill erosion .
num material and construction method all materials are to be supplied by the contractor .
the contractor shall place the bales on their sides and tightly together so that the twine is not in contact with the ground .
bales shall be secured by driving two sturdy wooden or steel stakes through each bale deep enough to anchor them securely .
the contractor shall drive the first stake in each bale toward the previously laid bale to force the bales together .
the contractor shall wedge loose straw between any cracks or other openings and scatter loose straw over the soil on the uphill side of the barrier .
subsequent movement of the loose straw tends to seal any undetected openings in the barrier .
straw bale barriers shall be installed as shown on figure num .
straw bale barriers shall be keyedin to a num mm deep trench at the engineers discretion .
num maintenance the contractor shall comply with the following procedure inspect regularly and after rainfalls of num mm or more accumulation and repair as required .
undercutting and end flow are a common problem .
clean out accumulated sediment regularly and before it reaches one half the height of the barrier .
dispose of sediment at an approved location in consultation with the county environmental officer and in compliance with the terms and conditions of the ems approval to proceed see section num silt fences on land of ties epp .
if weather forecasts indicate that a significant rainfall may occur it is recommended that barriers be checked and cleaned out prior to the rainfall as a preventative measure .
bales should be replaced if they become clogged with sediment .
remove structures after the area has stabilized level and seed areas disturbed during removal and inspect regularly and repair if as required until the area has stabilized .
the engineer may require that some or all straw bale barriers be maintained after substantial completion of the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy straw bale barrier num num num num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of straw bales that are installed and maintained as per this specification .
num basis of payment payment for straw bale barriers shall be at the unit bid price per straw bale and this price shall be full compensation for the supply and installation of the bale stakes and loose straw labour equipment tools and incidentals necessary to install maintain decommission the barrier including disposal of all surplus materials and accumulated sediments and site reinstatement to a condition acceptable to the engineer .
maintenance and decommissioning is the responsibility of the contractor until the end of the warranty period .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy compost num num num num description this item consists of the supply and application of approved compost material as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
this specification refers to standards specifications or publications noted below .
all reference standards shall be current issue or latest revision at the first date of tender advertisement .
c ccme guidelines for compost quality c adi international pei inc. compost from organicbased waste resources brochure num c iwmc compost from organicbased waste resources brochure num c canada fertilizers act and regulations num material the compost material shall be supplied by the contractor and shall be an organic substance produced from the aerobic decomposition of organic matter .
the compost material shall not contain any visible refuse material nor any material toxic to plant establishment or growth .
the composted material may be derived from but not limited to leaves yard trimmings food scraps food processing residues manure and other agricultural residues bark and other forest residues soiled or unrecycled paper and biosolids .
compost materials shall meet all applicable provincial and federal regulations and guidelines for compost production see above reference materials .
compost material shall meet the ccme guidelines for category a. compost material shall meet the physical requirements shown in table num or meet requirements designated by the engineer .
num submissions and design requirements prior to delivery of compost to the site the contractor shall provide the engineer with the following information c correspondence verifying that the compost meets ccme guidelines for category a compost c correspondence verifying that the compost material meets the physical requirements in table num .
the engineer may require the contractor to provide a sample of the compost for confirmatory purposes .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy compost num num num table num as received basis compost for manufactured topsoil erosion control compost general use compost organic matter content num dry mass organic matter content num num dry mass organic matter content num num dry mass moisture content num moisture content num moisture content num particle size num passing num mm sieve particle size num passing num mm and approx .
num passing num mm sieve particle size num passing num mm and approx .
num passing num mm sieve soluble salts num max .
dsm soluble salts num max .
dsm soluble salts num max .
dsm ph num num ph num num ph num num num construction method after the designated areas have been graded according to the lines and grades approved by the engineer compost of the specified type shall be placed according to the following descriptions .
compost materials shall be loose and friable and be free of dust at the time of application .
no compost materials shall be stored on site within num m of a watercourse .
num compost manufactured topsoil compost manufactured topsoil shall consist of soil material amended with num num compost by volume .
the soil material shall be free from trash branches and other objectionable materials and shall be approved by the engineer prior to beginning the mixing process .
blended onsite compost shall be evenly spread in a uniform layer over the previously prepared slope and thoroughly mixed to the depths shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
preblended topsoil manufactured offsite shall be spread over the prepared slope in a uniform layer to a depth of num num cm .
the topsoil shall be free of objectionable materials .
num erosion control compost compost materials shall be spread evenly over the prepared subgrade or slopes to form a uniform layer of a thickness of num num mm or as shown on the plans .
compost shall not be used for erosion control on slopes steeper than num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy compost num num num num general use compost general use compost shall be applied as a top dressing over established areas of turf grass or other ground cover to the depth specified on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num method of measurement measurement for compost shall be the area in square metres where compost manufactured topsoil both blended onsite and preblended erosion control compost general use compost has been acceptably applied and in place measured along the slope of the ground .
num basis of payment num compost manufactured topsoil num erosion control compost num general use compost payment at the contract unit price for the above tender items shall be full compensation for all labour equipment and material necessary to perform the work and shall include supply and transport .
where soil material used in the production of compost manufactured topsoil originates from offsite locations payment for the soil material shall be consistent with terms described in sections num and num .
slope preparation prior to use of compost materials and removal of objectionable materials will not be measured for payment but shall be considered as incidental to the bid items under which the excavation or embankment construction of such areas was carried out .
if hydroseeding is required payment for hydroseeding will be made as per section num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy gabions num num num num description this item consists of the supply and installation of gabion baskets fabricated from wire mesh and filled with rock .
refer to section num gabions of ties environmental protection plan .
num materials all materials shall be supplied by the contractor .
gabion baskets shall be fabricated of galvanized wire mesh .
fasteners to secure the baskets shall be supplied in a material compatible with the material type and properties of the basket .
rocks used in the construction of gabions shall be clean hard sound and durable with the least dimension of any rock equal to or greater than one and onehalf times the mesh size and shall not exceed num mm in greatest dimension .
rock used for basket fill material when tested by los angeles abrasion test method in accordance with astm cnum andor cnum shall have an abrasion loss not greater than num .
rocks shall be of a size that at least two layers of overlapping rock are required to fill the gabion .
geotextile shall be supplied in accordance section num type nnum .
gabion baskets shall conform to the following minimum standards factory fabricated so that the sides ends lid and internal diaphragms can be readily assembled at the work area into rectangular baskets of the sizes indicated in the contract documents .
when the length exceeds horizontal width diaphragms of the same mesh as the gabion basket walls shall be used to divide the basket into equal cells of a length not in excess of the horizontal width .
wire mesh shall be a uniform regular pattern with a maximum nominal opening size of num by num mm and fabricated to be nonravelling .
selvedge edges of the mesh shall be securely fastened together so that the joints which are formed are as strong as the body of the mesh .
hot dip galvanized wire shall have a minimum coverage of num gramssquare metre and shall conform to astm tests anum anum and anum .
wire shall be dimensioned as a minimum as indicated in table num the contractor shall supply free draining backfill behind the gabion structure .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy gabions num num num table num minimum twisted galvanized wire dimensions application diameter mesh num mm selvedges num mm binding num mm interlocking wire fasteners num mm num submittals the contractor shall submit in advance of the work a mill certificate for the gabion materials to be supplied .
the contractor shall submit upon request the manufacturers recommended procedures for installation and instructions for handling of the selected gabion .
the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing for approval of the source of supply of rock at least num days in advance of obtaining material from the source proposed .
submittals are required in accordance with any crossreferenced item forming part of this item .
num construction the contractor shall carry out the work as indicated in the contract documents andor as specifically directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall prepare the grades and slopes of the underlying material as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall place the gabions on a prepared compacted soil foundation grade and shall assemble the gabions according to the manufacturers instructions and recommendations .
the gabion baskets in any row shall be filled in stages to minimize void spaces and so that local deformations are avoided .
the upstream and downstream ends of a gabion basket shall be blended into the existing bank with the use of rock rip rap or vegetation .
the rock for the exposed rock faces of the gabion basket shall be hand placed to ensure proper alignment and a neat compact square appearance .
bulges in the gabions shall not exceed num mm at the most extreme point measured in any cell .
the geotextile shall be placed in accordance with section num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy gabions num num num num measurement for payment the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the volume in cubic metres of gabions supplied and installed in accordance with this item .
measurement additional backfill material and geotextile will be made in accordance with the respective specification section .
num basis of payment payment for work under this item shall be at the unit bid price for the number of cubic metres of gabions supplied and installed and shall be full compensation for all materials including rock work additional costs associated with backfill materials and incidentals necessary to complete the work unless specified otherwise in this section .
payment for free draining backfill additional backfill material and geotextile will be made in accordance with the respective specification section .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy gabions num num num figure num gabion details general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy safety num num traffic control persons num removal of flex beam guiderail num flex beam guiderail num pavement edge delineation num temporary marking num traffic control devices num vehicle configurations and restrictions num traffic control plan num installation of guiderail end treatment general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy traffic control persons num num num num description this work shall consist of the provision of traffic control persons to direct traffic safely through the work site or around detours .
num personnel the traffic control persons must meet the requirements of section num of the num temporary workplace traffic control manual and section num of the occupational health and safety act regulations .
num equipment the contractor shall ensure that all traffic control persons on the work site are clothed and equipped as specified in section num of the num temporary workplace traffic control manual and part num of the occupational health and safety act regulations .
all traffic control persons working on projects must be equipped with twoway radios of a quality acceptable to the engineer .
num methods the contractor shall ensure that the traffic control persons comply with section num of the num temporary workplace traffic control manual and part num of the occupational health and safety act regulations when directing traffic .
num requirements the contractor shall ensure that traffic control persons are at the work site and at the proper location to direct traffic as required by section num of the num temporary workplace traffic control manual and part num of the occupational health and safety act regulations .
traffic control persons shall ensure that a valid accreditation certificate is carried with them at all times while on the job site .
num method of measurement the quantity to be measured for payment under this section shall be the number of hours which traffic control persons actually control traffic .
num basis of payment payment for traffic control persons shall be at the unit price per hour set by the department and this shall be full compensation for labour equipment and incidentals to carry out the work .
no compensation shall be provided to the contractor for holiday pay or overtime expenses that may occur .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy removal of flex beam guiderail num num num num description this work shall consist of the removal of flex beam guiderail from a roadway .
num construction method the contractor shall remove existing guiderail from areas designated by the engineer .
this work shall include removal of bolts pulling of posts and filling post holes with approved material as directed by the engineer .
all material recovered in the dismantling operation including but not limited to posts blocks delineators and guiderail sections shall remain the property of the department .
the contractor shall stockpile all such materials in a manner and at a location approved by the engineer .
num method of measurement the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the number of linear metres of guiderail removed excluding overlapped guiderail .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per linear metre and this price shall be full compensation for dismantling the guiderail transporting materials to the stockpile stockpiling materials tools labour materials equipment and incidentals necessary to carry out the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy flex beam guiderail num num num num description this work shall consist of the supply and erection of a flex beam guiderail .
num material unless otherwise specified all materials shall be supplied by the contractor .
num posts and blocks all guiderail posts and posts shall be manufactured from a suitable hardwood species and conform with the requirements for no .
num structural posts and timber graded in accordance with the national lumber grading authority nlga standard grading rules for canadian lumber .
the dimensions of hardwood guiderail posts shall be nummm x nummm x num mm .
matching hardwood blocks shall be nummm x nummm x nummm .
all posts and blocks shall be treated with chromated copper arsenate cca in accordance with csanum .
penetration and retention of preservatives shall conform to the requirements of csa num table num .
structural steel posts and blocking shall conform to cancsagnumw steel and shall be hot dipped galvanized after fabrication in accordance with gnum num gmnum .
size and dimensions of steel posts shall be as shown on standard sketch num .
num beams all steel beams dimensions and crosssection shall be in accordance with figure num .
the rail shall be class a type num wbeam steel beams conforming to aashto mnum .
rails shall be punched for bolt holes in conformity with the aashto standard to the designated spacings as shown in figure num .
there shall be no onsite alteration or drilling of new holes .
properties of the base metal for the rails shall conform to the following requirements minimum yield point num mpa minimum tensile strength num mpa minimum elongation minimum num in num mm length the rails and terminal elements thickness shall be manufactured according to table num class a type num of aashto standard mnum with nominal base metal thickness of num mm num mm minimum .
num construction method the contractor shall erect guiderails at the locations and for the length directed by the engineer .
erection of guiderails shall be in accordance with figures num and num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy flex beam guiderail num num num the contractor shall thoroughly compact the bottom of the hole .
the guard rail posts shall rest directly and solidly on the bottom of the hole at the time of installation .
backfill shall be compacted in layers not exceeding num mm for the full depth of the excavation .
the contractor shall ensure the final elevation of fill matches the adjacent grade .
guard rail and guide posts shall be installed plumb and set according to alignment and grade as shown on the drawings or as directed by the engineer .
the rail elements shall be erected to produce a smooth continuous rail parallel to the line and grade of the highway surface as directed by the engineer .
all rail elements shall be lapped in the direction of traffic .
num method of measurement the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the number of linear metres of guiderail erected excluding overlapped guiderail .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per linear metre and this price shall be full compensation for supply of guiderail system materials erection of the guiderail tools labour equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy construction zone edge delineation num num num num description the work under this section consists of the supply erection maintenance and removal of delineators along the edge of the travelling surface within the construction zone .
num material construction zone edge delineation shall consist of signs having alternating black and high intensity reflective orange stripes of at least num mm in width .
the minimum size of the delineator sign shall be num mm wide by num mm high .
the delineator shall be in accordance with figure num .
num construction method construction zone edge delineation shall be supplied erected and maintained along all edges of the travelling surface within the construction zone .
delineators shall be placed as work progresses with no sections under construction left undelineated overnight .
delineators shall be maintained until immediately prior to placement of shoulder material when they shall be removed from the work site .
the delineators shall be erected num m from edge of pavement on the shoulder at a spacing of num m on highway sections or as specified by the engineer .
the delineator shall be erected so that the bottom of the delineator sign is between num mm and num mm above the top of the travelling surface .
num maintenance the delineators shall be maintained in proper position and must be clean and legible at all times .
maintenance shall include removal and reinstallation as required by the engineer .
damaged or faded delineators shall be repaired or replaced as soon as possible .
num method of measurement construction zone edge delineation shall be measured by the number of delineators erected and maintained .
the number may be recorded at any time between the erection and removal of the delineators .
those delineators erected but not maintained will not be recorded .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per construction zone edge delineator .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy temporary marking num num num num description temporary marking tape or temporary overlay markers toms shall be placed on all new asphaltic concrete base and seal courses all surface treatments all milled pavement surfaces and all tack coated asphaltic concrete base courses as work progresses with no new road surface left unmarked overnight .
num material temporary marking shall consist of reflective pavement marking tape or toms with adhesive backing .
the adhesive shall adhere the tape or tom to the roadway surface so that they are not removed displaced rolled or torn by traffic .
nails may be required to be used to ensure toms are not removed displaced rolled or torn by traffic .
temporary marking tape num mm in widthtoms num mm in width by num mm in height reflective on two sides and nails shall be supplied by the contractor .
num construction method yellow tape or toms are to be used to separate lanes of traffic in opposing directions .
white tape or toms reflective one side are to be used to separate lanes of traffic in the same direction .
the tape is to be placed in num mm lengths every num m and the toms are to be placed every num m or as specified by the engineer .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of linear metres of tape applied or the number of toms placed .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per linear metre for tape and at the unit bid price per unit for toms .
this price shall be full compensation for supply and application of temporary marking tools labour equipment and incidentals necessary to carry out the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy traffic control devices num num num num scope the requirement of this section is that the contractor have a supply of traffic control devices available on the work site before construction begins .
num material the contractors shall have the following traffic control devices on the work site before construction begins num traffic cones num plastic traffic posts num construction zone signs num construction ahead signs num work zone signs num construction ends signs in addition to the listed traffic control devices the contractor must have the following at all arterial highway work sites num traffic barrels num plastic traffic posts as work progresses the contractor must supply and maintain any additional traffic control devices as required by the engineer .
traffic barrels must be constructed of impact resistant flexible low density polyethylene .
minimum wall thickness shall be num mm .
the traffic barrel shall be num piece construction with a breakaway base that locks in place after ballast is placed in the barrel .
the height of the traffic barrel shall be not more than num m and not less than num mm .
the outside diameter of the barrel shall be num mm and the barrel shall be tapered to an outside top diameter of num mm .
the colour of the traffic barrel shall be safety orange and shall have num reflective alternating bands of orange and white high intensity sheeting .
at the request of the engineer the contractor shall clean or replace any deficient reflective striping .
the minimum width of each band of sheeting shall be num mm and shall be the same circumference of the traffic barrel .
num construction method the traffic control devices are to be placed on the work site as required in accordance with the traffic control procedures for road work of appendix num to indicate a safe roadway for traffic .
the above requirements do not alleviate the contractors responsibility of accommodating traffic in accordance with provision num .
num method of measurement there shall be no measurement for payment under this section .
num basis of payment the provision of all signs traffic cones and barrels are incidental to the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy vehicle configurations and restrictions num num num num scope this section specifies the vehicle configuration which may be used to haul various materials to the work site and the type of traffic control that must be in place for each highway project depending on traffic control i.e .
approved detours and traffic volumes i.e .
summer average daily traffic sadt .
num vehicle configurations on all highway projects truck single unit vehicle with end dump num or num axles no trailers .
truck with pup trailer tpt truck with num or num axle trailer connected to the truck by a drawbar .
tractor semitrailer tst num or num axle tractor with num or num axle enddump semitrailer connected through a numth wheel and kingpin .
tractor belly dump tbd num or num axle tractor with num or num axle belly dump semitrailer connected through a numth wheel and kingpin .
train num or num axle tractor with more than num trailer or semitrailer .
tractor with flowboy trailer tfb num or num axle tractor with num or num axle semitrailer connected through a numth wheel and a kingpin and the semitrailer is equipped with a conveyor in the floor to unload to the rear of the trailer .
tractor scissor dump tsd num or num axle tractor with num axle quarter frame end dump semi trailer connected through a numth wheel and kingpin .
num vehicle restrictions on highway projects with an approved detour num materials haul restrictions num .
only trucks and tractors with flowboy trailers will be permitted to haul asphaltic concrete and rap .
num .
only trucks trucks with pup trailers and tractors with flowboy trailers will be permitted to haul shoulder material .
num .
unless restricted in other sections of this policy trucks trucks with pup trailers tractor semitrailers tractor belly dumps and tractors with flowboy trailers will be permitted to haul bulk materials on the work site .
num .
trains will not be permitted to haul any materials .
num traffic restrictions num .
all vehicles may haul in any order .
num safety requirements num .
tractor semitrailers will not be permitted to dump on roads where the super elevation or crossslope is greater than num .
num .
tractor semitrailers will not be permitted to move ahead or in reverse with the dump body raised .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy vehicle configurations and restrictions num num num num contractor requirements num .
the contractor must provide sufficient equipment for spreading the material after dumping .
num .
the contractor must prepare a levelled area where tractor semitrailers are permitted to dump .
num vehicle restrictions on highway projects with sadt num num material haul restrictions num .
only trucks and tractors with flowboy trailers will be permitted to haul asphaltic concrete and rap .
num .
only trucks trucks with pup trailers and tractors with flowboy trailers will be permitted to haul shoulder material .
num .
unless restricted in other sections of this policy trucks trucks with pup trailers tractor semitrailers tractor belly dumps and tractors with flowboy trailers will be permitted to haul bulk materials on the work site .
num .
trains will not be permitted to haul any materials .
num traffic restrictions num .
all vehicles may haul in any order .
num .
on gravel and sandstone hauls all vehicles must turn in a designated turning area if one is provided by the contractor .
num safety requirements num .
any designated turning area must have safe stopping sight distance at the entrance and exit .
num .
tractor semitrailers will not be permitted to dump on roads where the super elevation or crossslope is greater than num .
num .
tractor semitrailers will not be permitted to move ahead or in reverse with the dump body raised .
num .
traffic must be stopped from the time the tractor semitrailer starts to raise the dump body until the empty dump body has been lowered to the level of the top of the tractor cab .
num .
signallers must control all areas where any vehicle is in the dumping queue .
this requirement includes entering waiting dumping and leaving the queue .
num .
no loaded vehicles will be permitted to turn on the travelled portion of the highway .
num .
the dumping sequence for trucks must comply with the num stages of figure num when the paving operation is proceeding toward the asphalt plant .
num .
the dumping sequence for tractor semitrailers must comply with the num stages of figure num .
num contractor requirements num .
the contractor must provide sufficient equipment for spreading the material after dumping .
num .
the contractor must prepare a level plane where tractor semitrailers are permitted to dump .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy vehicle configurations and restrictions num num num num .
the contractor must provide num additional signallers num located at each end of the tractor semitrailer at sites where tractor semitrailers are permitted .
num vehicle restrictions on highway projects with sadt num but num num material haul restrictions num .
only trucks and tractors with flowboy trailers will be permitted to haul asphaltic concrete and rap .
num .
only trucks trucks with pup trailers and tractors with flowboy trailers will be permitted to haul shoulder material .
num .
unless restricted in other sections of this policy trucks trucks with pup trailers tractor semitrailers tractor belly dumps and tractors with flowboy trailers will be permitted to haul bulk materials on the work site .
num .
trains will not be permitted to haul any materials .
num traffic restrictions num .
on gravel and sandstone hauls all vehicles must turn in a designated turning area if one is provided by the contractor .
num .
tractor semitrailers may only haul on the ratio of num tractor semitrailer to num other haul vehicles .
num safety requirements num .
any designated turning area must have safe stopping sight distance at the entrance and exit .
num .
tractor semitrailers will not be permitted to dump on roads where the super elevation or crossslope is greater than num .
num .
tractor semitrailers will not be permitted to move ahead or in reverse with the dump body raised .
num .
traffic must be stopped from the time the tractor semitrailer starts to raise the dump body until the empty dump body has been lowered to the level of the top of the tractor cab .
num .
signallers must control all areas where any vehicle is in the dumping queue .
this requirement includes entering waiting dumping and leaving the queue .
num .
no loaded vehicles will be permitted to turn on the travelled portion of the highway .
num .
the dumping sequence for trucks must comply with the num stages of figure num when the paving operation is proceeding toward the asphalt plant .
num .
the dumping sequence for tractor semitrailers must comply with the num stages of figure num .
num contractor requirements num .
the contractor must provide sufficient equipment for spreading the material after dumping .
num .
the contractor must prepare a levelled area where tractor semitrailers are permitted to dump .
num .
the contractor must provide num additional signallers num located at each end of the tractor semitrailer at sites where tractor semitrailers are permitted .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy vehicle configurations and restrictions num num num num truckers association requirements the prince edward island truckers association is responsible for enforcing the ratio of num tractor semitrailers to num other haul vehicles prior to loading and weighing .
this ratio is to be enforced prior to leaving the loading area .
num vehicle restrictions on highway projects with sadt num num material haul restrictions num .
only trucks and tractors with flowboy trailers will be permitted to haul asphaltic concrete and rap .
num .
only trucks trucks with pup trailers and tractors with flowboy trailers will be permitted to haul shoulder material .
num .
unless restricted in other sections of this policy trucks trucks with pup trailers tractor belly dumps and tractors with flowboy trailers will be permitted to haul bulk materials on the work site .
num .
tractor semitrailers and trains will not be permitted to haul any materials .
num traffic restrictions num .
on gravel and sandstone hauls all vehicles must turn in a designated turning area if one is provided by the contractor .
num safety requirements num .
any designated turning area must have safe stopping sight distance at the entrance and exit .
num .
signallers must control all areas where any vehicle is in the dumping queue .
this requirement includes entering waiting dumping and leaving the dumping queue .
num .
no loaded vehicles will be permitted to turn on the travelled portion of the highway .
num .
the dumping sequence for trucks must comply with the num stages of figure num when the paving operation is proceeding toward the asphalt plant .
num method of measurement there shall be no measurement for payment under this section .
num basis of payment compliance with this section shall be incidental to the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy traffic control plan num num num num description this work shall consist of the preparation implementation maintenance and supervision associated with a traffic control plan .
num preparation the contractor shall provide the engineer with a traffic control plan tcp at least five working days prior to the commencement of construction .
the tcp will describe the temporary traffic controls to be used on the site at all times during the various phases of construction .
the tcp will pay special attention to areas with more than num lanes intersections detours accommodating pedestrians in urban areas and any other areas requested by the engineer .
the tcp shall be implemented and monitored by the contractor in accordance with the fundamental principles outlined in section num of the num temporary workplace traffic control manual .
the contractor shall ensure that the necessary standard of care is followed and documented as outlined in section num of the num temporary workplace traffic control manual is met .
num traffic control manager the contractor shall have a traffic control manager tcm whose sole responsibility is to control traffic on the site at all times when work is underway .
the contractor will designate the traffic control manager to the engineer at least five working days prior to commencement of the work and provide a proof of certification showing that the person is accredited .
the traffic control manager shall be trained in work zone traffic control and shall be responsible for the supervision of all signallers compliance with the tcp and the condition placement relocation and removal of all traffic control devices .
the traffic control manager shall maintain daily records of the number location and condition of all traffic control devices on the site .
copies of the daily records shall be provided to the department .
the tcm shall be available on site as required by the engineer to address any traffic control issues as they arise .
num revisions revisions to the tcp may be made with the engineers approval .
revisions must be requested at least num working days prior to implementation .
num equipment traffic control devices used in the tcp must comply with those in appendix num or receive approval from the engineer at least num working days prior to implementation .
num method of measurement measurement for this section will be based on the provision of a traffic control plan and a traffic control manager providing active traffic control on the site .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit price per hour set by the department and this price shall be full compensation for the following general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy traffic control plan num num num providing a written traffic control plan with drawings covering the placement of signs signallers detours and all other traffic control devices associated with the work site providing any revisions to the traffic control plan and drawings providing a traffic control manager whose sole responsibility is to control traffic on the site at all times when work is underway who supervises the signallers installs maintains and removes all traffic control devices and maintains daily records of the traffic control devices and signallers on the site .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy installation of guiderail end treatment num num num num description this work shall consist of the installation of guiderail end treatment at the end of a section of installed guiderail .
num material eagrts shall meet the requirements of national cooperative highway research programnchrp report num test level num .
only proprietary eagrts will be acceptable including those made by the following energy absorption systems inc. chicago illinois .
road system inc. big spring texas .
trinity industries inc. dallas texas .
posts shall be a steel breakaway type designed for the eagrt to be supplied on the contract .
a yellow and black hazard marker minimum num mm x num mm and made from numm hiintensity reflective sheeting or equivalent shall be supplied with each eagrt num requirements the contractor shall submit at least num days in advance of the work the type of eagrt system proposed for the work the name of the manufacturer and at least three copies of shop drawings stamped by a professional engineer clearly showing in detail the components and installation of the system .
prior to delivery of the eagrt systems to the work site the contractor shall submit written certification that the eagrt has been designed to meet the requirements of nchrp report num test level num have been fabricated of materials consistent with the design and will function as designed .
num construction method the contractor shall carry out the work as indicated in the approved shop drawings or as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall be prepared to arrange for a technical representative of the suppliermanufacturer of the eagrt to be on site for the initial installation on the contract to ensure that correct construction procedures are established .
the impact end of each eagrt may be offset up to num mm away from the line of the guide rail installation if the line is not on a horizontal curve as determined by the general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy installation of guiderail end treatment num num num engineer .
the impact head of each eagrt shall be cleaned thoroughly as recommended by the manufacturer of the reflective sheeting hazard marker .
installation of any eagrt system shall be performed within num days of the guide rail installation to which it will be attached .
num method of measurement the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the number of guiderail end treatments installed .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price for guiderail end treatment supply and installation and this price shall be full compensation for the supply and installation of guiderail end treatment tools labour equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy electrical num num electrical general provisions num telephone ductbank num basic materials num traffic signals general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy electrical general provisions num num num num scope this section details the requirements for traffic signal systems and ductwork as shown on the drawings or as specified .
num codes and standards installation must be in accordance with csa num except where otherwise specified .
must comply with the csa electrical bulletins in force at time of tender submission while not identified and specified by number in this division the bulletins are to be considered as part of the related csa part ii standard .
abbreviations for electrical terms to csa znum .
num permits and fees submit to the electrical inspection division of the department of communities land and environment the necessary number of drawings and specifications for examination and approval prior to commencement of work .
must pay associated fees .
engineer will provide drawings at no cost .
num care operation and startup instruct operating personnel in the operation care and maintenance of equipment .
arrange and pay for the services of the manufacturers factory service engineer to supervise startup of the installation and to check adjust balance and calibrate the components .
provide services for such period and for as many visits as necessary to put equipment in operation and to ensure that operating personnel are conversant with all aspects of the equipments care and operation .
num voltage ratings operating voltages to csa cnum .
motors electric heating control and distribution devices and equipment to operate satisfactorily at num hz within normal operating limits established by csa cnum equipment to operate in extreme operating conditions as established in above standard without damage .
num inspection furnish a certificate of acceptance from the chief electrical inspector of the province of prince edward island .
num materials and equipment equipment and material to be csa certified and manufactured to standard quoted .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy electrical general provisions num num num num finishes shop finish metal enclosure surfaces by removing rust and scale cleaning applying rust resistant primer inside and outside and by applying a minimum of num coats of finish enamel .
clean and touch up surfaces of shoppainted equipment scratched or marred during shipment or installation to match original paint .
clean prime and paint exposed hangers racks and fastenings to prevent rusting .
num wiring identification identify wiring with permanent identifying numbers on both ends of phase conductors of feeders and branch circuit wiring .
maintain phase sequence and colour coding throughout .
colour code wiring to csa cnum .
ensure that colour coded wires in traffic control cable are matched throughout the system .
provide colour coding of the traffic signal wiring system as indicated on the contract drawings .
num wiring terminations lugs terminals and screws used for termination of wiring must be suitable for either copper or aluminum conductors .
num manufacturers and csa labels manufacturers nameplates and csa labels are to be visible and legible after equipment is installed .
num warning signs provide warning signs as specified or to meet requirements of the chief electrical inspector of the province of prince edward island .
use decal signs that are a minimum of num x num mm in size .
num protection protect exposed live equipment during construction for personnel safety .
shield and mark all live parts i.e .
live num volts with appropriate voltage .
num conduit and cable installation install conduit and sleeves prior to the pouring of concrete .
install cables conduits and fittings that are to be embedded or plastered over neatly and close to the structure so that furring is minimized .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy electrical general provisions num num num num tests conduct and pay for all tests for control signal and traffic systems installed under this contract .
carry out tests in the presence of the engineer .
provide instruments meters equipment and personnel required to conduct tests during and at conclusion of project .
submit test results .
furnish manufacturers certificate or letter confirming that entire installation as it pertains to each system has been installed to manufacturers instructions .
num insulation resistance testing megger circuits feeders and equipment up to num v with a num v instrument .
check resistance to ground before energizing .
num coordination of protective devices ensure that circuit protective devices such as over current trips relays and fuses are installed to values and settings as specified .
num cleaning do cleaning in accordance with provision num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy telephone ductbank num num num num description work in this section includes supply and installation of the concrete encased telephone ductbank as indicated on the drawings and as specified .
num material pvc duct type ebii .
marker tape yellow plastic that is suitable for direct burial .
pulling rope num mm diameter nylon in each duct .
concrete to be in accordance with section num .
num construction method install underground ductbanks as indicated .
install ducts founded on undisturbed soil or on well compacted bedding material in accordance with section num .
make transitions offsets and changes in direction using num bend sections .
install marker tape and backfill with materials indicated on the drawings .
the contractor must prove that all ducts are clear of obstructions before the engineer will accept the work .
this will be accomplished by blowing a flight through each duct and pulling an approved plug or mandrel through each duct or by a similar approved process .
each duct will be strung using nylon pulling ropes .
ducts are to be supported at num m intervals using interlocking type spacers with vertical and horizontal interlocks .
base and intermediate spacers are to be used and assembled according to manufacturers instructions .
ducts are to be joined using solvent weld couplings or suitable waterproof couplings .
ensure these junctions are smooth and free of any sharp protrusions which could damage cables being pulled into the ducts .
stagger coupling of conduits to bell ends both vertically and horizontally a minimum of num mm .
num inspection do not backfill until the engineer has inspected the work .
num method of measurement the quantity to be measured under this section shall be the number of linear metres of ductbank measured horizontally along the centreline for each type of ductbank constructed terminating at the vertical faces of the structures .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy telephone ductbank num num num num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per linear metre and this price shall be full compensation for constructing ductbanks trench excavation and backfilling disposal of surplus materials supply and placement of ducts spacers jointing concrete formwork bedding marker tape and incidentals necessary to complete the work and testing .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy basic materials num num num num scope this section details basic materials .
it should be noted that drawings do not show all conduit and cable locations those shown are in schematic form only .
num material copper conductors to csa cnum no .
numm .
moulded case circuit breakers to csa cnum no .
numm .
grounding equipment to csa cnum no .
numm .
num conductors copper conductors for power supply and beacon light wiring size as indicated with num v or num v insulation of chemically crosslinked thermosetting polyethylene material rated rwnum .
traffic control cables num conductor num awg soft drawn num strand copper with pvc insulation type tw minus num c rated num v type imsa num or equal .
detector leadin cable num conductor twisted and shielded size num pvc jacketed belden num num v or approved equal .
detector loops imsa num cable within a pvc jacket installed as detailed on the drawings .
num connectors pressure type wire connectors with current carrying parts of copper alloy sized to fit copper conductors as required .
bushing stud connectors to eemac numynum to consist of connector body and stud clamp for stranded copper conductors .
stud clamp bolts .
sized for conductors as indicated .
num conduits rigid pvc conduit to csa cnum no .
num size as indicated on the drawings .
num conduit fastenings one hole malleable iron straps to secure surface conduits num mm and smaller .
two hole steel straps for conduits larger than num mm .
num conduit fittings fittings manufactured for use with conduit specified .
factory ells where num bends are required for num mm and larger conduits .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy basic materials num num num num expansion fittings for rigid conduit watertight expansion fittings suitable for linear expansion and num mm deflection in all directions .
locate expansion fittings where indicated on the drawings .
num fittings general bushing and connectors with nylon insulated throats .
knockout fillers to prevent entry of foreign materials .
conduit outlet bodies for conduit up to num mm and pull boxes for larger conduits .
num service fittings service entrance fitting made of num piece pvc size as indicated on drawings .
num grounding equipment provide insulated ground conductor complete with connectors as indicated between ground lugs of controller equipment and ground rods as indicated .
protect conductor with conduit as indicated .
num traffic loop sealants medium hard asphaltic base compound that requires heating for installation .
acceptable product novoid c or approved equivalent .
num disconnect switch and meter base provide a num pole num a disconnect switch in eemac numx stainless steel enclosure .
provide num a fuses of type recommended by controller manufacturer .
provide utility meter base as required by maritime electric .
num method of construction num installation of cables and cable supports do not use wire lashing or perforated straps to support or secure raceways or cables .
do not use supports or equipment installed for other trades for conduit or cable support except with permission of the other trade and the approval of the engineer .
install fastenings and supports as required for each type of equipment cables and conduits and in accordance with manufacturers installation recommendations .
conductors are shown on drawings or in cable tables in approximate locations .
confirm locations of cable runs with engineer before installation .
num installation of wire and cable connectors remove insulation carefully from ends of conductors and general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy basic materials num num num install mechanical pressure type connectors and tighten screws with appropriate tool recommended by manufacturer .
installation shall meet secureness tests in accordance with csa cnum no .
numm .
install crimp type connectors to manufacturers recommendations .
num installation of conduit install conduits to cause minimum interference in spaces through which they pass .
replace conduit if kinked or flattened more than numth of its original diameter .
install nylon fish cord in empty conduits .
where conduits become blocked remove and replace blocked section .
dry conduits out before installing wire .
num surface conduits run parallel or perpendicular to structure lines .
num conduit poured in concrete encase conduits completely in concrete as detailed on the drawings .
num installation of ground install complete permanent continuous system in conduit to equipment and provide electrodes conductors connectors accessories as indicated on the drawings to conform to requirements of the engineer and the local authority having jurisdiction over installation .
install connectors to manufacturers instructions .
protect exposed grounding conductors from mechanical injury .
make buried connections electrodes using copper welding by thermite process .
use mechanical connectors for grounding connections to equipment provided with lugs .
soldered joints are not permitted .
install bonding wire for flexible conduit connected at both ends to grounding bushing solderless lug clamp or cup washer and screw .
neatly cleat bonding wire to exterior of flexible conduit .
bond single conductor metallic armoured cables to cabinet at supply end and provide non metallic entry plate at load end .
install grounding connections to service equipment .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy basic materials num num num num tests of grounding system perform grounding tests as required by the electrical inspection division of the department of communities land and environment .
num traffic loop sealant prepare joint surfaces mix compounds and place sealant in accordance with manufacturers instructions .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy traffic signals num num num num description provide all labour tools equipment and materials necessary to complete the traffic control system .
install the following equipment supplied by the department traffic signals heads and lenses poles brackets and trusses traffic controller and flasher unit mounting hardware precast concrete pole bases available for pickup at the storage yard located on riverside drive north of queen elizabeth hospital or as directed by engineer .
supply and installation of the following concrete base for signal controller conduits and junction boxes vehicle detector loops system wiring including traffic signal cable twisted and shielded leadin cable detector loop cable beacon signal and power service wiring including fused disconnect switch num existing underground utilities the intersection may contain underground telephone street lighting storm and sanitary sewer and water utilities .
the location of these utilities as indicated on the drawings shall be approximate only .
num power supply known utility pole locations are shown on the drawings .
the contractor shall coordinate the installation of traffic signal power supply with maritime electric .
num material concrete and reinforcement shall be in accordance with section num .
concrete mix for controller base and junction boxes to produce num mpa minimum compressive strength at num days .
granular base material shall be in accordance with section num .
anchor bolts shall be in accordance with section num .
conduit as shall be in accordance with provision num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy traffic signals num num num num construction method num excavation and backfill the contractor shall excavate and backfill in accordance with section num .
num bedding material the contractor shall comply with the following procedure place bedding material beneath signal bases and controller foundation to details indicated or as directed .
shape bed true to grade to provide a uniform horizontal bearing surface for base structures .
bedding material in accordance with section num shall be placed in num mm layers and compact num standard proctor density in accordance with section num .
num concrete the contractor shall comply with the following procedure do concrete work in accordance with section num .
form vertical surfaces to full height using forming material that will not deform under loading by plastic concrete .
accurately place reinforcing steel and anchor bolts in positions indicated and hold firmly during placing compacting and setting of concrete .
finish exposed surfaces to a smooth uniform finish free of open texture and exposed aggregate .
install precast concrete bases supplied by the department where shown on the drawings .
provide backfill in accordance with the respective specifications .
the grade on the top of the concrete base for poles shall be a minimum of num mm and a maximum of num mm above the top of the adjacent curb or if no curb exists above the finished grade of the surrounding material .
the grade on the top of the concrete base for controller cabinet shall be as shown on the drawings .
num installation of poles the contractor shall comply with the following procedure prior to erection of the poles clean the under surfaces of all base plates and treat with a non staining sealant .
install poles with handhold facing away from the roadway .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy traffic signals num num num field drill apertures for installation of signal wiring from truss bracket .
deburr edges of holes and install rubber grommets .
secure poles in a vertical position .
tighten all nuts to a ½ turn beyond snug tight condition ensuring that all parts of the joint are brought into full contact with each other and that all bolts are in tension .
grout the space between the underside of the pole base and the top of the concrete base with approved nonmetallic nonshrink grout .
num installation of signal brackets the contractor shall comply with the following procedure install truss side post and post top brackets in the positions shown on the drawings .
attach the brackets to the metal poles in the manner recommended by the manufacturer .
slipfit signal hangers onto the tenons of the truss brackets and secure in position .
num installation of signal heads the contractor shall comply with the following procedure orient signal heads as shown on the drawings .
secure signal heads in a horizontal or vertical alignment to the satisfaction of the engineer .
install signal lenses in signal head assembly .
num installation of conduit the contractor shall install conduit in the locations and to the details shown on the drawings .
num installation of detector loops the contractor shall comply with the following procedure install loop wire continuous from curbside junction box around loop and back to junction box .
splices are not permitted .
twist wires from loop to junction box .
use num turns per metre with equal lay on each wire .
splice loop leads to detector leadin cable using scotchcast num numm splice kit or equivalent as approved by the engineer .
centre detector loop in the traffic lane to the dimensions shown on the drawings .
install detector loops in a slot formed in the pavement to the details indicated on the drawings .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy traffic signals num num num to complete the loop connection extend one of the slots toward the curb .
twist the loop conductors where they enter the undercurb conduit sleeve and extend to the designated junction box as detailed on the drawings .
clean slots of loose material and moisture to the approval of the engineer .
exercise extreme care during installation to ensure that the loop turns are wound in num direction .
stack individual loop turns directly one above another .
prevent individual wires from twisting on themselves .
install loops to following procedure apply num mm layer sealant to bottom of slot .
temperature control sealant to prevent burning of the wire insulation .
after sealant has set sufficiently lay the first turn in the slot .
install wire slack to allow contraction .
apply additional sealant to fill slots on either side of the loop .
do not cover top of wire .
repeat preceding steps until all turns have been installed and sealant is applied to its final levels num mm above finished road grade .
twist loop leads about one another num twists per metre .
group and twist individual loop feeder pairs and extend through conduit sleeves under curb to junction box as indicated on the drawing .
ensure conduit sleeve is packed with sealant before asphalt is laid .
connect each set of lane loops in series to the numc twistedshielded leadin cable .
route copper leadin cable via underground conduit to the traffic signal controller cabinet and connect to the detector harness as directed by the controller manufacturer .
check the continuity resistance to ground and insulation leakage at num v. perform this check in the presence of the engineer .
num installation of traffic signal controller cabinet the contractor shall comply with the following procedure secure controller cabinet to the concrete base by use of chuckend type anchors complete with stainless steel machine bolts and lock washers .
the number and location of bolts to be as per the cabinet manufacturers instructions .
assemble and secure control equipment components within the cabinet .
install beacon flasher unit on cabinet as indicated .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy traffic signals num num num bring traffic signal and detector leadin cables and power supply and ground wire conductors into the cabinet and make connections as shown on the drawings and in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
all wiring and connections shall be in accordance with sections num and num .
num installation of power supply the contractor shall comply with the following procedure install conduit risers on power supply pole as shown on the drawings .
install supply conductors in the conduits in a continuous run between the service entrance fitting and the controller .
provide a minimum of num m of supply conductors coiled at the service entrance for final connection to the overhead supply by maritime electric .
all wiring to be in accordance with sections num and num .
num installation of traffic signal control equipment the contractor shall comply with the following procedure install controller only after all signal system and power feed wiring has been completed .
the signal system shall be energized and placed in the operating mode immediately after installation .
the control equipment is to be tested by operating the system for at least num hour in the presence of the engineer prior to setting the system on all flash operation .
num testing and commissioning the contractor shall comply with the following procedure test the continuity resistance to ground and insulation leakage of the detector loop .
ensure that all signal heads are securely covered during periods when the signal system is not in operation .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be a unit measurement based on the completion of the traffic control system specified .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price as a lump sum and this price shall be full compensation for the following general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy traffic signals num num num excavation and backfill disposal of surplus material supply placement and compaction of bedding material concrete reinforcing grout and anchor bolts .
the acceptance transportation and installation items supplied by the department including traffic signal poles bases and signal heads complete with truss brackets spring cushion hangers appurtenances and wiring and the signal controller and flasher unit installed on the concrete base constructed by the contractor including ducts bolts wiring cabinet all connections and system testing .
the supply and installation of junction boxes complete with conduit stubs ground rods frames and covers ducts including timber planks signal wiring and connections detector loops including saw cutting asphalt sealant connection of loop wiring to lead wires in junction box and power supply including conduit main disconnect utility metre base miscellaneous appurtenances conductors and connection to utility .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy concrete num num castinplace concrete num curb and gutter num concrete sidewalk and flatwork num precast concrete span general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy castinplace concrete num num num num description this section specifies requirements for constructing supplying transporting and placing cast inplace concrete .
num reference standards castinplace concrete work shall be in accordance with cannumanumm and testing shall be in accordance with cananumm except where otherwise specified .
num samples the contractor shall inform the engineer of proposed source of aggregates in advance of the work and shall provide access for sampling as requested .
num certificates the contractor shall provide the following certification to the engineer prior to starting concrete work submit the manufacturers test date and the certification by qualified independent inspection and testing laboratory that the materials will meet specified requirements .
provide certification that plant equipment and materials to be used in the castinplace concrete work comply with requirements of cannumanumm .
provide certification that mix proportions selected will produce concrete of specified quality and yield and that the strength will comply with cannumanumm .
num quality control the contractor shall submit proposed quality control procedures for the engineers approval .
num material the contractor shall supply and use only materials meeting the following standards formwork lumber plywood and wood formwork materials conforming to cannumanumm .
form release agent chemically active release agents containing compounds that react with free lime present in concrete to provide water insoluble soaps to prevent a film from setting on the forms .
reinforcement shall be billet steel conforming to csa gnum grade num unless otherwise specified .
chairs bolsters bar supports and spacers shall be of adequate strength to support reinforcing construction conditions .
portland cement to cannumanum type general use gu except highearly strength cement if permitted shall be type num .
water to cannumanum .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy castinplace concrete num num num aggregates to cannumanum.m course aggregates to be normal density .
air entraining admixture to cannumanumm .
chemical admixtures to cannumanumm .
owner to approve accelerating or set retarding admixtures during cold and hot weather placing .
supplementary cementing materials and their use to cannumanumm .
nonshrink grout premixed compound consisting of nonmetallic aggregate portland cement water reducing and plasticizing agents of pouring consistency capable of developing compressive strength of num mpa at num days .
curing compound to cannumanumm white .
bolts and anchor bolts to astm anum .
premoulded joint filler bituminous impregnated fibreboard to astm dnum .
granular base as specified in section num .
bedding material as specified in section num .
num reinforcing fabrication the contractor shall comply with the following procedure fabricate reinforcing to cannumanumm .
obtain engineers approval for locations of reinforcement splices .
fabricate reinforcing steel within the following tolerances sheared length plus or minus num mm .
ship bundles of reinforcement bar clearly identified in accordance with bar lists .
num concrete mixes the contractor shall comply with the following procedure proportion normal density concrete in accordance with cannumanum alternative num for all concrete except for a suspended slab at a manhole chamber or a bridge deck to give the following properties use type general use gu cement .
minimum compressive strength at num days num mpa .
minimum cement content to cannumanumm .
class of exposure cnum .
nominal size of coarse aggregate num mm .
slump at time and point of discharge num mm num mm .
air content num to num .
maximum watercement ratio num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy castinplace concrete num num num chemical admixtures to cannumanumm .
proportion normal density concrete in accordance with cannumanum alternative num to give following properties for a suspended slab at a manhole chamber or a bridge deck use type general use blended gub cement .
minimum compressive strength at num days num mpa .
minimum cement content to cannumanumm .
class of exposure cnum .
nominal size of coarse aggregate num mm .
slump at time and point of discharge num mm num mm .
air content num to num .
maximum watercement ratio num .
chemical admixtures to cannumanumm .
do not change concrete mix without prior approval of the engineer .
should a change in material source be proposed a new mix design shall be provided for approval by the engineer .
num workmanship the contractor shall comply with the following procedure obtain engineers approval and provide num hours notice prior to concrete placement .
pumping of concrete is permitted only after approval of equipment and mix .
ensure reinforcement and inserts are not disturbed during concrete placement .
maintain accurate records of poured concrete items to indicate date location of pour quality air temperature and test samples taken .
protect and cure concrete in extreme weather in accordance with cannumanumm .
prior to concrete placement in adverse weather conditions obtain engineers approval of proposed method for protection of concrete during placing and curing .
do not place concrete on frozen ground .
in locations where new concrete is dowelled to existing work drill holes in existing concrete .
place dowels of deformed steel reinforcing bars as shown on the drawings and pack solidly with nonshrink grout to positively position and anchor dowels .
do not place load on new concrete until authorized by engineer .
control joints are to be a minimum of ¼ and a maximum of a of the section thickness .
saw cutting may be allowed if done as soon as concrete has set sufficiently to resist ravelling and before shrinkage cracks appear .
fill control joints with backer rods and sealant in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy castinplace concrete num num num install isolation joint filler around manholes and catch basins and along the length adjacent to concrete curbs catch basins or permanent structures .
horizontal and vertical alignment of the forms shall be within num mm of the design location .
num erecting forms the contractor shall comply with the following procedure verify lines and levels before proceeding with formwork and ensure that the dimensions agree with the drawings .
construct forms to produce finished concrete conforming to the shape dimensions locations and levels indicated within tolerances required by cannumanumm .
align form joints and make them watertight .
keep form joints to a minimum .
leave formwork in place for a minimum of num days after placement during cold weather num ºc or num days during normal weather numº c. adequately shore and brace members subjected to additional loads during construction .
assume full responsibility for any damage to the structure due to premature removal of forms .
num placing reinforcement the placement and positioning of reinforcing steel shall conform with cannumanum .
all reinforcing shall be clean free from mill scale oil grease or other matter before and after erection and shall be kept in a condition approved by the engineer .
all reinforcing steel shall be secured rigidly in position by annealed iron wire or suitable clips at intersections and well supported on reinforcing chairs .
the contractor shall ensure that the positions of the bars do not alter during concrete placement and that the cover as shown on the contract drawings is maintained at all times .
the contractor shall obtain the engineers approval of reinforcing steel quantities and placement before placing concrete .
num inserts the contractor shall comply with the following procedure set anchor bolts to templates under supervision of the appropriate trade prior to placing concrete .
with engineers approval grout anchor bolts in preformed holes or holes drilled after concrete has set .
formed holes are to be at least num mm in diameter .
drilled holes are to be a minimum of num mm larger in diameter than the bolts to be used .
protect anchor bolt holes from water accumulations .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy castinplace concrete num num num set bolts and fill holes with nonshrink grout .
set inserts and openings as indicated .
openings greater than num x num mm not indicated on the drawings must be approved by engineer .
do not eliminate or displace reinforcement to accommodate hardware .
if inserts can not be located as specified obtain engineers approval for modifications before placing concrete .
num finishing the contractor shall comply with the following procedure finish concrete in accordance with cannumanumm .
finish exposed surfaces to a smooth uniform finish free of open texture and exposed aggregate .
do not work more mortar to surface than required .
do not use neat cement as a dryer to facilitate finishing .
trowel smooth the top surfaces of concrete foundations and bases .
round edges including edges of joints with a num mm radius edging tool .
finish surfaces to within num mm in num m from lines level or grade as measured with a straight edge placed on surface .
apply curing compound to finished surfaces at a rate recommended by manufacturer .
finish the perimeter of all slabs with an edger .
num defective work concrete shall be deemed defective when it contains excessive honeycombing embedded debris or when the numday strength in any defined area is less than num of the specified strength .
num method of measurement there shall be no measurement for payment under this section .
num basis of payment no payment shall apply to this section .
castinplace concrete shall be supplied and paid for according to the various specifications for curb and gutter sidewalkflatwork or other bid items as specified .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy curb and gutter num num num num description this section specifies requirements for constructing concrete curb and curb and gutter on granular base to lines grades dimensions and typical crosssections indicated or directed .
num materials the contractor shall supply and use only materials meeting the following standards castinplace concrete and reinforcing shall be in accordance with section num .
concrete mix for castinplace concrete shall be designed to produce num mpa minimum compressive strength at num days and containing num mm maximum size coarse aggregate .
water cement ratio by weight shall not exceed num .
the concrete shall have an air content of num to num .
class of exposure cnum .
isolation joint filler to astm dnum num mm preformed notextruding resilient bituminous type .
curing compound to astm cnum ritecure as manufactured by sternsons or mbnum as manufactured by master builders .
chemical grout epoxy acrylate resin .
acceptable product hilti cnum .
granular base under curb and gutter granular class a as specified in section num .
num construction methods the contractor shall comply with the following procedure construction of curb or curb and gutter shall be in accordance with figures num num num and num .
do not place concrete until finished granular base is inspected and approved .
place granular base material to lines widths and depths indicated .
compact granular base to a minimum num standard proctor density .
concrete for curbs and curb and gutter to be shaped by forms of either wood or metal construction or by use of a slip form paver .
extruding equipment and mule configuration to be approved before construction begins .
form vertical surfaces to full depth using forming material that will not deform under loading by plastic concrete .
securely position forms to required lines and grades .
horizontal and vertical alignment of the forms prior to placing concrete shall not vary more than num mm from the correct alignment and grade .
coat forms with approved form release agent .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy curb and gutter num num num obtain acceptance of forms before placing concrete .
do concrete and reinforcing work in accordance with section num and as specified herein .
finish exposed surfaces to a smooth uniform finish free of open texturing and exposed aggregate .
do not work more mortar to surface than required .
do not use neat cement as a drier to facilitate finishing .
round edges including edges of joints with num mm radius edging tool .
finish surfaces to within num mm in num metres from line level or grade as measured with a straight edge placed on surface .
apply curing compound to finished surfaces at a rate recommended by manufacturer .
control joints to be a minimum of ¼ to a maximum of a of the section thickness .
space control joints every num metres for curbs unless otherwise indicated .
provide control joints within num mm of change in crosssection of curbs and gutters .
finish perimeter of all slabs with an edger .
saw cutting may be allowed if done as soon as concrete has set sufficiently to resist ravelling and before shrinkage cracks appear .
when new curb is adjacent to sidewalks make joints of curb and sidewalk coincide .
install isolation joint filler around manholes and catch basins and along length adjacent to concrete curbs catch basins or permanent structures .
num method of measurement the quantity of curb and curb and gutter for which payment will be made shall be measured in linear metres constructed .
modified curb sections across driveways are to be included in the measurement .
num basis of payment the unit bid price for each of these items shall be for the number of linear metres as measured by the method of measurement .
such payment shall be full compensation for excavation and foundation preparation supply transporting and placing concrete reinforcing and dowels excavation and compaction of granular base formwork finishing jointing and curing and for all labour and other materials necessary to complete the work .
backfill behind curbs shall be paid for in accordance with the section for the type of material supplied .
granular base under curb and gutter shall be paid for under section num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy concrete sidewalk and flatwork num num num num description this section specifies requirements for constructing concrete sidewalk and flatwork on granular base to lines grades dimensions and typical crosssections indicated or directed .
num material the contractor shall supply and use only materials meeting the following standards castinplace concrete shall be in accordance with section num .
concrete mix for castinplace concrete shall be designed to produce num mpa minimum compressive strength at num days and containing num mm maximum size coarse aggregate .
water cement ration by weight shall not exceed num .
the concrete shall have an air content of num to num .
class of exposure cnum .
isolation joint filler to astm dnum num mm preformed nonextruding resilient bituminous type .
curing compound to astm cnum ritecure or equivalent .
granular base under sidewalkflatwork class a as specified in section num .
wire mesh reinforcement numxnum mwnumxmwnum welded wire fabric which meets the requirements of csa gnumm .
num construction methods num preparation and inspection construction of sidewalkflatwork shall be in accordance with figures num and num .
do not place concrete until finished granular base is inspected and approved .
num forming the contractor shall comply with the following procedure concrete for sidewalkflatwork to be shaped by wood or metal forms .
form vertical surfaces to full depth using forming material that will not deform under loading by plastic concrete .
securely position forms to required lines and grades .
horizontal and vertical alignment of the forms prior to placing concrete shall not vary more than num mm from the correct alignment and grade .
coat forms with approved form release agent .
obtain acceptance of forms before placing concrete .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy concrete sidewalk and flatwork num num num slipform paving machines may be used for placing concrete sidewalkflatwork but only in areas approved by the engineer .
the machine shall have automatic grade and line control and be able to spread vibrate shape and finish the concrete in a single pass while producing a dense and homogenous concrete section .
num concrete the contractor shall comply with the following procedure do concrete and reinforcing work in accordance with section num .
finish exposed surfaces to a smooth uniform finish free of open texturing and exposed aggregate .
do not work more mortar to surface than required .
do not use neat cement as a drier to facilitate finishing .
broom finish sidewalkflatwork transverse to the direction of traffic to provide a nonskid uniform texture .
finish perimeter of all slabs with an edger .
round edges including edges of joints with num mm radius edging tool .
finish surfaces to within num mm in num metres from line level or grade as measured with a straight edge placed on surface .
apply curing compound to finished surfaces at a rate recommended by manufacturer .
num jointing the contractor shall comply with the following procedure control joints to be a minimum of onequarter to a maximum of onethird of the section thickness .
provide control joints within num mm of change in crosssection of curbs and gutters .
saw cutting may be allowed if done as soon as concrete has set sufficiently to resist ravelling and before shrinkage cracks appear .
install joints at intervals of num metres for isolation joints num metres for transverse control joints or as directed by the project engineer .
isolation joints shall be installed around manholes and catch basins and along length adjacent to concrete curbs catch basins and permanent structures .
num measure of measurement the quantity of sidewalkflatwork for which payment will be made shall be measured in square metres .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy concrete sidewalk and flatwork num num num num basis of payment the unit bid price for these items shall be for the number of square metres of sidewalkflatwork as measured by the method of measurement .
such payment shall be full compensation for excavation and foundation preparation supplying transporting and placing concrete formwork wire mesh reinforcement finishing jointing and curing surface reinstatement unless otherwise specified cutting concrete curb for wheel chair ramps and for all labour and materials necessary to complete the work .
backfill behind sidewalk shall be paid for in accordance with the section for the type of material supplied .
granular base under sidewalkflatwork shall be paid under section num .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy precast concrete span num num num num description this section specifies requirements for the design manufacture delivery and installation of precast concrete spans .
num material concrete shall be in compliance with csa cannumanum and shall have a compressive strength of num mpa at num days .
reinforcing steel shall either be wire fabric in compliance with cancsa gnum grade num or be high strength deformed round bars in compliance with csa gnum grade num .
joint water proofing and recommended primer shall be rubr nek joint waterproofing or an equivalent approved by the engineer .
num construction methods num design and manufacturing the manufacture of precast concrete spans shall not commence until the shop drawings have been approved by the department and have been stamped by a professional engineer licensed to practice in prince edward island .
approval of shop drawings by the department will not relieve the manufacturer of the responsibility for correctness of dimensions size of components and details of fabrication in accordance with the latest editions of aashto standard specifications for highway bridges csa cansanum design of concrete structures and cancsasnum design of highway bridges .
curing shall conform to csa anum .
all sections should be covered for a minimum period of three consecutive days or spread with a curing agent .
the manufacturer will be responsible for all labour laws patents and licensing fees duties and handling charges transportation and all other charges .
the manufacturer will ensure that each section will have a quality assurance document as specified in csa anum .
mill certificates concrete mix design and other quality assurance documents shall be prepared in binder format and delivered to the department on completion of the contract .
num inspection the department shall have the right to inspect the manufacture of the precast concrete span and the authority to order production to stop if the work does not conform to plans shop drawings or specifications .
the manufacturer shall notify the department five calender days in advance of the commencement of any phase of manufacturing .
to ensure proper jointing of sections to a maximum of num mm gap when installed at the job site the manufacturer shall fit a random number of three sections at the factory .
each span and footing section shall have the lot number date of manufacture name of manufacturer and specification designation marked on them by indentation or waterproof paint .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy precast concrete span num num num num delivery to site it is the responsibility of the contractor to deliver the concrete span to the site safely and by the time specified in the contract .
num placement it is the responsibility of the contractor to properly place the concrete span and footings to the design criteria indicated by the project engineer .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of linear metres of precast concrete span installed .
num basis of payment payment under this section shall be at the unit bid price per linear metre of precast concrete span and is to include all applicable taxes .
this price shall be full compensation for all the work including the supply and placement of footings the supply and placement of the concrete span transportation equipment tools labour curing grouting waterproofing joint filling reinforcing steel and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy miscellaneous num num chain link fence and gates general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy chain link fence and gates num num num num description this work includes the supply transportation and erection of chain link fences and gates .
num reference standards cancsanum concrete materials and methods of concrete construction cancgsbnum fence chain link fabric cancgsbnum fence chain link framework zinccoated steel cancgsbnum fence chain link installation cancgsbnum fence chain link gates cancgsbnumgpnumm organic zinc rich coating num shop drawings shop drawings are to show details of the work and are to indicate dimensions materials finish fittings and hardware installation requirements and other pertinent information .
check all shop drawings prior to submission .
determine and verify all field measurements field construction criteria materials and similar data and check and coordinate each shop drawing with the requirements of the work .
sign and date each shop drawing to confirm compliance with provision num .
submit num copies of the shop drawings to the engineer for review .
engineer will not review shop drawings if it is evident that they are not in accordance with provision num .
after review the engineer will return num copies of shop drawings .
the contractor shall make all corrections as noted and resubmit .
do not proceed with work involving relevant products until completion of shop drawings .
num material num concrete mixes and materials to cancsanum .
nominal coarse aggregate size to be num mm .
compressive strength num mpa minimum at num days .
num chain link fence fabric to cancgsbnum .
num gauge type num class a heavy style .
height of fabric numm or as indicated on the drawings .
num posts braces and rails to cancgsbnum galvanized steel pipe dimensions as follows line posts nummm diameter schedule num hot dipped galvanized tubular steel pipe .
terminal posts nummm diameter schedule num hot dipped galvanized tubular steel pipe with stretching bands and bars for attaching fabric to the post .
terminal posts at double gate openings greater than numm in width shall be nummm diameter .
top rails nummm diameter schedule num hot dipped galvanized tubular steel pipe .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy chain link fence and gates num num num braces gate corner straining and end posts shall be braced by a centre rail of the same material as the top rail between the gate corner or end post and the next post .
num bottom tension wire single strand galvanized steel wire num mm diameter .
num tie wire fasteners single strand aluminum coated or galvanized steel wire conforming to requirements of fence fabric num mm diameter .
num tension bars min .
num x num mm galvanized steel .
num tension bar bands min .
num x num mm galvanized steel or min .
num x num mm aluminum .
num gate frames to astm anum galvanized steel pipe standard weight num mm outside diameter pipe for outside frame num mm outside diameter pipe for interior bracing .
fabricate gates as indicated with electrically welded joints and hot dipped galvanized after welding or paint gates with minimum num coats of zinc rich coating after welding .
fasten fence fabric to gate with twisted selvage at top .
furnish gates with galvanized malleable iron hinges latch and latch catch with provision for a padlock which can be attached and operated from either side of installed gate .
furnish double gates with chain hook to hold gates open and a centre rest with a drop bolt to hold gates closed .
num fittings and hardware cast aluminum alloy galvanized steel or malleable or ductile cast iron .
post caps to provide waterproof fit to fasten securely over posts and to carry top rail .
extension arms to provide waterproof fit to hold top rails and an outward or inward projection as directed and to hold barbed wire overhang .
provide projection with clips or recesses to hold num strands of barbed wire spaced num mm apart .
projection length of approximately num mm long to project from fence at numº above horizontal .
turnbuckles to be drop forged .
num organic zinc rich coating to cgsb numgpnumm .
num barbed wire num mm diameter galvanized steel wire to astm anum num point barbs num mm spacing .
num finishes galvanizing for chain link fabric to cancgsbnum grade num .
galvanizing for pipe num gmnum minimum to astm anum .
galvanizing for barbed wire to astm anum class num .
galvanizing for other fittings to csa gnum .
num construction method num grading general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy chain link fence and gates num num num remove debris and correct ground undulations along fence line to obtain smooth uniform gradient between posts .
provide a clearance between bottom of fence and ground surface no more than num mm .
num erection of fence erect fence along lines as directed by engineer and in accordance with cancgsbnum excavate post holes to num mm depth x nummm diameter or to dimensions as indicated by methods approved by engineer .
space line posts numm apart as measured parallel to the ground surface or to spacing as indicated .
space straining posts at equal intervals not exceeding num m if distance between end or corner posts on straight continuous lengths of fence over reasonably smooth grade is greater than num m. install additional straining posts at sharp changes in grade and where directed by engineer .
install corner post where change in alignment exceeds numº .
install end posts at end of fence and at buildings .
install gate posts on both sides of gate openings .
place concrete in post holes then embed posts in concrete to depths as indicated on the drawings .
extend concrete num mm above ground level and slope it to drain away from the posts .
brace to hold posts in plumb position true to alignment and elevation until concrete has set .
do not install fence fabric until concrete has cured a minimum of num days .
install brace between end and gate posts and nearest line post place in centre of panel and parallel to ground surface .
install braces on both sides of corner and straining posts in similar manner as required .
install overhang tops and caps .
install top rail between posts and fasten securely to terminal posts and secure waterproof caps and overhang tops .
install bottom tension wire stretch tightly and fasten securely to end corner gate and straining posts with turnbuckles and tension bar bands .
lay out fence fabric .
stretch tightly to tension recommended by manufacturer and fasten to end corner gate and straining posts with the tension bar secured to post and with tension bar bands spaced at num mm intervals .
knuckled selvedge at bottom .
twisted selvedge at top .
secure fabric to top rails line posts and bottom tension wire with tie wires at num mm intervals .
give tie wires two twists .
install barbed wire strands and clip securely to lugs of each bracket .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy chain link fence and gates num num num num installation of gates install gates in locations where directed by engineer .
level contours between gate posts and set gate bottom approximately num mm above ground surface .
determine position of centre gate rest for double gate .
cast gate rest in concrete as directed .
dome concrete above ground level to shed water .
install gate stops where directed .
num touchup clean damaged surfaces with wire brush removing loose and cracked coatings .
apply num coats of organic zincrich paint to damaged areas .
pretreat damaged surfaces according to manufacturers instructions for zincrich paint .
num cleaning clean and trim areas disturbed by operations .
dispose of surplus material and reinstate disturbed surfaces as directed by engineer .
num method of measurement measurement for payment under this section shall be the number of linear metres of chain link fence including gates installed .
num basis of payment payment shall be at the unit bid price per linear metre and this price shall be full compensation for supply transportation handling storage and all labour tools and materials necessary to complete the work .
general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction department of transportation infrastructure and energy supplemental specifications num num num appendix num tender document appendix num environment workplace traffic control manual appendix num temporary workplace traffic control manual appendix num weight scale procedures department of transportation infrastructure and energy province of prince edward island tender form and agreement revision num this agreement made by and between herein called the contractor the party of the first part and the government of prince edward island as represented by the honourable paula j. biggar herein called the minister the party of the second part .
witness as follows num .
definitions the definition of terms used in this tender form and agreement shall conform in all respects to the definition of terms contained in the document entitled general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction published by the department of transportation infrastructure and energy of the province of prince edward island as amended on the date of closing of tenders pursuant to this agreement .
num .
general covenant the contractor hereby covenants and agrees with the minister as herein provided in connection with the following work namely for a distance of the work includes tender closes page num rev .
num num .
no implied contract it is hereby understood and agreed between the parties hereto that no implied contract of any kind whatsoever by or on behalf of the minister shall arise or be implied from anything contained in this contract or from any position or situation of the parties at any time and that this contract made by the minister is and shall be the only contract upon which any rights against the minister are to be founded .
num .
how party of the first part is read whenever this contract is entered into by more than one party or parties of the first part the word contractor shall be read contractors and pronouns in the contract referring to the contractors shall be read as plural and whenever a corporation is the party of the first part the said pronouns shall be read accordingly .
num .
consideration of clauses as covenants wherever it is stipulated that anything shall be done or performed by either of the parties hereto it shall have the same effect and be constructed as if such party had entered into a covenant with the other party to do or perform the same and as if such covenant had been expressly made on the part of the contractor not only on the contractors own behalf but also on the behalf of the contractors legal representative successors or assigns and as if any such covenant on the part of the minister has been made on behalf of the minister and the ministers successors in office .
num .
contractors submission respecting the agreement the contractor shall as part of the contractors submission respecting this contract complete the attached schedule b identification of principles schedule c schedule of tendered unit prices schedule d schedule of equipment to be used on the work and schedule e schedule of sub contractors .
the contract including all appended schedules shall be completed in complete conformity with the instructions to bidders contained in the document entitled general provisions and contract specification for highway construction .
in presenting the contractors submission for consideration by the minister the contractor understands that until and unless the contract is endorsed by the minister no contract between the parties shall exist and the minister shall not be bound to endorse any contract .
num .
performance by contractor the contractor at the contractors own expense shall except as herein otherwise specifically provided furnish and provide all and every kind of labour and superintendence services tools implements machinery plant materials articles and whatsoever is necessary for the due execution of the work .
the contractor shall fully construct and erect the work in the most thorough professional and substantial manner in every respect to the satisfaction and approval of the engineer .
the contractor shall complete the work within the time specified herein and deliver it to the minister in the manner and upon the terms and conditions of the contract .
page num rev .
num num .
bid and performance security the contractor hereby and herewith deposits with and delivers to the minister as security of the due fulfilment of the contract one of the following which shall remain in effect for a minimum of num days after tender closing a a certified cheque in the amount stipulated in schedule a schedule of special provisions .
or b a bank draft in the amount stipulated in schedule a schedule of special provisions .
or c a bid format irrevocable standby letter of credit on a government approved form in the amount stipulated in schedule a schedule of special provisions .
or d a bid bond in the amount stipulated in schedule a schedule of special provisions .
the bond shall be from a surety company authorized to carry on business in canada guaranteeing to supply a performance bond equal to num of the contract value excluding hst and a labour and material bond equal to num of the contract value excluding hst .
performance security must be filed with the department before work on the project commences .
this security shall be held and retained by the minister for the due and faithful performance observance and fulfilment by the contractor of all the covenants provisos agreements conditions and reservations in this contract contained on the part of the contractors to be observed performed and complied with shall be in the form of e a certified cheque in the minimum amount of ten percent num of the contract value excluding hst which shall be retained until the warranty period one num year after substantial completion has elapsed .
or f a bank draft in the minimum amount of ten percent num of the contract value excluding hst which shall be retained until the warranty period one num year substantial completion has elapsed .
or g a performance format irrevocable standby letter of credit on a government approved form in the minimum amount of ten percent num of the contract value excluding hst which shall be retained until the warranty period one num year after substantial completion has elapsed .
or h a performance bond equal to num of the contract value excluding hst and a labour and materials bond equal to num of the contract value excluding hst both of which shall be retained until the warranty period one num year after substantial completion has elapsed .
page num rev .
num num .
bid and performance security continued all performance security which has an expiry date which precedes the end of warranty date must be renewed prior to the time that the security would expire .
the bidder will forfeit security to the minister if the bidder fails to enter into or carry out the contract when called upon to do so .
it is understood and agreed that the contractor assumes risk and must bear any loss in respect to the performance security as aforesaid occasioned by the failure or insolvency of the banks on which any cheque was drawn or in which any deposit was made in connection with the security aforesaid .
if at any time hereafter the said contractor should make default under the said contract or if the minister acting under the powers reserved in the said contract shall determine that the said works or any portion thereof remaining to be done should be taken out of the hands of the contractor and be completed in any manner or way whatsoever than by the contractor or if the contractor refuses or neglects to pay for work done or materials supplied by any person in connection with the said work the minister may in either case dispose of said security for the carrying out of the construction and completion of the work of the contract or for paying any salaries or wages for work done or any accounts for materials supplied for the said works that may be left unpaid by the said contractor .
in the event of any breach default or nonperformance being made or suffered by the contractor in or in respect of any of the terms and conditions covenants provisions agreements or restrictions herein contained which on the part of the said contractor should be observed performed or complied with the said security so delivered to or deposited with the minister or by the minister received in respect thereof shall by the contractor be forfeited absolutely to the minister .
upon the due and faithful performance observance and fulfilment by the contractor of all the terms provisions covenants agreements conditions reservations hereinbefore contained on the part of the contractor to be observed performed and complied with the minister shall surrender the performance security .
num .
minister covenants to pay in consideration of the faithful performance by the contractor of all and singular covenants agreements and provisions of the contract the minister hereby covenants and agrees with the contractor that on the full completion by the contractor of all the work as specified in the contract within the time specified and limited for the final completion thereof and to the entire satisfaction of the engineer to be evidenced by the certificate of the engineer in writing the said minister will well and truly pay or cause to be paid to the said contractor the amount of the contract price representing the actual quantities in the several items in the schedule of prices identified as schedule c to this contract at the unit prices or lump sum prices quoted by the contractor .
this amount paid to the contractor as above shall include all and every kind of work labour superintendence services tools implements machinery plant materials articles and things whatsoever necessary for the full execution and completion of the work to the entire satisfaction of the engineer .
num .
final payment it is hereby agreed by the parties hereto that the payment of the final amount due under the contract and the adjustment and payment of any bills that may be rendered for work done in accordance with any alteration in or addition to the same shall release the minister from any and all claims or liability on account of work performed under the said contract or any alteration in or addition to the same .
page num rev .
num num .
no waiver it is hereby agreed that no condoning excusing or overlooking by the minister or any person acting on the ministers behalf on previous occasions of breaches or defaults similar to that for which any action is taken or power is exercised or forfeiture is claimed or enforced against the contractor shall be taken as a waiver of any provisions of the contract or as defeating affecting or prejudicing in any way the right of the minister under the contract .
num .
components of the contract any and all plans or drawings prepared by the department the document titled general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction the advertisement the tender form and agreement together with schedule a schedule of special provisions schedule b identification of principals schedule c schedule of tendered unit prices schedule d schedule of equipment and schedule e schedule of subcontractors as well as any addenda which may be issued by the department pursuant to this contract shall hereby be a part of this contract as fully and to the same effect as if the same had been set forth at length in the body of the contract .
num .
completion of work the contractor agrees to complete the work on or before datemonthyear .
num .
foipp clause num .
by submitting your bid you agree to disclosure of the information supplied subject to the provisions of the freedom of information and protection of privacy act foipp .
num .
anything submitted in your bid that you consider to be confidential information because of its proprietary nature should be marked as confidential and will be subject to appropriate consideration under the freedom of information and protection of privacy act .
num .
during the delivery and installation of goods andor services you may have access to confidential or personal information .
should this occur you must ensure that such information is not released to any third party or unauthorized individual .
num .
any information provided on this contract may be subject to release under the freedom of information and protection of privacy act .
you will be consulted prior to the release of any information .
page num rev .
num in witness whereof the parties hereto have hereby caused these presents to be signed and sealed on the dates stated .
signed sealed and delivered signed sealed and delivered by the contractor on the day by the minister on the day of num . of num .
contractor minister in the presence of in the presence of page num rev .
num schedule a schedule of special provisions page num rev .
num schedule b identification of principals name of contractor mailing address telephone fax principals name title mailing address if contractor is a corporation in which province of canada is the corporation registered _________________________________________________________________________________ page num rev .
num schedule c schedule of prices page num rev .
num schedule d schedule of equipment to be used on the work page num rev .
num schedule e schedule of subcontractors num anum appendix num environmental requirements department of transportation infrastructure and energy province of prince edward island environmental management section num anum environmental requirements table of contents num .
description num .
conditions of approval num .
compliance and delays num .
prevention of the transportation introduction of invasive species num .
pollution control num .
water and runoff control num .
release of fuel and other hazardous substances num .
accidental events and environmental emergencies num anum environmental requirements num .
description num .
the contractor shall carry out the work on the contract according to the plans and specifications and in such a manner so as to be in compliance with various acts and regulations of the province of prince edward island andor the government of canada which concerns the protection of the environment and any approvals or permits issued to the owner or the contractor in accordance therewith .
num .
the installation of environmental controls shall be coordinated with the county environmental officer and the engineer .
environmental protection measures shall be installed whenever possible prior to the commencement of the work .
if not possible to provide the environmental protection prior to the commencement of the work the contractor shall as a minimum have all materials required for the environmental protection available on site prior to the commencement of any work and shall install the environmental measures as soon as practical in the work progression .
num .
if during the work any suspected artifacts of historical or archaeological value are uncovered or any endangered plant or animal species or any contaminated soils is identified the contractor shall cease work until the site has been reviewed by representatives of the appropriate agencies and the engineer has approved resumption of the work .
num .
the contractor shall follow sound environmental construction practices .
guidance in this practice to the application of his work shall be derived from but not limited exclusively to the following documents division num of the specifications manual environment environmental requirements appendix num .
p.e.i .
ties environmental protection plan num .
conditions of approval num .
the contractor shall complete the work in accordance with the following conditions all sediment and erosion control measures shall be carried out as detailed on the plans and as included in the specifications .
measures determined by the appropriate regulatory authorities i.e .
provincial environment department fisheries and oceans canada etc as necessary for the protection of watercourseswetlands affected directly or indirectly by the work .
conditions outlined in the associated approvaltoproceed issued by ties environmental management section .
num anum num .
any debris and excavated material within the work area shall be removed from the watercourse and adjacent areas for disposal or placement in a manner such that it can not be returned to the watercourse .
removal of debris whether natural or left behind by others will be measured for payment in accordance with provision num extra work .
removal and disposal of excavated material will be measured for payment under the appropriate excavation items .
num .
all necessary precautions shall be taken by the contractor to prevent discharge or loss of any harmful material into a watercourse including but not limited to creosote fuels hydrocarbons biocides fertilizers cement lime paint or fresh concrete .
num .
no work including but not limited to grubbing excavation embankment construction or installation of drainage structures shall take place within numm of a watercourse or wetland without an ems approval to proceed .
the installation and maintenance of these structures shall be in accordance with section num .
num .
in dewatering an excavation whether a roadway cut foundation excavation a pit or a quarry the contractor shall ensure that any turbid water pumped out or released is released into either a a grassed riparian area a minimum of numm outside any watercourse or wetland area or b a collection area created for the purpose of filtering sedimentladen water .
the area where the pumped water will be released must be approved by the county environmental officer and may require additional sedimenterosion controls .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to install and maintain at his cost to the satisfaction of the provincial environment department any erosion control measures for pits and quarries that may be required and to obtain permission to pump or release any turbid water onto properties abutting and beyond .
the contractor shall be responsible at his cost for any and all damage resulting from the dewatering .
num .
slopes for soil fill materials over natural watercourses shall be stabilized immediately upon completion of culvert installation or as a minimum at the end of each days embankment construction as follows random rnum riprap or larger shall be placed to a num mm depth over geotechnical fabric from toe of slope to a minimum of num m above the top of the culvert pipe or box .
this riprap apron shall extend to a minimum of num m on either side of the culvert and shall be wider at the engineers discretion .
to a minimum distance of num m on either side of the culvert pipe or box the remaining disturbed fill slope areas not riprapped shall be mulched from toe of slope to top of slope .
this includes the slope area above the riprap to the top of the slope .
at the discretion of the engineer slopes with larger erosion potential shall have the mulch covered by jute mat or replaced by straw blanket .
all mulch and erosion control mats shall be removed from slopes prior to final grading and seeding .
after slopes have been graded to the satisfaction of the engineer and the disturbed areas have been hydro seeded then all areas shall be num anum remulched and any erosion control mats shall be reinstalled .
num .
the contractor shall not place an earth or rock causeway in the watercourse for the purposes of creating a temporary access structure without specific approval of the engineer and the appropriate regulatory authorityies in writing .
num .
all instream work shall be carried out between june num and september num or as otherwise directed in the permits .
the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing at least seven days in advance of the anticipated date of commencement of instream work .
watercourse culvert installation guidelines must be followed instream work shall be kept to a minimum by either installing the pipe inthedry and diverting the flow into it upon completion by constructing a temporary plastic lined diversion channel inthedry andor by pumping the stream flow around the work area .
if it is necessary to isolate the stream from the work area the contractor shall construct cofferdams consisting of sandbags wrapped in nummm plastic .
the engineer upon receiving notice from the contractor as to when construction shall actually commence will arrange an onsite meeting with representatives from each of the departments environment section provincial environment department fisheries and oceans canada and the contractor prior to commencement of the instream work .
no instream work shall commence until the engineer verifies with the regulatory agencies having jurisdiction that the work site is approved for the commencement of instream work .
num .
erosion control measures shall be as detailed in the contract documents and if additional measures are required in addition to those indicated the engineer shall order and approve such work under the appropriate items .
num .
any natural materials produced andor supplied by excavation either from pits andor quarries shall not contain any friable soluble or reactive minerals or other deleterious materials or conditions that would make the material prone to decomposition or disintegration or present any environmental hazard from the presence of the parent material or its byproducts when exposed to the natural elements after placement in the work .
num .
additional conditions of approval as specified in environmental permits issued to the owner for the work andor as detailed in the contract documents shall be carried out by the contractor .
num .
compliance and delays num .
for each maintenance or construction project a project assessmentregistration application must be submitted by the proponent typically the project manager or supervisor representing peitie to the environmental management section for review and approval .
once the project application is received the environmental management num anum section will coordinate all aspects of its review and assessment issuance of associated permits and approvals from the section or other regulatory agencies .
num .
the proponent is responsible to ensure that all projectrelated permits and approvals are posted in a visible location at the project work area at all times .
num .
failure by the contractor to carry out the work in accordance with the requirements of this section will result in the contractor being liable for any fines levies or penalties made under environmentrelated acts or regulations of the province of prince edward island and the government of canada .
num .
the engineer will be responsible for the day to day field monitoring and for ensuring that the specifications are implemented by the contractor .
ties environmental management section shall assist to ensure that all environmental protection measures which are part of the contract are adhered to by the contractor .
num .
the department will have environment officers who will act as a liaison between the department and other provincial and federal regulatory bodies responsible for environmental protection .
the environment officer will also liaise with the engineer and assist in ensuring that environmental compliance is being enforced .
num .
the departments environment officers shall make recommendations to remedy insufficient environmental protection measures on projects .
the environmental management section manager or environmental coordinator may coordinate with the engineer to have the project work suspended until the contractor remedies the environmental protection measures as per the specifications in the departments general provisions and contract specifications for highway construction the tie environmental protection plan and all regulatory permits and approvals .
num .
in circumstances where the insufficient environmental protection poses no immediate threat to the environment the contractor shall implement the necessary remedies to the satisfaction of the department within a specified timeframe .
num .
in circumstances where insufficient environmental protection ongoing work activities or site conditions do pose an immediate threat to the environment either the project work can be suspended immediately or immediate action by the contractor to remedy the situation can be ordered whichever is appropriate as per section num .
num .
any delays to the contractors work operation resulting from suspension of work for failure to follow the requirements of this section will not be considered as a basis of claim for extra costs nor for any extension of the contract completion date .
num .
prevention of the transportation introduction of invasive species num .
environmental concerns waters of atlantic canada are experiencing the effects of invasive aquatic plant and animal species from around the world .
once these nonnative or invasive species have established themselves in a new ecosystem absent of their natural predators they can harm native species possibly causing entire ecosystems to be disrupted due to habitat destruction or food chain alteration i.e .
preying on native species transmitting disease etc .. num anum the principal invasive species in the gulf of st. lawrence and the canadian atlantic coast are tunicates styela clava green crab carcinus maenas and green algas i.e .
oyster thief codium fragile tomentosoides .
up to date information on the present distribution of these species in the northumberland strait can be obtained by calling the habitat management branch of fisheries and oceans canada at num num .
information on the gulf of st. lawrence can also be found at www.glf.dfompo.gc.ca and for the canadian atlantic coasts at www.northeastans.org .
num .
pathways nonnative and invasive species may be unintentionally introduced into a marine environment via various marine construction and improvement projects .
these species have the potential to alter the native ecosystems and have negative impacts on the commercial fishing and aquaculture industries .
potential pathways for spreading these species include but are not limited to the following species or their water borne larva travelling in bilge and ballast water of various marine construction equipment i.e .
barges scows etc .. marine sediments remaining in excavation equipment barges or trucks .
species being attached to or carried in the bottomhull of various boats or barges .
num .
environmental protection procedures the following protection procedures are intended to reduce the potential risk of transporting and introducing invasive marineterrestrial species all dredging equipment including excavatorscranes floating plant scows barges and work boats are to be free of all marine growth prior to mobilization to the site .
the contractor will make all equipment available for inspection by regulatory authorities i.e .
provincial environment department federal department of environment and the habitat management branch of fisheries and oceans canada or other agencies if requested .
any growth identified is to be completely removed from the equipment in an environmentally acceptable manner and using methods approved by the regulatory authority .
the contractor is to coordinate removal and cleaning operations to ensure they abide by all requirements of the provincial environment department federal department of environment the habitat management branch of fisheries and oceans canada and any other applicable agencies .
the contractor shall ensure that all costs associated with the requirements of this section are included in the bid price .
num .
the contractor is required to be familiar with invasive species management plans codes of practice or other documents that relate to the control and spread of aquatic invasive species and acquire any special regulatory permits or approvals associated num anum with the use of their equipment in or near a marine environment other than the typical permits and approvals acquired by the department or proponent to conduct the work .
produce independent documentation eg .
divers inspection reports and video of inspection etc .
of boats barges or scows as to when and how they had conducted the above mentioned mitigation measures at the request of the department or a regulatory agency at any time .
num .
pollution control num .
the contractor shall not dump spill or dispose of any overburden trees brush petroleum products or other debris into any watercourse or other natural water basin or into any area which may ultimately cause pollution to water drainage or storage systems andor ground water .
num .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to familiarize himself with the applicable legislation and regulations and to obtain all necessary permits and approvals for his operations .
num .
water and runoff control num .
the contractor shall perform his work in a manner so as to not obstruct the flow of surface drainage or natural watercourses .
num .
the contractor shall direct or discharge water resulting from the work in a manner not detrimental to public and private property or any portion of the work completed or under construction .
num .
release of fuel and other hazardous substances num .
the contractor including any subcontractors andor any agents of the contractor involved in any aspect of the contract shall be responsible for all containment and cleanup of any release of fuel andor other hazardous materials regardless of the cause of the release .
all fuel lubricants or other toxic chemicals shall be stored a minimum of numm from a watercourse or wetland .
a twoman system for proper refueling of equipment when within nummetres of a watercourse or wetland area must be in place .
num .
this section shall include the work site all lands being used by the contractor and under the control of the owner andor any crown land being utilized for the work under the contract .
num .
accidental events and environmental emergencies num .
response procedures for accidental events contingency plans and response procedures to be followed for unplanned environmental events are provided in the tie environmental protection plan section num contingency plans for unplanned events .
num .
key contact list key organizations andor individuals that may be contacted a during environmental emergency situations or b to assist with routine environmental issues are provided in the tie environmental protection plan section num key contact list .
in general the person managing the work should num anum for an environmental emergency directly contact emergency response personnel using the names and numbers provided .
for routine or nonemergency issues contact provincial personnel using the names and numbers provided .
num .
watercourse culvert installation guidelines full guidelines available at httpwww.gov.pe.caphotosoriginaleef_wet_alter_num.pdf num .
a preconstruction stream survey must be completed prior to watercourse culvert replacements or new installations .
this survey must include the following information a first upstream of existing structure or planned structure location riffle elevation b first downstream of existing structure or planned structure location riffle elevation c inlet bottom top of riblipedge of culvert elevation d outlet bottom top of riblipedge of culvert elevation e stream length a to b f culvert length c to d g calculation of stream slope h calculation of culvert slope ensure that a representative of the environmental management section is on site during the preconstruction survey .
num .
watercourse culvert installations may only take place during the period of june num to september num of any given year and only if an ems approval to proceed has been issued .
num .
watercourse culvert maximum length under lowrisk guidelines and ems approval to proceed is num metres unless otherwise approved in consultation with pei department of communities land and environment and the department of fisheries and oceans .
num .
culvert must be embedded a minimum of num of its diameter .numd .
num .
surveyor must be onsite during culvert replacement or installation .
num .
stream must be isolated during replacement or installation through use of a coffer dam not longer than num hrs andor cofferdam combined with pumping water through around or over the work area .
num .
culvert must be installed at a slope not greater than .num .
num .
culvert diameter must not exceed num ft under the lowrisk guideline and ems approval to proceed unless otherwise approved in consultation with pei department of communities land and environment and the department of fisheries and oceans .
num .
a post construction culvert survey must be completed upon completion of the replacementinstallation .
