maryland department of transportation state highway administration standard specifications for construction and materials preface table of contents general provisions terms and conditions category num preliminary category num grading category num drainage category num structures category num paving category num shoulders category num landswing category num traffic category num materials index search exit www.marylandroa s.com july num preface this num edition of the maryland department of transportation state highway administrations standard specifications for construction and materials is a revised updated version of the manual dated january num .
this manual is divided into three parts part igeneral provisions .
general provisions for construction contracts is reproduced .
included is bold italicized print indicating changes which apply to administration contracts .
part iiterms and conditions .
provisions which are applicable to all administration construction contracts .
part iiitechnical requirements .
provisions which are applicable to all administration construction contracts .
visit the maryland state highway administration on the internet www.marylandroads.com copies of this manual may be purchased by contacting state of maryland state highway administration cashiers office num east madison street baltimore maryland num telephone num num the administration would like to thank mr. peter p. phillips of the office of highway development mr. marvin d. blimline of the office of bridge developemnt and mr. john schene of the office of construction for their many years of service dedication and knowledge in the development and implementation of specifications .
their contribution has been a great asset to the maryland state highway administration .
table of contents part i general provisions gpsection numdefinitions and terms num general num num organizational structure num num organizational definitions num num abbreviations num num definitions num gpsection numbidding requirements and conditions num bid irrevocable num num contents of bid forms num num interpretation of quantities in bid schedule num num site investigation num num taxesresponsibility for payment exemptions forms to file etc .
num num preparation of bid num num proposal guaranty num num delivery of bids num num communications and interpretationsprior to bid opening num num amendments to invitations for bids num num preopening modification or withdrawal of bids num num late bids late withdrawals and late modification num num opening and recording of bids num num mistakes in bids num num minor irregularities or informalities num num cancellation of invitations for bids num num rejection of individual bids or proposals num num rejection of all bids num num bid evaluation and award num num tie bids num num resident business preference num num multiple or alternate bids num num bid protests num gpsection numaward and execution of contract num award of contract see gpnum num num return of proposal guaranty num num performance bond and payment bond requirements num num execution of contract num num failure to execute contract num i gpsection numscope of work num intent of contract num num general provisions controlling num num entire contract num num variations in estimated quantities num num differing site conditions num num changes num num negotiated payment provision num num unauthorized work num num final clean up num num warranty of construction num gpsection numcontrol of the work num authority of the procurement officer num num conformity with contract requirements num num discrepancies in the contract documents num num cooperation by contractor num num cooperation with utilities num num cooperation between contractors num num authority and duties of inspectors num num inspection of work num num removal of defective work num num load restrictions num num maintenance of work during construction num num failure to maintain entire project num num acceptance for maintenance num num filing of claim by contractor num num disputes num gpsection numcontrol of material num general num num storage and handling of materials num num unacceptable materials num num administration furnished material num gpsection numlegal relations and responsibility to public num .
num compliance with laws num num .
num permits and licenses num num .
num patented devices materials and processes num num .
num federal participation num num .
num construction safety and health standards num num .
num public convenience and safety num num .
num detours num num .
num barricades and warning signs num ii num flagging of motor vehicle traffic num num maintenance of traffic num num preservation and restoration of property num num land air and water pollution num num responsibility for damage claims num num liability insurance num num use and possession prior to completion num num contractors responsibility for work num num contractors responsibility for utility property and services num num personal liability of public officials num num no waiver of legal rights num num nondiscrimination in employment num num sanctions upon improper acts num num nonhiring of employees num num choice of law num num contingent fee prohibition num num multiyear contracts contingent upon appropriations num num cost and price certification num num corporate registration and tax payment certification num num buy american steel act num num minority business enterprise and affirmative action num num prevailing wage contracts for public works num num small business procurements num num financial disclosure num num political contribution disclosure num num conflict of interest law num num preexisting regulations num num retention of records num gpsection numprosecution and progress num subcontracting num num notice to proceed num num prosecution of the work num num progress schedule num num limitations of operation num num character of workmen methods and equipment num num suspension of work num num termination for defaultdamages for delaytime extensions num num liquidated damages num num termination for convenience of the state num num successful termination of contractors responsibility num gpsection num payment num scope of payment num num force account work num num progress payments num iii num final acceptance and final payment num num late payments num part ii terms and conditions tc section numreferences and definitions num language num num referencesnum num definitionsnum tc section numbidding requirements and conditions num project classification num num preparation of bid num num value engineering change proposals num num owneroperator num num debarmentsuspension num num partnering num tc section numscope of work num governing order of contract documents num num construction documents to successful bidder num num rights in and use of materials found on the projectnum num safety hazards in confined spaces num tc section num control of work num working drawings num num failure to adequately maintain project num num use and possession prior to completion num num suspension of worknum num dispute mediationnum tc section numlegal relations and progress num insurance num num notice to proceed and project schedule num num subcontracting and subcontractors num num cultural resources num num determination and extension contract time num tc section numrestrictions and permits num moving of equipment num num load and speed limitations num num compliance with maryland vehicle laws num num restoration of surfaces opened by permit num iv num railroad highway grade crossings and separations num num bridges and other work in or over waters of the state num num use of explosives num num aerial electric lines num volts or more num num hazardous material num num recycled or rehandled material num num const ruction and waste material num num struct ure underclearances and overhead clearancesnum num hauling over proposed structures.num num storing materials and equipment onagainst structures restriction.num tc section numpayment num measurem ent of quantities num num paym ent allowances for stored material num num force account work num num scope of payment num num progress payments num num final acceptance and final payment num num late payments num num elim inated items num part iii technical requirements category numpreliminary num clearing and grubbing num num removal and disposal of existing buildings num num engineers office num num maintenance of traffic num num aggregate for maintenance of traffic num num hot mix asphalt hma for maintenance of traffic num num construction stakeout num num mobilization num num critical path method project schedule num num activities chart project schedule num num sampling devices and testing equipment .. num num num reserved .. num tree preservation num category numgrading num roadway excavation class num class numa class num num v num channel or stream change excavation class num num num borrow excavation num num embankment and subgrade num num test pit excavation num num removal of existing pavement sidewalk paved ditches curb or combination curb and gutter num num removal of existing masonry num num subgrade preparation num num trimming existing ditches num num tamped fill num num geosynthetic stabilized subbase using graded aggregate base num category numdrainage num class num excavation for incidental construction num num selected backfill num num pipe culverts num num structural plate pipe and structural plate pipe arch culverts num num miscellaneous structures num num underdrains subgrade drains and spring control num num prefabricated edge drains num num erosion and sediment control num num concrete ditches num num concrete slope and channel protection num num riprap ditches num num riprap slope and channel protection num num gabions num num flowable backfill num num infiltration trenches num category numstructures num maintaining existing bridge deck during life of contract num num structure excavation class num and class num num num reserved .
num removal of existing structures num num drilled holes in existing masonry num num reserved .
num piling num num pile load test num num drilled shafts caissons num num reserved .
vi num protective jackets for piles num num subfoundation investigation num num portland cement concrete structures num num reinforcement for steel num num dampproofing and membrane waterproofing .. num num pneumatically applied mortar num num reserved .. num lightweight superstructure concrete num num latex modified concrete overlay for bridge decks num num reserved .
num metal structures .. num num steel stud shear developers num num bearings num num bridge mounted sign supportsnum num reserved .. num cleaning and painting new structural steelnum num cleaning and painting existing structural steelnum num reserved .
num prestressed concrete beams and slab panelsnum num reserved .
num retaining walls num num reserved .
num noise barriers num num reserved .
num expansion joints in structures num num metal railing num num timber structures num num brick masonry num num epoxy protective coatings for concrete num num fusion bonded powder coatings for metal num num reserved .
num porous backfill num num utilities on structures num num reserved .
num application of bridgestructure numbers num num reserved .
num working drawingsnum category numpaving num aggregate base courses num num soilcement base course num num chip seal surface treatment num num hot mix asphalt pavement num num hot mix asphalt patches num num hot mix asphalt gapgraded num vii num slurry seal num num milling existing hot mix asphalt pavement num num grinding hot mix asphalt pavement num num filling cracks in hot mix asphalt pavements num num reserved .
num plain and reinforced portland cement concrete pavements num num continuously reinforced portland cement concrete pavement num num portland cement concrete pavement repairs num num joint sealing of portland cement concrete pavements num num reserved .
num pavement markings num category numshoulders num earth shoulders num num curb combination curb and gutter and monolithic median num num sidewalks num num concrete traffic barriers num num metal traffic barriers num num permanent traffic barrier end treatments num num chain link fence num num wheel stops num num shoulder edge drop off grading adjustment num num shoulder rumble stripsnum num detectable warning surfacenum category numlandscaping num topsoil and subsoil num num reserved .
num temporary seeding and temporary mulching .. num num turfgrass establishment num num shrub seeding num num meadow establishment and wildflower seeding num num turfgrass sod establishment num num soil stabilization matting num num tree shrub and perennial installation and establishment num num annual and bulb installation and establishment .. num num tree branch pruning num viii num brush removal .
num num tree felling num num tree root pruningnum num tree fertilizing num category numtraffic num concrete foundations num num galvanized steel beam sign posts num num overhead sign structures num num grounding num num electrical conduit and fittings num num luminaires and lamps num num electrical service equipment num num lighting structures num num trenching and backfilling num num electrical cable wire and connectors num num electrical hand holes manholes pull and junction boxes num num wood sign supports num num signs num num signal heads num num saw cuts for traffic control devices num num traffic control device cabinets and equipment num num push buttons and push button signs num num signal structures num num steel span wire num num general electrical work and testing num num breakaway base support systems num num remove and relocate existing signs and sign structures num num remove and relocate or remove and dispose of roadway lighting structures num num modify existing sign messages num num cutting and capping mast arms and poles num category nummaterials num aggregates num num portland cement concrete and related products num num masonry products num num performance graded asphalt binders and hot mix asphalt num num pipe num num gabions num num piles and piling num num reinforcement steel num ix num metals num num bearings num num joints num num coating systems for structural steel num num waterproofing num num chain link fence num num production plants num num soil and soil aggregate borrow num num miscellaneous protective coatings num num traffic barriers num num reserved .. num landscaping num num miscellaneous num num prefabricated edge drains num num slurry seal num num reserved .
num detectable warning surfaces num num reserved num traffic materials num x part i general provisions general provisions gpsection num definitions and terms gpnum general portions of part iii technical requirements of these standard specifications for construction and materials are written in the active voice writing style .
wherever in these general provisions or in other contract documents the terms or abbreviations are used the meaning shall be as provided herein .
gpnum organizational structure the maryland department of transportation is composed of the following administrations i maryland port administration ii maryland transit administration iii state highway administration iv maryland aviation administration v motor vehicle administration vi maryland transportation authority and vii office of the secretary gpnum organizational definitions administrationthe word administration shall mean any one of the administrations within the maryland department of transportation as listed in gpnum .
administratorthe chief executive officer of an administration .
num num definitions and terms departmentthe word department shall mean the maryland department of transportation .
engineerany person designated by the administrator or the procurement officer acting directly or through his duly authorized representative such representative acting within the scope of the particular duties assigned to him or of the authority given him .
inspectorthe authorized representative of the procurement officer assigned to make detailed inspection of any or all portions of the work or materials therefore .
procurement officerany person authorized by a state agency in accordance with law or regulations to formulate enter into or administer contracts or make written determinations and findings with respect to them .
the term also includes an authorized representative acting within the limits of authority .
secretarythe chief executive officer of the maryland department of transportation .
gpnum abbreviations aan american association of nurserymen aapa american association of port authorities aar association of american railroads aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials aci american concrete institute aia american institute of architects aiee american institute of electrical engineers aisc american institute of steel construction aisi american iron and steel institute ansi american national standards institute ara american railway association area american railway engineering association asce american society of civil engineers ashrae american society of heating refrigeration and airconditioning engineers asla american society of landscape architects asme american society of mechanical engineers astm american society for testing and materials ata american transit association awwa american water works association aws american welding society awpa american wood preservers association num num definitions and terms agc associated general contractors of america boca building officials conference of america comar code of maryland regulations crsi concrete reinforcing steel institute eei edison electric institute eia electronic industries association epa environmental protection agency faa federal aviation administration u.s. department of transportation fcc federal communications commission fhwa federal highway administration u.s. department of transportation fra federal railway administration u.s. department of transportation fss federal specifications and standards general services administration fta federal transit administration ieee institute of electrical and electronic engineers ies illuminating engineers society imsa international municipal signal association ipcea insulated power cable engineers association irt institute for rapid transit mbma metal building manufacturers association nchrp national cooperative highway research program msmt maryland standard method of tests as developed by the state highway administration mdmutcd maryland manual on uniform traffic control devices nbfu national board of fire underwriters nbs national bureau of standards nec national electric code nesc national electric safety code nema national electrical manufacturers association nfpa national fire protection association osha occupational safety and health administration rlmi reflector and lamp manufacturers institute sae society of automotive engineers sawp society of american wood preservers sspc society for protective coatings ul underwriters laboratories incorporated qpl qualified products list num num definitions and terms gpnum definitions awardthe decision by a procurement agency to execute a purchase agreement or contract after all necessary approvals have been obtained .
bida statement of price terms of sale and description of the supplies services construction or constructionrelated services offered by a bidder to the state in response to an invitation for bids .
bid bondsee proposal guaranty .
bid formthe approved form on which an administration requires bids to be set forth and submitted .
biddera person formally submitting a bid for the work contemplated acting directly or through a duly authorized representative .
boardthe board of public works of the state of maryland .
businessa corporation partnership individual sole proprietorship joint venture or any other legal entity through which commercial activity is conducted .
calendar dayevery day shown on the calendar saturdays sundays and holidays included .
change ordera written order signed by the responsible procurement officer directing a contractor to make changes which the changes clause of a contract authorizes the procurement officer to order with or without the consent of the contractor .
tcnum shall also apply .
constructionthe process of building altering repairing improving or demolishing any structure building or other improvement to real property .
contractany agreement entered into by a procurement agency for the acquisition of supplies services construction construction related services architectural services or engineering services .
contract does not include num collective bargaining agreements with employee organizations or agreements creating employeremployee relationships as defined in article numa section numaanum annotated code of maryland .
num medicaid medicare judicare or similar reimbursement contracts which user eligibility and cost are set by law or regulation .
num num definitions and terms contract documentsthe written agreement executed between an administration and the successful bidder covering the performance of the work and furnishing of labor equipment and materials by which the contractor is bound to perform the work and furnish the labor equipment and materials and by which the administration is obligated to compensate him therefore at the mutually established and accepted rate or price .
the contract documents shall include the invitation for bids notice to contractors instructions to bidders proposal contract forms and bonds general provisions specifications supplemental specifications all special provisions all technical provisions all plans and notices to proceed also any written change orders and supplemental agreements that are required to complete the construction of the work in an acceptable manner including authorized extension thereof contract drawingssee definition of plans .
contract item pay iteman item of work specifically described and for which a price either unit or lump sum is provided .
it includes the performance of all work and the furnishing of all labor equipment and materials described herein or described in any supplemental specifications or special provisions .
contract modificationany written alteration in the specifications delivery point date of delivery contract period price quantity or other provision of any existing contract whether accomplished in accordance with a contract provision or by mutual action of the parties to the contract .
it includes change orders extra work orders supplemental agreements contract amendments or reinstatements .
contractorany person having a contract with a procurement agency .
contractor does not include an employee with an employment contract or an employee organization with a collective bargaining agreement .
daycalendar day unless otherwise designated .
invitation for bidsany document whether attached or incorporated by reference used for soliciting bids under procurement by competitive sealed bidding and small procurement procedures including requests for quotations .
materialsany substances specified for use in the construction of the project and its appurtenances .
notice to contractorsthe advertisement for bids for all required work or materials .
such advertisement will indicate the location and num num definitions and terms magnitude of the work to be done or the character and quantity of the material to be furnished and the time and place of the opening of bids .
notice to proceeda written notice to the contractor of the date on or before which he shall begin the prosecution of the work to be done under the contract .
payment bondsecurity as stated in comar numb as a guarantee that contractor will pay in full all bills and accounts for materials and labor used in the work as provided by law .
performance bondsecurity as stated in comar numb guaranteeing complete performance of the contract .
personany individual or a corporation partnership sole proprietorship joint stock company joint venture unincorporated association union committee club or other organization or legal entity .
plansthe official drawings issued by the administration as part of the contract documents including those incorporated in the contract documents by reference .
proposalthe response by an offeror to a request for proposals issued by a procurement agency to obtain goods or labor .
the response may include but is not limited to an offerors price and terms for the proposed contract and description of technical expertise work experience and other information as requested in the solicitation .
as used herein the word proposal means bid .
proposal guarantythe security in the form stated in comar numb designated in the proposal to be furnished by the offeror as a guaranty of good faith to enter into a contract with the state if the work of constructing the improvement is awarded to him .
resident businessa business whose principal office or principal base of operations is located in the state .
responsible bidder or offerora person who has the capability in all respects to perform fully the contract requirements and the integrity and reliability that shall assure good faith performance .
responsive bida bid submitted in response to an invitation for bids that conforms in all material respects to the requirements contained in the invitation for bids .
specificationa written description of functional characteristics or the nature of a construction item to be procured .
it may include a num num definitions and terms statement of any of the users requirements and may provide for inspection testing or preparation of a construction item before procurement .
statethe state of maryland acting through its authorized representative .
subcontractany agreement entered into by the contractor or a subcontractor for a portion of the construction or any other part of the work in connection with and under the terms of the contract .
subcontractorany person undertaking a portion of the construction or any other part of the work under the terms of the contract by virtue of an agreement with the contractor or a subcontractor who prior to such undertaking has received the approval of the administration .
subcontractor does not include an employee with an employment contract or an employee organization with a collective bargaining agreement .
superintendentthe executive representative of the contractor authorized to receive and execute instructions from the procurement officer and who shall supervise and direct the construction .
supplemental specificationsadditions and revisions to the standard specifications .
generally include new or improved procedures construction items or materials developed subsequent to the publication of standard specifications .
suretythe corporate body bound with and for the contractor for the full and complete performance of the contract and for the payment of all debts pertaining to the work .
when applying to the bid bond it refers to the corporate body which engages to be responsible in the execution by the bidder of a satisfactory contract .
third tier contractingthe process in which the contractor subcontracts a portion of the contract to a subcontractor who in turn subcontracts a portion of the contract to a third party .
this latter action is termed entering into a third tier contract .
workwork shall be understood to mean the furnishing of all labor materials equipment and other incidentals necessary to the successful completion of the project and the carrying out of all the duties and obligations imposed by the contract .
num num bidding requirements and conditions gpsection num bidding requirements and conditions gpnum bid irrevocable unless otherwise provided in the invitation for bids bid prices are irrevocable for num days following bid opening .
gpnum contents of bid forms all papers included in bound thereto or attached to the bid form are necessary parts thereof and shall not be detached separated or altered .
the plans specifications supplemental specifications referred to in the specifications and all other contract documents will be considered a part of the bid form whether attached thereto or not .
gpnum interpretation of quantities in bid schedule where designated as estimated quantities the quantities in the prepared bid schedule are approximate only .
payment to the contractor will be made only for the actual quantities of work performed or materials furnished in accordance with the contract and as provided in gpnum variations in estimated quantities .
gpnum site investigation the contractor acknowledges that he has investigated and satisfied himself as to the conditions affecting the work including but not restricted to those bearing upon transportation disposal handling and storage of materials availability of labor water electric power roads and uncertainties of weather river stages tides or similar physical conditions at the site and confirmation and conditions of the ground the character of equipment and facilities needed preliminary to and during prosecution of the work .
the contractor further acknowledges that he has satisfied himself as to the character quality and quantity of surface and subsurface materials or obstacles to be encountered insofar as this information is reasonably ascertainable from an inspection of the site including all exploratory work done by the state as well as from information presented by the drawings and specifications made a part of this contract .
any failure by the contractor to acquaint himself with the available information may not relieve him from responsibility for estimating num num bidding requirements and conditions properly the difficulty or cost of successfully performing the work .
the state assumes no responsibility for any conclusions or interpretations made by the contractor on the basis of the information made available by the state .
gpnum taxesresponsibility for payment exemptions forms to file etc .
a the contractor is responsible for and by submitting a bid agrees to pay all retail sales income real estate sales and use transportation and special taxes applicable to and assessable against any materials equipment processes and operations incident to or involved in the construction .
the contractor is responsible for ascertaining and acquainting himself with such taxes and making all necessary arrangements to pay same .
b the contractor shall indicate its federal tax identification or social security number on the face of each invoice billed to the administration .
c the administration or the comptroller of the treasury may withhold any payment under this contract until the contractor and any subcontractors performing any duties under this contract have paid all state taxes or other obligations due the state of maryland .
the taxes or other obligations shall be resolved either by setoff of the amount due the contractor against the amounts due the state or by direct payment .
gpnum preparation of bid on administration contracts the contractor may elect to submit his bid on forms generated in the development of his bid as specified in tcnum preparation of bid .
a the bidder shall submit his bid upon the blank forms furnished by the administration .
the bidder shall specify a price in dollars and cents for each pay item given and shall show the products of the respective unit prices and quantities written in figures in the column provided for that purpose together with the total amount of the bid obtained by adding the amounts of the several items .
b the bid forms shall be filled out legibly in ink or typed .
the bid if submitted by an individual shall be signed by the individual .
if submitted by a partnership the bid shall be signed num num bidding requirements and conditions by such member or members of the partnership an have authority to bind the partnership .
if submitted by a corporation or other business entity the same shall be signed by an officer with his or her position stated below the signature line .
such signature shall constitute the contractors representation and warrant that the signing party has contractors authorization to do so binding the contractor to the bid and to the contract .
all bids shall be signed in ink .
all erasures or alterations shall be initialed by the signer in ink .
c bid samples and descriptive literature .
if the invitation for bids requires the bidder to furnish samples or descriptive literature it shall be submitted with the bid unless the invitation for bids provides otherwise .
d offerors shall identify those portions of their proposals which they deem to be confidential proprietary information or trade secrets and provide any justification of why such materials should not be disclosed by the state under the maryland public information act section num et seq .
of the state government article of the annotated code of maryland .
e foreign corporations pursuant to the corporations and associations title num of the annotated code of maryland corporations not incorporated in the state shall register with the state department of assessments and taxation before doing any interstate or foreign business in this state .
before doing any intrastate business in this state a foreign corporation shall qualify with the department of assessments and taxation .
gpnum proposal guaranty a no bid will be considered for any contract in excess of num unless accompanied by a guaranty in an amount not less than num percent of the amount bid or such amount as may be specified elsewhere in the bid documents and made payable to the state of maryland .
b acceptable forms of security for bid guaranty shall be num a bond in a form satisfactory to the state underwritten by a surety company authorized to do business in this state num a bank certified check bank cashiers check bank treasurers check or trust account num num bidding requirements and conditions num pledge of securities backed by the full faith and credit of the united states government or bonds issued by the state of maryland or num cash or other securitiesif submitted pursuant to comar num .
gpnum delivery of bids each bid must be submitted in a sealed envelope plainly marked to indicate its contents .
when sent by mail the sealed bid must be addressed to the administration at the address and in care of the official in whose office the bids are to be received .
all bids shall be filed prior to the time and at the place specified in the notice to contractors .
bids received after the time for opening of bids will be treated in accordance with the provisions of gpnum .
gpnum communications and interpretations prior to bid opening any information regarding the requirements or the interpretation of any provision of the general provisions special general provisions specifications or any part of the bidding documents shall be requested in writing from the procurement officer and delivered no later than num days prior to the scheduled date of bid opening .
responses to questions or inquiries having any material effect on the bids shall be made by written addenda or by written notice sent to all prospective bidders .
do not make verbal inquiries .
any verbal interpretations or oral prebid statements made by state employees or their representatives shall not be binding upon the state .
gpnum amendments to invitations for bids a form .
each amendment to an invitation for bids shall be in writing and identified as such .
b acknowledgements .
unless otherwise provided the bidder shall acknowledge receipt of all amendments .
num num bidding requirements and conditions gpnum preopening modification or withdrawal of bids a procedure .
bids may be modified or withdrawn by written notice delivered to and received in the office designated in the invitation for bids before the time and date set for bid opening .
written notice of modification or withdrawal may be delivered by hand delivery overnight carrier or by us postal mail .
any notice addressed in this subsection must be received before the time and date set for bid opening .
b disposition of bid security .
if a bid is withdrawn in accordance with this regulation the bid security if any shall be returned to the bidder .
gpnum late bids late withdrawals and late modification a policy .
any bid received at the place designated in the solicitation after the time and date set for receipt of bids is late .
any request for withdrawal or request for modification received after the time and date set for opening of bids at the place designated for opening is late .
b treatment .
a late bid late request for modification or late request for withdrawal may not be considered .
late bids will be returned to the bidder unopened .
upon written approval of the office of the attorney general exceptions may be made when a late bid withdrawal or modification is received before contract award and the bid withdrawal or modification would have been timely but for the action or inaction of state personnel directing the procurement activity or their employees .
note provision gpnumb does not apply to federal aid projects .
gpnum opening and recording of bids a opening and recording .
bids and modifications shall be opened publicly at the time date and place designated in the invitation for bids .
the name of each bidder the bid price and such other information as is deemed appropriate shall be read aloud or otherwise made available .
this information also shall be recorded at the time of bid opening .
the bids shall be tabulated num num bidding requirements and conditions or a bid abstract made .
the opened bid shall be available for public inspection at a reasonable time after bid opening but in any case before contract award except to the extent the bidder designates trade secrets or other proprietary data to be confidential as set forth in comar num .
material so designated shall accompany the bid and shall be readily separable from the bid in order to facilitate public inspection of the nonconfidential portion of the bid .
prices makes and model or catalog numbers of the items offered deliveries and terms of payment shall be publicly available at a reasonable time after bid opening but in any event before contract award regardless of any designation to the contrary at the time of bid opening .
b confidential data .
the procurement officer shall examine the bids to determine the validity of any requests for nondisclosure of trade secrets and other proprietary data identified in writing .
confidential proprietary information and trade secrets furnished by a bidder or offeror may be disclosed to another state agency if there is a need for the information and may not be disclosed outside of state government except as provided by the public information act or other applicable laws of this state .
gpnum mistakes in bids a mistakes discovered before opening .
a bidder may correct mistakes discovered before the time and date set for bid opening by withdrawing or correcting the bid as provided in gpnum .
b confirmation of bid .
if the procurement officer knows or has reason to conclude that a mistake may have been made the bidder may be required to confirm the bid .
situations in which confirmation may be requested include obvious apparent errors on the face of the bid or a bid unreasonably lower than the other bids submitted .
if the bidder alleges mistake the bid may be corrected or withdrawn upon written approval of the office of the attorney general if any of the following conditions are met num if the mistake and intended correction are clearly evident on the face of the bid document the bid shall be corrected to the intended correct bid and may not be withdrawn .
examples of mistakes that may be clearly evident on the face of the bid document are typographical errors errors in extending unit prices transposition errors and arithmetical errors .
num num bidding requirements and conditions num a bidder may be permitted to withdraw a low bid if a a mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document but the intended correct bid is not similarly evident or b the bidder submits proof of evidentiary value which clearly and convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made .
c mistakes discovered after award .
mistakes may not be corrected after award of the contract except when the procurement officer and the head of a procurement agency makes a determination that it would be unconscionable not to allow the mistake to be corrected .
changes in price are not permitted .
corrections shall be submitted to and approved by the office of the attorney general .
gpnum minor irregularities or informalities a general .
minor irregularities or informalities in bids as defined below may be waived if the procurement officer determines that it shall be in the states best interest .
the procurement officer may either give a bidder an opportunity to cure any deficiency resulting from a technicality or minor irregularity in its bid or waive the deficiency where it is to the states advantage to do so .
when at any public opening of bids a bid appears to be irregular as herein specified this fact may be announced when read .
said bid shall be read as other bids and then referred to the procurement officer for consideration and appropriate action thereon in accordance with these general provisions law and regulation .
a minor irregularity is one which is merely a matter of form and not of substance or pertains to some immaterial or inconsequential defect or variation of a bid or proposal from the exact requirement of the solicitation the correction or waiver of which would not be prejudicial to other bidders or offerors .
the defect or variation in the bid or proposal is immaterial and inconsequential when its significance as to price quantity quality or delivery is trivial or negligible when contrasted with the total cost or scope of the supplies or services being procured and the intent and meaning of the entire bid or proposal is clear .
num num bidding requirements and conditions gpnum cancellation of invitations for bids a before opening of bids a solicitation may be canceled in whole or in part when the state determines this action is fiscally advantageous or otherwise in its best interest .
c when a solicitation is canceled before bid opening the bids shall be returned to the vendors submitting them and notice of cancellation shall be included .
gpnum rejection of individual bids or proposals a any bid may be rejected in whole or in part when it is in the best interest of the state to do so .
b reasons for rejection of a bid may include but are not limited to num the bid is not responsive i.e .
it does not conform in all material respects to the solicitation .
num unreasonable price num the bidder submitting the bid is determined to be nonresponsible .
a determination of nonresponsibility may be made for but is not limited to any of the following reasons a bidder debarred or ineligible and period of debarment or ineligibility not expired .
b the unit prices contained in a bid are unbalanced .
c evidence of collusion among bidders .
d inadequate quantity andor quality of experience plant equipment financing manpower or other resources required to perform the contract .
e bidders workload which in the judgement of the administration might hinder or prevent the prompt completion of the subject work if awarded .
f default by the bidder on other contracts .
num num bidding requirements and conditions g failure to pay or satisfactorily settle all reasonable and just bills due for labor and material on prior or current contracts .
h the same person has an interest in more than one bid on a contract exclusive of being named by another bidder as a subcontractor .
i failure to perform satisfactorily on other contracts awarded and the conditions leading to unsatisfactory performance remain unresolved .
j any other reason affecting the bidders ability to perform or record of business integrity .
k bidder not otherwise qualified and eligible to receive an award under applicable laws and regulations .
num the bidder or offeror fails to supply information to the procurement officer promptly after notification from the procurement officer that such information is required in connection with a determination to be made pursuant to this gpnum .
gpnum rejection of all bids a after opening of bids or proposals but before award all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part when the procurement officer with the approval of the agency head or his designee determines that this action is fiscally advantageous or otherwise in the states best interest .
b a notice of rejection of all bids shall be sent to all vendors that submitted bids and bids which have been opened shall be retained by the administration .
gpnum bid evaluation and award a general .
the contract is to be awarded to the responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements and evaluation criteria set forth in the invitation for bids and is either the lowest bid price or lowest evaluated bid price .
b determination of lowest bidder .
bids shall be evaluated to determine which bidder offers the lowest cost to the state in num num bidding requirements and conditions accordance with the evaluation criteria set forth in the invitation for bids .
except as otherwise provided under gpnum mistakes in bids num the unit price will govern in the event of a discrepancy between the unit price bid and the extended price product of unit price multiplied by the quantity .
num the sum of the extended prices will govern in the event of a discrepancy between the total lump sum bid and the extended prices .
num the written words will govern in the event of a discrepancy between the prices written in words and the prices written in figures .
num if a unit price has been omitted the unit price will be determined by dividing the extended price by the quantity .
the administration reserves the right to make the award by item or groups of items or total bid if it is in the best interest of the state to do so unless the bidder specifies in his bid that a particular or progressive award is not acceptable .
c award .
upon determination of the lowest bidder review of the bid for responsiveness and satisfaction that the bidder is responsible the contract may be awarded to that bidder .
a contract may be awarded to a bidder offering a higher quality item than that designated in the invitation for bids if that bidder is also the lowest responsive and responsible bidder .
gpnum tie bids on administration federal aid contracts the preference to instate contractors does not apply .
a definition .
tie bids are responsive bids from responsible bidders that are identical in price terms and conditions and which meet all the requirements and evaluation criteria set forth in the invitation for bids .
b award .
in the instance of tie bids the award shall be made in accordance with comar num .
if identical low bids are received from an instate and outofstate bidder the award shall be made to the instate bidder .
if identical low bids are received num num bidding requirements and conditions from instate bidders or from outofstate bidders a drawing shall be conducted and a witness shall be present to verify and certify the result .
gpnum resident business preference a when awarding a contract by competitive sealed bidding if the state in which a nonresident firm submitting the lowest responsible bid is located gives a competitive advantage to its resident businesses a procurement agency may give an identical competitive advantage to the maryland firm submitting the lowest responsive and responsible bid in order to determine contract award .
b a competitive advantage may include num a percentage preference num an employee residency requirement num any other provision that favors a nonresident firm over a maryland firm .
c this provision gpnum shall not apply if it conflicts with any federal grant or regulation affecting this contract .
gpnum multiple or alternate bids unless multiple or alternate bids are requested in the solicitation these bids may not be accepted .
however if a bidder clearly indicates a base bid it shall be considered for award as though it were the only bid submitted by the bidder .
gpnum bid protests a bid protest must be in writing and filed with the procurement officer .
oral objections whether or not acted on are not protests .
a time for filing .
num a bid protest shall be filed not later than num days after the basis for protest is known or should have been known whichever is earlier .
num num award and execution of contract num a protest based on alleged improprieties in the solicitation which are apparent before the bid opening or the closing date for receipt of initial proposals shall be filed before the opening date or the closing date for receipt of initial proposals .
b content of written protest .
num name and address of protestor .
num bid or contract number .
num reasons for protest .
num supporting exhibits evidence or documents to support claim .
if not available within filing time indicate expected availability date .
num mark envelope protest .
bid protests will be resolved pursuant to comar num .
gpsection num award and execution of contract gpnum award of contract see gpnum written notice of award shall be sent to the successful bidder .
a notice of award may be rescinded at any time prior to execution of the contract by the administrator .
gpnum return of proposal guaranty all proposal guaranties except those of the three lowest bidders will be returned immediately following opening and the review of the proposals .
the guaranty of the three lowest bidders will be returned following the execution of the contract and approval by the board if required .
the contractor has the right to substitute a bid bond for other bid security at any time prior to return of the proposal guaranty .
num num award and execution of contract gpnum performance bond and payment bond requirements a acceptable security for performance and payment shall be as stated in comar numb .
b performance and payment bonds .
a performance and payment bond is required for all construction contracts in excess of num each in the amount equal to at least num percent of the contract price .
the bonds shall be delivered by the bidder to the administration no later than the time the contract is to be executed .
if the bidder fails to deliver the required bonds his bid shall be rejected his bid security shall be enforced and award of the contract may be made to the next lowest responsive and responsible bidder .
num the required performance bond shall be in the form specified in comar num exhibit a .
num the required payment bond shall be in the form specified in comar num exhibit b. gpnum execution of contract a the contract shall be effective only upon receipt by the administration of the proper executed contract form and performance and payment bonds if required approval by the board of public works if required and execution of the contract by the administration .
b after a notice of award as provided in gpnum has been issued to a bidder the administration shall forward the formal contract form and the appropriate forms for the payment and performance bonds if any to the bidder for execution .
the bidder will execute the contract form and return same together with fully executed payment and performance bonds if any to the administration within num days after receipt of same .
after receipt of properly executed contract form and payment and performance bonds if any the administration will execute the contract within num days and forward the bidder a copy provided however that the board has approved the contract if such approval is required .
if the administration fails to execute the contract and the period of irrevocability has expired the bidder may as its sole remedy withdraw its bids .
num num scope of work gpnum failure to execute contract failure of the bidder to execute the contract and file acceptable security as defined in gpnum within the time aforesaid shall be just cause for the annulment of the award and the forfeiture of the proposal guaranty which shall become the property of the state of maryland not as a penalty but in liquidation of damages sustained .
award may then be made to the next lowest responsive responsible bidder or the work may be readvertised and constructed under contract or otherwise as the administration may decide .
gpsection num scope of work gpnum intent of contract a the contractor shall within specified tolerances perform all work in accordance with the lines grades typical cross sections dimensions and other data shown on the plans or as modified by written orders including the furnishing of all materials implements machinery equipment tools supplies transportation labor and all other things necessary to the satisfactory prosecution and completion of the project in full compliance with the contract requirements .
b the documents composing the contract documents are intended to be complementary and to describe the construction and completion of the work .
anything mentioned in the specifications and not shown on the contract drawings or shown on the contract drawing and not mentioned in the specifications shall be of like effect as if it is shown or mentioned in both .
c omissions from the drawings or specifications or the misdescription of details of work which are manifestly necessary to carry out the intent of the drawings and specifications or which are customarily performed shall not relieve the contractor from performing such omitted or misdescribed details of work but they shall be performed as if fully and correctly set forth and described in the drawings and specifications .
num num scope of work gpnum general provisions controlling in the event of a conflict between these general provisions and any other provision of the contract documents these general provisions shall prevail unless such other provision expressly provides to the contrary .
gpnum entire contract the contract documents represent the entire and integrated agreement between the parties hereto and supersedes all prior negotiations representations or agreements either written or oral .
gpnum variations in estimated quantities on administration contracts in addition to gpnum variations in estimated quantities tcnum estimated items shall apply .
where the quantity of a pay item in this contract is an estimated quantity and where the actual quantity of such pay item varies more than num percent above or below the estimated quantity stated in this contract an equitable adjustment in the contract price shall be made upon demand of either party .
the equitable adjustment shall be based upon any increase or decrease in costs due solely to the variation above num percent or below num percent of the estimated quantity .
if the quantity variation is such as to cause an increase in the time necessary for completion the procurement officer shall upon receipt of a written request for an extension of time within num days from the beginning of the delay or within a further period of time which may be granted by the procurement officer before the date of final settlement of the contract ascertain the facts and make the adjustment for extending the completion date as in his judgement the findings justify .
gpnum differing site conditions a the contractor shall promptly and before such conditions are disturbed notify the procurement officer in writing of num subsurface or latent physical conditions at the site differing materially from those indicated in this contract or num unknown physical conditions at the site of an unusual nature differing materially from those ordinarily num num scope of work encountered and generally recognized as inherent in work of the character provided for in this contract .
the procurement officer shall promptly investigate the conditions and if he finds that such conditions do materially so differ and cause an increase or decrease in the contractors cost of or the time required for performance of any part of the work under this contract whether or not changed as a result of such conditions an equitable adjustment shall be made and the contract modified in writing accordingly .
b no claim of the contractor under this clause shall be allowed unless the contractor has given the notice required in a above provided however the time prescribed therefore may be extended by the state .
d no claim by the contractor for an equitable adjustment here under shall be allowed if asserted after final payment under this contract .
gpnum changes a the procurement officer may unilaterally at any time without notice to the sureties if any by written order designated or indicated to be a change order make any change in the work within the general scope of the contract including but not limited to changes num in the specifications including drawings and designs num in the method or manner of performance of the work num in the statefurnished facilities equipment materials services or site or num directing acceleration in the performance of the work .
b any other written order or an oral order including a direction instruction interpretation or determination from the procurement officer that causes any such change shall be treated as a change order under this clause provided that the contractor gives the procurement officer written notice stating the date circumstances and source of the order and that the contractor regards the order as a change order .
num num scope of work c except as herein provided no order statement or conduct of the procurement officer shall be treated as a change under this clause or entitle the contractor to an equitable adjustment hereunder .
d subject to paragraph f if any change under this clause causes an increase or decrease in the contractors cost of or the time required for the performance of any part of the work under this contract whether or not changed by any order an equitable adjustment shall be made and the contract modified in writing accordingly .
provided however that except for claims based on defective specifications no claim for any change under b above shall be allowed for any costs incurred more than num days before the contractor gives written notice as therein required and provided further that in the case of defective specifications for which the state is responsible the equitable adjustment shall include any increased cost reasonably incurred by the contractor in attempting to comply with such defective specifications .
e if the contractor intends to assert a claim for an equitable adjustment under this clause he shall within num days after receipt of a written change order under a above or the furnishing of written notice under b above submit to the procurement officer a written statement setting forth the general nature and monetary extent of such claim unless this period is extended by the state .
the statement of claim hereunder may be included in the notice under b above .
f each contract modification or change order that affects contract price shall be subject to the prior written approval of the procurement officer and other appropriate authorities and to prior certification of the appropriate fiscal authority of fund availability and the effect of the modification or change order on the project budget or the total construction cost .
if according to the certification of the fiscal authority the contract modification or change order will cause an increase in cost that will exceed budgeted and available funds the modification or change order may not be made unless sufficient additional funds are made available or the scope of the project is adjusted to permit its completion within the project budget .
g no claim by the contractor for an equitable adjustment hereunder shall be allowed if asserted after final payment under this contract .
num num scope of work gpnum negotiated payment provision if the contractor is entitled to an equitable adjustment the contractor shall be allowed to add the following maximum percentages for overhead and profit to his costs for labor and materials a twenty percent may be added by the contractor for overhead and profit for work performed by his own forces .
b fifteen percent may be added by the subcontractor for overhead and profit for work performed by the subcontractor the contractor may add an additional num percent of the subcontractors costs for labor and materials .
c the provisions of paragraphs a and b above apply only to price adjustments negotiated prior to completion of the added or changed work and do not apply to work performed on a force account basis as provided for in section gpnum on administration contracts tcnum force account shall apply or gpnum variations in estimated quantities .
gpnum unauthorized work work done contrary to or regardless of the instructions of the procurement officer work done beyond the lines and grades shown on the contract drawings or as given or any extra work done without written authority will be considered as unauthorized and at the expense of the contractor and will not be measured or paid for .
work so done may be ordered removed andor replaced at the contractors expense .
gpnum final clean up upon completion of the work specified in the contract and before final payment will be made the construction area and all other adjoining areas other than those owned by him occupied by the contractor during the construction of said contract shall be cleaned of all surplus and discarded materials spilled materials excess materials left deposited on the permanent work as a result of the contractors operations false work and rubbish and temporary structures and buildings that were placed thereon by the contractor .
the adjoining areas mentioned above outside the normal pay limits for seeding will be reshaped seeded and mulched or otherwise restored as directed by the procurement officer at the contractors expense .
num num scope of work gpnum warranty of construction on administration contracts gpnum warranty of construction does not apply unless otherwise specified in the contract documents .
a in addition to any other warranties at law or set out elsewhere in this contract the contractor warrants for one year after final acceptance of the work that work performed under this contract conforms to the contract requirements and is free of any defect of equipment material or design furnished or workmanship performed by the contractor or any of his subcontractors or suppliers at any tier .
with respect to any part of the work which the state takes possession of prior to final acceptance such warranty shall continue for a period of one year from the date the state takes possession .
under this warranty the contractor shall remedy at his own expense any such failure to conform or any such defect .
in addition the contractor shall remedy at his own expense any damage to state owned or controlled real or personal property when that damage is the result of the contractors failure to conform to contract requirements or any such defect of equipment material workmanship or design .
the contractor shall also restore any work damaged in fulfilling the terms of this clause .
the contractors warranty with respect to work repaired or replaced hereunder will run for one year from the date of such repair or replacement .
b the state shall notify the contractor in writing within a reasonable time after the discovery of any failure defect or damage .
c should the contractor fail to remedy any failure defect or damage described in a above within a reasonable time after receipt of notice thereof the state shall have the right to replace repair or otherwise remedy such failure defect or damage at the contractors expense .
d in addition to the other rights and remedies provided by this clause all subcontractors manufacturers and suppliers warranties expressed or implied respecting any work and materials shall at the direction of the state be enforced by the contractor for the benefit of the state .
in such case if the contractors warranty under a above has expired any suit directed by the state to enforce a subcontractors manufacturers or suppliers warranty shall be at the expense of the state .
the contractor shall obtain any warranties which the subcontractors manufacturers or suppliers would give in normal commercial practice .
num num control of work e if directed by the procurement officer the contractor shall require any such warranties to be executed in writing to the state .
f notwithstanding any other provision of this clause unless such a defect is caused by the negligence of the contractor or his subcontractors or suppliers at any tier the contractor shall not be liable for the repair or any defects of material or design furnished by the state nor for the repair of any damage which results from any such defect in state furnished material or design .
g the warranty specified herein shall not limit the states rights under gpnum acceptance clause of this contract .
gpsection num control of work gpnum authority of the procurement officer a the procurement officer shall decide all questions which may arise as to the quality and acceptability of materials furnished and work performed and as to the rate of progress of said work all questions which may arise as to the interpretation of any or all plans and specifications and all questions as to the acceptable fulfillment of the contract on the part of the contractor .
b the procurement officer shall determine the amount and quantity of work performed and materials which are to be paid for under the contract .
c the procurement officer shall have the authority to suspend the work wholly or in part due to the failure of the contractor to carry out provisions of the contract .
gpnum conformity with contract requirements all work performed and all materials furnished shall be in conformity with the contract requirements .
in the event the procurement officer finds the materials or the finished product in which the materials are used or the work performed are not in reasonably close conformity with the contract requirements and have num num control of work resulted in an inferior or unsatisfactory product the work or materials shall be removed and replaced or otherwise corrected by and at the expense of the contractor .
in the event the procurement officer finds the materials or the finished product in which the materials are used are not in conformity with the contract requirements but that acceptable work has been produced he shall then make a determination if the work shall be accepted .
in this event the procurement officer will document the basis of acceptance by a change order which will provide for an appropriate adjustment in the contract price .
any action taken pursuant to this paragraph may not result in an increase of the contract price .
gpnum discrepancies in the contract documents in the event the contractor discovers any discrepancies in the contract documents he shall immediately notify the procurement officer .
the procurement officer will then make such corrections and interpretations as may be deemed necessary for fulfilling the intent of the contract .
for governing order of contract documents see tcnum .
gpnum cooperation by contractor the contractor will keep available on the project site at all times one complete set of contract documents .
the contractor shall give the work the constant attention necessary to facilitate the progress thereof and shall cooperate with the procurement officer and his inspectors in every way possible .
the contractor shall assign to the contract as his agent a competent superintendent capable of communicating in english and capable of reading and thoroughly understanding the contract documents and thoroughly experienced in the type of work being performed who shall receive instructions from the procurement officer or his authorized representatives .
the superintendent shall have full authority to execute the order or directions of the procurement officer without delay and to promptly supply such materials equipment tools labor and incidentals as may be required .
such superintendence shall be furnished irrespective of the amount of work sublet .
said superintendent shall be on the project site at all times when the work is in progress .
num num control of work gpnum cooperation with utilities it is understood and agreed that the contractor has considered in his bid all of the permanent and temporary utility appurtenances in their present or relocated positions and that no additional compensation will be allowed for delays inconvenience or damage sustained by him due to any interference from the said utility appurtenances or the operation of moving them .
the contractor shall have responsibility for notifying all affected utility companies prior to the necessity of performing any work on their utilities and shall cooperate with them in achieving the desired result .
all damage to utility facilities caused by the contractors operations shall be the responsibility of the contractor .
gpnum cooperation between contractors a separate contractors on adjoining or overlapping work shall cooperate with each other as necessary .
such cooperation shall include num arrangement and conduct of work num storage and disposal of materials etc .
by each in such manner as to not unnecessarily interfere with or hinder the progress of the work being performed by other contractors .
contiguous work shall be joined in an acceptable manner .
b the administration and department shall have the right at any time to contract for and perform other work on near over or under the work covered by this contract .
in addition other work may be performed under the jurisdiction of another administration or state agency .
in such cases when a dispute arises among contractors the procurement officer will decide which of the procurement officers will have jurisdiction over said dispute .
the contractor shall cooperate fully with such other contractors and carefully fit his own work to such other work as may be directed by the procurement officer .
c the contractor agrees that in the event of dispute as to cooperation the procurement officer will act as referee .
the contractor agrees to make no claims against the administration for any inconvenience delay or loss experienced by them because of the presence and operations of other contractors .
num num control of work gpnum authority and duties of inspectors inspectors shall be authorized to inspect all work done and all material furnished .
such inspection may extend to all or any part of the work and to the preparation fabrication or manufacture of the materials to be used .
the inspector is not authorized to revoke alter or waive any requirements of the contract nor is he authorized to approve or accept any portion of the complete project .
he is authorized to call the attention of the contractor to any failure of the work or materials to conform to the contract .
he shall have the authority to reject materials or suspend the work until any questions at issue can be referred to and decided by the procurement officer .
inspectors shall perform their duties at such times and in such manner as will not unnecessarily impede progress on the contract .
the inspector shall in no case act as foreman or perform other duties for the contractor nor interfere with the management of the work by the latter .
any advice instruction direction or other order which the inspector may give the contractor shall not be construed as binding the procurement officer in any way or releasing the contractor from fulfilling all of the terms of the contract .
where there is disagreement between the contractor or his representative and the inspector such as refusal by the contractor to use properly approved material performing work not in compliance with plans and specifications andor refusing to suspend work until problems at issue can be referred to and decided by the procurement officer the inspector will immediately direct the procurement officers attention to the issues of disagreement .
if the contractor still refuses to make corrections comply or suspend work the procurement officer will prepare and deliver in writing to the contractor by mail or otherwise a written order suspending the work and explaining the reason for such shutdown .
as soon as the inspector is advised of the delivery of the shutdown order the inspector shall immediately leave the site of the work and any work performed during the inspectors absence will not be accepted or paid for and may be required to be removed and disposed of at the contractors expense .
gpnum inspection of work all materials and each part or detail of the work shall be subject at all times to inspection by the procurement officer or his authorized representative and the contractor will be held strictly to the materials workmanship and the diligent execution of the contract .
such inspection may include mill plant or shop inspection and any material furnished under the contract is subject to such inspection .
the procurement officer num num control of work or his representative shall be allowed access to all parts of the work and shall be furnished with such information and assistance by the contractor as is required to make a complete and detailed inspection .
if the procurement officer requests it the contractor at any time before acceptance of the work shall remove or uncover such portions of the finished work as may be directed .
after examination the contractor shall restore said portions of the work to the standards required by the contract .
should the work thus exposed or examined prove acceptable adjustments in contract time and price will be made pursuant to section gpnum for the uncovering or removing and the replacing of the covering or making good of the parts removed .
should the work so exposed or examined prove unacceptable the uncovering or removing and replacing shall be at the contractors expense .
when the united states government or any railroad corporation or other agency is to pay a portion of the cost of the work covered by this contract their respective representatives shall have the right to inspect the work .
gpnum removal of defective work all work and materials which do not conform to the requirement of the contract will be considered unacceptable unless otherwise determined acceptable under the provisions in gpnum .
any defective work whether the result of poor workmanship use of defective materials damage through carelessness or any other cause found to exist shall be removed and replaced by work and materials which shall conform to the specifications or shall be remedied otherwise in an acceptable manner authorized by the procurement officer .
upon failure on the part of the contractor to comply promptly with any order of the procurement officer made under the provisions of these general provisions the procurement officer shall have authority to cause defective work to be remedied or removed and replaced and unauthorized work to be removed and to deduct the costs from any monies due or to become due the contractor under this contract .
gpnum load restrictions a the contractor shall comply with all state and local requirements pertaining to speed size and weight of motor vehicles .
num num control of work b the administration may indicate in the contract load restrictions on any road or structure within the vicinity of the project .
c the contractor shall take into account any and all posted bridges the crossing of which might be contemplated by the work on the contract .
no loads in excess of posted limits will be allowed in the prosecution of the work on any contract unless the required permits are obtained from the appropriate state and local governmental agencies .
d the contractor shall consider possible detrimental effects of operating heavy paving and grading equipment contiguous to retaining walls pipe culverts arches forms for concrete work as well as construction existing prior to this contract .
e the procurement officer shall have the right to limit passage of heavy equipment plus loads when such passage or usage is causing apparent or visible damage to embankments paving structures or any other property .
f within the baltimore city limits the department of transit and traffic of the city of baltimore has jurisdiction for oversize and overweight vehicle movements .
permits are obtainable from the transit and traffic department .
gpnum maintenance of work during construction a the contractor shall maintain the work during construction and until acceptance .
this maintenance shall constitute continuous and effective work prosecuted as required with adequate equipment and forces to the end that all parts of the work be kept in satisfactory condition at all times .
b particular attention shall be given to drainage both permanent and temporary .
the contractor shall use all reasonable precautionary measures to avoid damage or loss that might result from accumulations and concentrations of drainage water and material carried by such water and such drainage shall be diverted or removed when necessary to prevent damage to excavation embankments surfacing structures or property .
suitable measures shall be taken by the contractor to prevent the erosion of soil in all construction areas where the existing ground cover has been removed .
num num control of work c all cost of maintenance work during construction and before final acceptance shall be included in the price bid and the contractor will not be paid additional amount for such work except as otherwise provided .
d in the event that the contractors work is ordered shutdown for failure to comply with the provisions of the contract the contractor shall maintain the entire project as provided herein and provide such ingress and egress for local residents or tenants adjacent to the project site for tenants of the project site and for the general public as may be necessary during the period of suspended work or until the contract has been declared in default .
e on projects where traffic flow is maintained the contractor shall be responsible for repair of all traffic damages to the work either partially or totally completed until such time as the work is accepted by the procurement officer .
responsible as used here shall mean the responsibility for restoration and the cost thereof unless otherwise expressly provided for in the special provisions .
gpnum failure to maintain entire project on administration contracts gpnum failure to maintain entire project does not apply tcnum shall apply .
failure on the part of the contractor at any time to comply with the provisions of gpnum above will result in the procurement officers immediately notifying the contractor to comply with the required maintenance provisions .
in the event that the contractor fails to remedy unsatisfactory maintenance within num hours after receipt of such notice the procurement officer will immediately proceed with adequate forces and equipment to maintain the project and the entire cost of this maintenance will be deducted from monies due the contractor .
gpnum acceptance for maintenance a partial acceptance for maintenance .
if at any time during the performance of the work the contractor substantially completes a unit or portion of the work he may request the procurement officer to make final inspection of that unit .
if the procurement officer finds upon inspection that the unit has been satisfactorily completed in compliance with the contract he may accept that unit as being completed and the contractor may be relieved of further maintenance responsibility for that unit .
generally partial acceptance for maintenance will only be considered when the num num control of work administration feels that such action is in the public interest .
such partial acceptance for maintenance shall in no way void or alter any of the terms of the contract .
b final acceptance for maintenance .
upon due notice from the contractor of presumptive completion of the entire project the procurement officer shall make a construction inspection and if at such inspection all construction provided for and contemplated by the contract is found completed such inspection shall constitute the final inspection and the procurement officer shall make the acceptance for maintenance as of that date and the contractor shall be notified of such acceptance in writing .
after acceptance for maintenance the administration will assume responsibility for maintenance except where otherwise provided by the contract .
c if however at any construction inspection any work in whole or in part is found unsatisfactory the procurement officer shall give the contractor the necessary instructions as to the work required for final completion and acceptance for maintenance .
the contractor forthwith shall comply with and execute such instructions .
upon completion of such work another inspection shall be made which shall constitute the final inspection if the said work is found to have been completed satisfactorily .
in such event the procurement officer shall make the acceptance for maintenance and the contractor shall be notified as aforesaid .
after final acceptance for maintenance the administration will assume responsibility for maintenance except where otherwise provided by the contract .
d unless otherwise provided in this contract acceptance by the state shall be made as promptly as practicable after completion and inspection of all work required by this contract or that portion of the work that the procurement officer determines can be accepted separately .
acceptance shall be final and conclusive except as regards latent defects fraud such gross mistakes as may amount to fraud or the states rights under any warranty or guarantee or any claims or counter claims reserved by the state .
gpnum filing of claim by contractor unless a shorter period is prescribed by law or elsewhere in this contract a the contractor shall file a written notice of claim for extension of time equitable adjustment extra compensation damages or any other matter whether under or relating to this contract with the num num control of work procurement officer within num days after the basis for the claim is known or should have been known whichever is earlier .
b contemporaneously with or within num days of the filing of a notice of a claim but no later than the date that final payment is made a contractor shall submit the claim to the appropriate procurement officer .
the claim shall be in writing and shall contain num an explanation of the claim including reference to all contract provisions upon which it is based num the amount of the claim num the facts upon which the claim is based num all pertinent data and correspondence that the contractor relies upon to substantiate the claim and num a certification by a senior official officer or general partner of the contractor or subcontractor as applicable that to the best of the persons knowledge and belief the claim is made in good faith supporting data are accurate and complete and the amount requested accurately reflects the contract adjustment for which the person believes the administration is liable .
c the claim shall also contain itemized supporting data for the elements of cost the contractor claims to have incurred or it will incur .
this data shall be in sufficient detail to permit analysis by the administration of material labor equipment subcontract and overhead costs as well as profit and shall include all work covered by the claim whether deleted added or changed .
subcontract cost shall be supported by similar detailed data .
d a notice of claim or a claim that is not filed within the prescribed time shall be dismissed .
gpnum disputes a this contract is subject to the provisions of title num subtitle num state finance and procurement article dispute resolution of the annotated code of maryland and comar num administrative and civil remedies .
num num control of work b except as otherwise may be provided by law all disputes arising under or as a result of a breach of this contract that are not disposed of by mutual agreement shall be resolved in accordance with this clause .
c as used herein claim means a written demand or assertion by one of the parties seeking as a legal right the payment of money adjustment or interpretation of contract terms or other relief arising under or relating to this contract .
a voucher invoice or request for payment that is not in dispute when submitted is not a claim under this clause .
however if the submission subsequently is not acted upon in a reasonable time or is disputed either as to liability or amount it may be converted to a claim for the purpose of this clause .
d a claim shall be made in writing and submitted to the procurement officer for decision in consultation with the office of the attorney general .
e when a claim can not be resolved by mutual agreement the contractor shall submit a written request for final decision to the procurement officer .
the written request shall set forth all the facts surrounding the controversy .
f the contractor at the discretion of the procurement officer may be afforded an opportunity to be heard and to offer evidence in support of the claim .
g the procurement officer shall render a written decision on all claims within num days of receipt of the contractors written claim unless the time is extended by mutual agreement of the parties .
if a decision is not issued within num days the procurement officer shall notify the contractor of the time within which a decision shall be rendered and the reasons for such time extension .
the decision shall be furnished to the contractor by certified mail return receipt requested or by any other method that provides evidence of receipt .
the procurement officers decision shall be deemed the final action of the state .
h the procurement officers decision shall be final and conclusive unless the contractor mails or otherwise files a written appeal with the maryland state board of contract appeals within num days of receipt of the decision .
num num control of material i pending resolution of a claim the contractor shall proceed diligently with the performance of the contract in accordance with the procurement officers decision .
gpsection num control of material gpnum general all materials shall meet all quality requirements of the contract .
in order to expedite the inspection and testing of the materials the contractor shall notify the procurement officer in writing of the sources from which he proposes to obtain all materials requiring approval testing inspection or certification prior to incorporation into the work as soon as possible after receipt of notification of award of the contract .
gpnum storage and handling of materials materials shall be so stored as to assure the preservation of their quality and acceptability for the work .
stored materials even though approved before storage may again be inspected prior to their use in the work .
stored materials shall be located so as to facilitate their prompt inspection .
approved portions of the rightofway or project site may be used for storage purposes and for the placing of the contractors plant and equipment such storage areas must be restored to their original condition by the contractor at his expense .
any additional space required must be provided by the contractor at his expense .
materials shall be handled in such a manner as to preserve their quality and acceptability for the work .
gpnum unacceptable materials a materials represented by samples taken and tested in accordance with the specified tests and failing to meet required values shall be considered to be defective regardless of prior tests or approvals .
b unless otherwise allowed by the procurement officer as set forth below defective materials shall be removed from the site with any tags stamps or other markings implying conformance with specifications removed or obliterated .
num num control of material c where defects can be corrected the contractor may propose such corrective action as he deems appropriate to the procurement officer .
the procurement officer may approve the corrective action but in so doing does not assume responsibility for the success thereof .
retests will be made to determine the acceptability of the material after corrective measures have been taken .
no person other than the procurement officer may change any provision of the specifications or the contract without written authorization .
d the cost of replacing correcting andor removal of defective material will be the responsibility of the contractor .
e the cost of repairing or replacing other materials damaged by the installation correction andor removal of defective materials will be the responsibility of the contractor .
gpnum administration furnished material the contractor shall furnish all materials required to complete the work except those specified to be furnished by the administration .
materials furnished by the administration will be delivered or made available to the contractor at the point or points specified in the special provisions .
the cost of handling and placing all materials after they are delivered to the contractor shall be considered as included in the contract price for the item in connection with which they are used .
the contractor shall be held responsible for all material delivered to him and deductions will be made from any monies due him to make good any shortages and deficiencies from any cause whatsoever and for any damage which may occur after such delivery and for any demurrage charges .
in cases where materials are supplied by the administration and incorporated in the contract work by the contractor materials inspection and acceptance will not be prerequisite for acceptance of the final product as the product pertains to these items .
num num legal relations and responsibility to public gpsection num legal relations and responsibility to public gpnum compliance with laws the contractor hereby represents and warrants that a it is qualified to do business in the state of maryland and that it will take such action as from time to time hereafter may be necessary to remain so qualified b it is not in arrears with respect to the payment of any monies due and owing the state of maryland or any department or unit thereof including but not limited to the payment of taxes and employee benefits and that it shall not become so in arrears during the term of this contract c it shall comply with all federal state and local laws regulations and ordinances applicable to its activities and obligations under this contract including the provisions of comar title num that are applicable to construction contracts and which are incorporated herein by reference and d all requirements set forth in federal assistance instruments applicable to this contract shall be satisfied .
therefore to the extent that the requirements which are specified in the assistance instrument conflict with regulations adopted under comar title num the former shall control .
gpnum permits and licenses a the contractor shall procure at his own expense such permits licenses insurance and governmental approval as may be necessary in order to comply with federal state and local laws ordinances and regulations in performance of the work .
he shall further give all notices necessary and incidental to the due and lawful prosecution of the work .
b federal permits from the u.s .
corps of engineers environmental protection agency andor united states coast guard for erection of structures in tidal waters will be obtained by the administration and the contractor shall comply with the requirements of such permits .
any required federal permits num num legal relations and responsibility to public however desired by the contractor for temporary structures such as docks piers anchorages etc .
must be applied for and obtained by the contractor .
gpnum patented devices materials and processes if the contractor is required or desires to use any design device material or process covered by letters of patent or copyright he shall provide for such use by suitable legal agreement with the patentee or owner and a copy of such agreement shall be filed with the administration if no such agreement is made or filed as noted the contractor and the surety shall indemnify and save harmless the state any affected third party or political subdivision from any and all claims for infringement by reason of the use of any such patented design device materials or process or any trademark or copyright and shall indemnify protect and save harmless the state its officers agents and employees with respect to any claim action cost or judgement for patent trademark or copyright infringement arising out of purchase or use of materials construction supplies equipment or services covered by this contract .
gpnum federal participation when the united states government pays all or any portion of the cost of a project the work shall be subject to the inspection of the appropriate federal agency .
such inspection shall in no sense make the federal government a party to this contract and will not interfere in any way with the rights of either party hereunder .
gpnum construction safety and health standards it is a condition of this contract and shall be made a condition of each subcontract entered into pursuant to this contract that the contractor and any subcontractor shall not require any laborer or mechanic employed in performance of the contract to work in surroundings or under working conditions which are unsanitary hazardous or dangerous to his health or safety as determined under construction safety and health standards and regulations title num code of federal regulations part num formerly part num as revised from time to time promulgated by the united states secretary of labor in accordance with section num of the contract work hours and safety standard act num stat .
num and under any construction safety and health standards and regulations promulgated by the num num legal relations and responsibility to public commissioner of labor and industry in accordance with the maryland occupational safety and health act of the labor and employment article title num of the annotated code of maryland as the same may be amended from time to time .
the contractor and each subcontractor shall permit inspection without delay and at any reasonable time on any premises where the work is being performed by a federal or state inspector authorized to investigate compliance with the above mentioned federal and state statutes and regulations .
the contractor further agrees to correct any violations found to exist during such inspection within a reasonable time after the issuance of any citation unless he contests the validity thereof through the appropriate administrative and judicial process .
gpnum public convenience and safety the contractor at all times shall conduct the work in such a manner as to ensure the least practicable obstruction to all forms of traffic .
the convenience of the general public tenants and of the residents along andor adjacent to the improvement shall be provided for .
equipment andor materials stored upon the project shall be placed so as to cause a minimum of obstruction to the public .
sprinkling shall be performed at the direction of the procurement officer .
the contractor shall unless otherwise specified provide and maintain in passable condition such temporary access roads and bridges as may be necessary to accommodate traffic diverted from the project under construction or using the project under construction and shall provide and maintain in a safe condition temporary approaches to and crossings of the project .
existing department facilities planned to be removed but which might be of service to the public during construction are not to be disturbed until other and adequate provisions are made .
existing mailboxes shall be maintained or reset in positions accessible to the public and to mail deliveries during construction and subsequent to construction in their final locations in a satisfactory condition .
on department facilities occupied by railroad tracks temporary platforms for the entrance and exit of passengers to and from the railway cars shall be provided and maintained in an approved manner by the contractor .
fire hydrants on or adjacent to the project shall be kept accessible to fire apparatus at all times and no material or obstruction shall be placed within num feet of any such hydrant .
all footways gutters sewer inlets and portions of the project adjoining the work under construction shall not be obstructed more than is absolutely necessary .
work closed down for the winter or at any other times shall be left entirely accessible at all points to fire apparatus .
num num legal relations and responsibility to public gpnum detours detours may be indicated in the contract documents or at the contractors request traffic may be detoured over approved routes along existing roads when acceptable to the procurement officer .
detours over existing state roads will be designated marked and maintained by the appropriate administrations .
all other detours will be the responsibility of the contractor .
gpnum barricades and warning signs the contractor shall provide erect and maintain all necessary barricades suitable and sufficient lights danger signals signs and other traffic control devices and shall take all necessary precautions for the protection of the work and safety of the public .
all highways and other department facilities closed to vehicular traffic shall be protected by effective barricades and obstructions shall be illuminated during hours of darkness with electric lights .
the contractor shall erect warning signs in advance of any place on the project where operations may interfere with the use of the facility by vehicular traffic and at all other points where the new work crosses or coincides with an existing roadway or traffic lanes .
such warning signs shall be constructed and erected in accordance with the manual on uniform traffic control devices or as directed .
the contractor shall furnish erect and maintain warning and direction signs in the number required by the procurement officer and at locations designated by the procurement officer throughout the limits of the project .
for street and highway type traffic the signs shall conform in every respect to the requirements of the manual on uniform traffic control devices mdmutcd for streets and highways .
signs must be freshly painted and adequately reflectorized before being placed on any project .
no work may be performed or begun unless an adequate number of signs of the proper category are in place .
in cases where the contractors sequence of operations results in grade differentials which would be hazardous to vehicular traffic the contractor shall at the direction of the procurement officer provide suitable substantial traffic barriers to the extent determined by the procurement officer .
num num legal relations and responsibility to public gpnum flagging of motor vehicle traffic for all construction contracts requiring the flagging of motor vehicles licensed for operation on the highways of maryland said flagging shall be conducted as specified in the manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways .
gpnum maintenance of traffic unless otherwise noted in the special provisions it shall be the contractors responsibility to maintain pedestrian and vehicular traffic safely adequately and continuously on all portions of existing facilities affected by his work .
in addition to existing facilities undergoing improvement this also applies to crossroads approaches crossovers and entrances affected or made necessary by his work .
gpnum preservation and restoration of property a the contractor shall not enter upon public or private property outside of the rightofway or project area for any purpose without obtaining permission and he shall be responsible for the preservation of all public and private property trees monuments signs and markers and fences thereon and shall use every precaution necessary to prevent damage or injury thereto .
all department signs and markers that are affected by the work shall be carefully removed when grading operations begin and delivered to the procurement officer .
the contractor shall take suitable precaution to prevent damage to underground or overhead public utility structures shall protect carefully from disturbances or damages all land monuments and property marks until the procurement officer has referenced their location and shall replace them as directed by the procurement officer .
b the contractor shall be responsible for all damage or injury to property of any character during the prosecution of the work resulting from any act omission neglect or misconduct in his manner or method of executing said work or at any time due to defective work or materials and said responsibility shall not be released until the work shall have been completed and accepted .
when or where any direct or indirect damage or injury is done to public or private property by or on account of any act omission neglect or misconduct in the execution of the work or at num num legal relations and responsibility to public consequence of the nonexecution thereof on the part of the contractor he shall restore at his own expense such property to a condition similar to or equal to that existing before such damage or injury in an acceptable manner .
in case of the failure on the part of the contractor to restore such property or make good such damage or injury the procurement officer may upon num hours notice proceed to repair rebuild or otherwise restore such property as may be deemed necessary and the cost thereof will be deducted from any monies due or which may become due the contractor under this contract .
gpnum land air and water pollution a the contractor shall incorporate all permanent erosion control features into the work at the earliest practicable time as required by the contract documents .
temporary pollution control measures will be used to correct conditions that develop during construction that were not foreseen during design that are needed prior to installation of permanent pollution control features or that are needed temporarily to control erosion that develops during normal construction practices but are not associated with permanent control features on the project .
b the contractors attention is directed to the fact that temporary pollution control may include control measures outside the rightofway or project site where such work is necessary as a direct result of project construction .
the procurement officer shall be kept advised of all such offsite control measures taken by the contractor .
this shall not relieve the contractor of the basic responsibilities for such work .
c in case of failure on the part of the contractor to control erosion pollution or siltation the procurement officer reserves the right to employ outside assistance or to use his own forces to provide the necessary corrective measures .
all expenses incurred by the procurement officer in the performance of such duties for the contractor shall be withheld from monies becoming due to the contractor .
d contractors and suppliers must submit evidence to the administration that the governing federal state and local air pollution criteria will be met .
this evidence and related documents will be retained by the administration for onsite evaluation .
num num legal relations and responsibility to public gpnum responsibility for damage claims a the contractor shall indemnify and save harmless and shall require that each subcontractor shall indemnify and save harmless the state and all of its representatives from all suits actions or claims of any character brought on account of any injuries or damages sustained by any person or property in consequence of any neglect in safeguarding the work or through the use of unacceptable materials in the construction of the improvement or on account of any act or omission by the said contractor or subcontractor or as a result of faulty inadequate or improper temporary drainage during construction or on account of the use misuse storage or handling of explosives or on account of any claims or amounts recovered for any infringement of patent trademark or copyright or from any claims or amounts arising or recovered under the workmens compensation laws or any other state or local law bylaw ordinance regulation order or decree whether by himself or his employees or subcontractors .
the contractor shall be responsible for all damage or injury to property of any character during the prosecution of the work resulting from any act omission neglect or misconduct in the manner or method of executing said work satisfactorily or due to the nonexecution of said work or at any time due to defective work or materials and said responsibility shall continue until the improvement shall have been completed and accepted .
b the contractor shall conduct his operations upon the rightofway of any railroad company fully within the rules regulations and requirements of the railroad company .
the contractor shall be responsible for acquainting himself with such requirements as the railroad company may demand .
c the contractor shall be held responsible for any accidents that may happen to the railroad company as a result of his operations .
d the contractor shall not be held responsible for any claims arising from accidents incurred because of any traffic andor general use permitted during the time the project or any section thereof is open to traffic under the terms of gpnum except from accidents which are attributable to his negligence .
gpnum liability insurance on administration contracts in addition to gpnum liability insurance tcnum insurance shall apply .
num num legal relations and responsibility to public prior to the start of work on this contract the contractor shall submit to the procurement officer a certificate of insurance indicating that he carries comprehensive general public liability and property damage insurance in the amounts specified elsewhere in the contract .
on administration contracts the contractor shall submit to the procurement officer a certificate of insurance prior to the execution of the contract .
the contractor may require each subcontractor to carry comprehensive general public liability and property damage insurance in amounts sufficient to cover the subcontractors exposure under the contract and may require proof of coverage prior to the start of work on each subcontract .
gpnum use and possession prior to completion on administration contracts in addition to gpnum use and possession prior to completion tcnum use and possession prior to completion shall apply .
the administration shall have the right to take possession of or use any completed or partially completed part of the work .
such possession of or use shall not be deemed an acceptance of any work not completed in accordance with the contract .
while the administration is in such possession the contractor shall be relieved of the responsibility for loss or damage to that portion of the work in possession of the administration other than that resulting from the contractors fault or negligence .
if such prior possession or use by the administration delays the progress of the work or causes additional expense to the contractor an equitable adjustment in the contract price or the time of completion will be made and the contract shall be modified in writing accordingly .
gpnum contractors responsibility for work a except as herein elsewhere provided until final acceptance of the work by the administration the contractor shall have the charge and care thereof and shall take every reasonable precaution against injury or damage to any part thereof by the action of the elements or from any other cause whether rising from the execution or from the nonexecution of the work .
the contractor except as herein elsewhere provided shall rebuild repair restore and make good all injuries or damages to any portion of the work occasioned by any of the above causes before final acceptance and shall bear the expense thereof .
material lost or structures damaged as a result of faulty temporary drainage during num num legal relations and responsibility to public construction or the action of the elements shall be replaced or repaired by the contractor at no cost to the administration .
the contractor shall make good or replace at his own expense and as required any administration furnished material which may be broken lost through fire theft or otherwise damaged or in any way made useless for the purpose and use intended subsequent to delivery to the contractor by the administration and prior to final acceptance of the work even though such breakage damage loss or uselessness may result from causes beyond the control of the contractor .
b in case of suspension of work for any cause whatever the contractor shall be responsible for the project and shall take such precautions as may be necessary to prevent damage to the work provide for normal drainage and shall erect any necessary temporary structures signs or other facilities at his expense .
during such period of suspension of work the contractor shall properly and continuously maintain in an acceptable growing condition all living material in newly established plantings seedings and soddings furnished under this contract and shall take adequate precautions to protect new growth and other important vegetative growth against injury .
gpnum contractors responsibility for utility property and services at points where the contractors operations are adjacent to properties of railway telegraph telephone and power companies or are adjacent to other property damage to which might result in expense loss or inconvenience work shall not be commenced until all arrangements necessary for the protection thereof have been made by the contractor .
the contractor shall cooperate with the owners of any underground or overhead utility lines in their removal and rearrangement operations in order that these operations may progress in a reasonable manner that duplication or rearrangement work may be reduced to a minimum and that services rendered by those parties will not be unnecessarily interrupted .
in the event of interruption to utility services as a result of accidental breakage or as a result of being exposed or unsupported the contractor shall promptly notify the proper authority and shall cooperate with the said authority in the restoration of service .
no work shall be undertaken around fire hydrants until provisions for continued service have been approved by the local fire authority .
num num legal relations and responsibility to public gpnum personal liability of public officials in carrying out any of the provisions of the contract or in exercising any power or authority granted to them by or within the scope of the contract there shall be no liability upon the administrator procurement officer or other authorized representatives either personally or as officials of the state it being understood that in all such matters they act solely as agents and representatives of the state .
gpnum no waiver of legal rights the administration shall not be precluded or estopped by any measurement estimate or certificate made either before or after the completion and acceptance of the work and payment therefore from showing the true amount and character of the work performed and materials furnished by the contractor nor from showing that any such measurement estimate or certificate is untrue or is incorrectly made nor from showing that the work or materials do not in fact conform to the contract .
the administration shall not be precluded or estopped notwithstanding any such measurement estimate or certificate and payment in accordance therewith from recovering from the contractor or his sureties or both such damage as it may sustain by reason of his failure to comply with the terms of the contract .
neither the acceptance by the administration or any representative of the administration nor any payment for or acceptance of the whole or any part of the work nor any extension of time nor any possession taken by the administration shall operate as a waiver of any portion of the contract or of any power herein reserved or of any right to damages .
the waiver of any breach of the contract shall not be held to be a waiver of any other or subsequent breach .
gpnum nondiscrimination in employment a compliance with state law and regulations num state law the contractor agrees a not to discriminate in any manner against an employee or applicant for employment because of race color religion creed age sex marital status national origin ancestry or physical or mental handicap unrelated in num num legal relations and responsibility to public nature and extent so as reasonably to preclude the performance of such employment b to include a provision similar to that contained in subsection a above in any subcontract except a subcontract for standard commercial supplies or raw materials and c to post and to cause subcontractors to post in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for employment notices setting forth the substance of this clause .
num sanctions for noncompliance in the event of the contractors noncompliance with the nondiscrimination provisions of this agreement the department shall impose such sanctions as it may determine to be appropriate including but not limited to a withholding of payment to the contractor under the agreement until the contractor complies andor b cancellation termination or suspension of the agreement in whole or in part .
b compliance with federal law contractors providing materials equipment supplies or services to the state under this contract herewith assure the state that they are conforming to the provisions of the civil rights act of num and section num of executive order num of the president of the united states of america as amended by executive order num as applicable .
the contractor shall comply with all applicable federal laws pertaining to nondiscrimination in employment .
gpnum sanctions upon improper acts in the event the contractor or any of its officers partners principals or employees is convicted of a crime arising out of or in connection with the procurement of work to be done or payment to be made under this contract the contract may in the discretion of the department be terminated for default under gpnum .
num num legal relations and responsibility to public section num of the state finance and procurement article of the annotated code and comar num which relate to contracts with persons convicted of bribery attempted bribery or conspiracy to bribe are incorporated in this contract by reference .
section num of the state finance and procurement article and comar num relating to collusion for purposes of defrauding the state are incorporated into this contract by reference .
section num of the state finance and procurement article and comar num relating to debarment for offenses other than bribery are incorporated into this contract by reference .
gpnum nonhiring of employees no official or employee of the state of maryland or any unit thereof as defined under state government article num of the annotated code of maryland whose duties as such official or employee include matters relating to or affecting the subject matter of this contract shall during the pendency and term of this contract and while serving as an official or employee of the state become or be an employee of the party contracting with the state .
gpnum choice of law the parties hereby agree that a this contract was made and entered into in maryland and under the laws of maryland .
b the law of maryland shall govern the resolution of any issue arising in connection with this contract including but not limited to all questions concerning the validity of this contract the capacity of the parties to enter therein any modification or amendment thereto and the rights and obligations of the parties hereunder .
gpnum contingent fee prohibition a the contractor warrants that it has not employed or retained any person partnership corporation or other entity other than a bona fide employee or agent working for the contractor to solicit or secure this contract and that it has not paid or agreed to pay any num num legal relations and responsibility to public person partnership corporation or other entity other than a bona fide employee or agent any fee or any other consideration contingent on the making of this contract .
c for breach or violation of this warranty the administration shall have the right to terminate this agreement without liability or in its discretion to deduct from the contract price or consideration or otherwise recover the full amount of such fee commission percentage brokerage fee gift or contingent fee .
gpnum multiyear contracts contingent upon appropriations if the general assembly fails to appropriate funds or if funds are not otherwise made available for continued performance for any fiscal period of this contract succeeding the first fiscal period this contract shall be canceled automatically as of the beginning of the fiscal year for which funds were not appropriated or otherwise made available provided however that this will not affect either the states rights or the contractors rights under any termination clause in this contract .
the effect of termination of the contract hereunder will be to discharge both the contractor and the state from future performance of the contract but not from their rights and obligations existing at the time of termination .
the contractor shall be reimbursed for the reasonable value of any nonrecurring costs incurred but not amortized in the price of the contract .
the state shall notify the contractor as soon as it has knowledge that funds may not be available for the continuation of this contract for each succeeding fiscal period beyond the first .
gpnum cost and price certification a the contractor by submitting cost or price information certifies that to the best of its knowledge the information submitted is accurate complete and current as of a mutually determined specified date prior to the conclusion of any price discussions or negotiations for num a negotiated contract if the total contract price is expected to exceed num or a smaller amount set by the procurement officer .
num a change order or contract modification expected to exceed num or a smaller amount set by the procurement officer .
num num legal relations and responsibility to public b the price under this contract and any change order or modification hereunder including profit or fee shall be adjusted to exclude any significant price increase occurring because the contractor furnished cost or price information which as of the date agreed upon between the parties was inaccurate incomplete or not current .
gpnum corporate registration and tax payment certification corporations are required to execute a certification of corporation registration and tax payment in the form included in the contract documents .
gpnum buy american steel act the provisions of comar num pertaining to implementation of the buy american steel act subtitle num of title num of the state finance and procurement article of the annotated code of maryland are incorporated in this contract by reference .
gpnum minority business enterprise and affirmative action a this contract is subject to executive order num december num num amended by order num july num num code of fair practices and comar num contractors affirmative action plan reviewapproval and compliance monitoring processdot .
this contract is also subject to the applicable provisions of title num subtitle num of the state finance and procurement article of the annotated code of maryland comar num minority business enterprise policies and provisions of comar num which incorporate by reference the current revision of the minority business enterprise program .
copies of the minority business enterprise program may be obtained from the department of transportation office of minority business enterprise p.o .
box num bwi airport maryland num .
this contract is also subject to all applicable federal and state laws and regulations pertaining to minority business enterprise and affirmative action .
d to the extent any of the above laws or regulations are applicable to this contract they are specifically incorporated herein .
num num legal relations and responsibility to public e third tier contracting .
two conditions must be met before an administration may approve a third tier contracting arrangement which may be entered into to meet an mbe goal .
num the administration awarding the contract must be satisfied that there is no way except by third tier contracting that an mbe goal can be achieved and num the contractor must request from the administration in writing prior to the award of the contract that approval be granted for each third tier contract arrangement .
the request must contain specifics as to why a third tier contracting arrangement should be approved .
an administration approving a third tier contract should do so in writing setting forth the parameters of the contract .
all records of the contract will be maintained by the administration granting approval .
third tier contracting to meet an mbe goal is to be considered the exception and not the rule .
gpnum prevailing wage contracts for public works a the provisions of subtitle num of title num of the state finance and procurement article of the annotated code of maryland and comar num pertaining to prevailing wage for public works are incorporated in construction contracts of num or more by reference .
b when all or a portion of the cost of a project is funded by the u.s. government and the cost of the project exceeds num the minimum wage rates and benefits paid to workmen under the contract shall be those prevailing in the locality as predetermined by the secretary of labor pursuant to the davisbacon act num usc numa to anum and regulations num cfr part num promulgated thereunder .
davisbacon rates applicable to this agreement if any are specified elsewhere in the contract document .
num num legal relations and responsibility to public gpnum small business procurements if the solicitation for bid indicates that this procurement has been designated for small business preferences the appropriate provisions of comar num pertaining to small business preferences shall apply and are incorporated herein by reference .
gpnum financial disclosure the contractor shall comply with the provisions of section num of the state finance and procurement article of the annotated code of maryland which requires that every business that enters into contracts leases or other agreements with the state of maryland or its agencies during a calendar year under which the business is to receive in the aggregate num or more shall within num days of the time when the aggregate value of these contracts leases or other agreements reaches num file with the secretary of the state of maryland certain specified information to include disclosure of beneficial ownership of the business .
gpnum political contribution disclosure the contractor shall comply with the provisions of the election law article num et .
seq .
of the annotated code of maryland which require that every person that enters into contracts leases or other agreements with the state of maryland or a political subdivision of the state including its agencies during a calendar year under which a person receives in the aggregate num or more shall on or before february num of the following year file with the state administrative board of election laws certain specified information to include disclosure of political contributions in excess of num to a candidate for elective office in any primary or general election .
the statement shall be filed with the state administrative board of election laws num before a purchase or execution of a lease or contract by the state a county and incorporated municipality or their agencies and shall cover the preceding two calendars years and num if the contribution is made after the execution of a lease or contract then twice a year throughout the contract term on a february num to cover the sixmonth period ending january num and b august num to cover the sixmonth period ending july num .
num num legal relations and responsibility to public gpnum conflict of interest law it is unlawful for any state officer employee or agent to participate personally in his official capacity through decision approval disapproval recommendation advice or investigation in any contract or other matter in which he his spouse parent minor child brother or sister has a financial interest or to which any firm corporation association or other organization in which he has a financial interest or in which he is serving as an officer director trustee partner or employee is a party or to which any person or organization with whom he is negotiating or has any arrangement concerning prospective employment is a party unless such officer employee or agent has previously complied with the provisions of state government article title num of the annotated code of maryland .
gpnum preexisting regulations a in accordance with the provisions of section num of the state finance and procurement article annotated code of maryland the regulations set forth in title num of the code of maryland regulations comar title num in effect on the date of execution of this contract are applicable to this contract .
gpnum retention of records a the contractor shall retain and maintain all records and documents including but not limited to cost or pricing data relating to this contract for three years after final payment by the state hereunder or any applicable statute of limitations whichever is longer and shall make them available for inspection and audit by authorized representatives of the state including the procurement officer or his designee at all reasonable times .
b the contractor shall include the provisions of paragraph a in every subcontract .
num num prosecution and progress gpsection num prosecution and progress gpnum subcontracting on administration contracts in addition to the provisions of gpnum subcontracting tcnum subcontracting and subcontractors shall apply .
except as may be provided elsewhere in the contract the contractor to whom a contract is awarded shall perform with his own organization and with the assistance of workmen under his immediate supervision work of a value of not less than num percent of the total original value of the contract .
no portion of the contract shall be subcontracted assigned or otherwise disposed of except with the written consent of the procurement officer .
any assignment subcontract or other disposition of all or part of this contract without the express written consent of the procurement officer shall be null and void .
consent to subcontract assign or otherwise dispose of any portion of the contract shall not be construed to relieve the contractor or surety of any responsibility for the fulfilling of all the requirements of the contract .
the contractor shall incorporate by reference or otherwise include these general provisions in every subcontract issued pursuant to or under this contract and shall require that the same reference or inclusion be contained in every subcontract entered into by any of its subcontractors .
gpnum notice to proceed on administration contracts in addition to gpnum notice to proceed tcnum notice to proceed and project schedule shall apply .
after the contract has been executed the administration will within the time limit specified by the administration elsewhere in the contract documents issue to the contractor a notice to proceed and this notice will stipulate when the contractor is expected to begin work .
the specified contract time shall begin on the date stipulated in the notice to proceed or if an earlier start is authorized in the notice to proceed on the day work other than the erection of the inspection office construction stakeouts and mobilization actually starts .
work done prior to receipt of the notice to proceed is unauthorized and will not be measured or paid for .
num num prosecution and progress gpnum prosecution of the work a the contractor shall begin work promptly within the time specified by the procurement officer and shall notify the procurement officer at least num hours before starting work .
b after the work has once been started it shall be prosecuted continuously on all acceptable working days without stoppage until the entire contract is complete .
c should the prosecution of the work for any reason be discontinued the contractor shall notify the procurement officer of his intention to stop and shall also notify the procurement officer at least num hours in advance of resuming operations .
said notification shall be confirmed in writing .
gpnum progress schedule a within num days after notice to proceed the contractor shall furnish the procurement officer a progress schedule showing the proposed order of work and indicating the time required for the completion of the work .
said progress schedule shall be used to establish major construction operations and to check on the progress of the work .
the contractor shall submit revised progress schedules as directed by the procurement officer .
on administration contracts the progress schedule shall be submitted in conformance with tcnum notice to proceed and project schedule .
b if the contractor fails to submit the progress schedule within the time prescribed or the revised schedule within the requested time the procurement officer may withhold approval of progress payment estimates until such time as the contractor submits the required progress schedules or may terminate the contract for default .
c if in the opinion of the procurement officer the contractor falls significantly behind the approved progress schedule the contractor shall take any and all steps necessary to improve his progress .
this may require the contractor to increase the number of shifts initiate or increase overtime operations increase days of work in the work week or increase the amount of construction plants or all of them .
the procurement officer may also require the contractor to submit for approval supplemental progress schedules detailing the specific operational changes to be num num prosecution and progress instituted to regain the approved schedule all without additional cost to the administration .
d failure of the contractor to comply with the requirements of the procurement officer under this provision shall be grounds for determination by the procurement officer that the contractor is not prosecuting the work with such diligence as will insure completion within the time specified .
upon such determination the procurement officer may terminate the contractors right to proceed with the work or any separable part thereof in accordance with gpnum of these general provisions .
gpnum limitations of operation the contractor shall conduct the work at all times in such a manner and in such sequence as will assure the least interference with the public .
gpnum character of workmen methods and equipment the contractor shall employ sufficient labor and equipment for prosecuting the several classes of work to full completion in the manner and time required by the contract .
workmen must have sufficient skill and experience to perform properly the work assigned to them .
all workmen engaged in special work or skilled work shall have sufficient experience in such work and in the operation of the equipment required to perform all work properly and satisfactorily .
any person employed by the contractor or by any subcontractor who in the opinion of the procurement officer does not perform his work in a proper manner or is intemperate or disorderly shall at the written request of the procurement officer be removed forthwith by the contractor or subcontractor employing such foreman or workman and shall not be employed again in any portion of the work without the approval of the procurement officer .
should the contractor fail to remove such person or persons as required above or fail to furnish suitable and sufficient personnel for the proper prosecution of the work the procurement officer may withhold estimates which are or may become due on the contract until a satisfactory understanding has been reached .
num num prosecution and progress equipment to be used on the work shall meet the requirements of the work and produce a satisfactory quality of work .
the procurement officer may order the removal and require replacement of any unsatisfactory equipment .
when the methods and equipment to be used by the contractor in accomplishing the construction are not prescribed in the contract the contractor is free to use any methods or equipment that he demonstrates to the satisfaction of the procurement officer will accomplish the contract work in conformity with the requirements of the contract .
when the contract specifies that the construction be performed by the use of certain methods and equipment such methods and equipment shall be used unless others are authorized by the procurement officer in writing .
if the contractor desires to use a method or type of equipment other than those specified in the contract he may request authority from the procurement officer to do so .
the request shall be in writing and shall include a full description of the methods and equipment proposed to be used and an explanation of the reasons for desiring to make the change .
if approval is given it will be on the condition that the contractor will be fully responsible for producing construction work in conformity with contract requirements .
if after trial use of the substituted methods or equipment the procurement officer determines that the work produced does not meet contract requirements the contractor shall discontinue the use of the substituted method or equipment and shall complete the remaining construction with the specified methods and equipment .
the contractor shall remove the deficient work and replace it with work of specified quality or take such other corrective action as the procurement officer may direct .
no change will be made in basis of payment for the construction items involved nor in contract time as the result of authorizing a change in methods or equipment under these provisions .
gpnum suspension of work on administration contracts in addition to gpnum suspension of work tcnum suspension of work shall apply .
a the procurement officer unilaterally may order the contractor in writing to suspend delay or interrupt all or any part of the work for a period of time as he may determine to be appropriate for the convenience of the state .
b if the performance of all or any part of the work is for an unreasonable period of time suspended delayed or interrupted by an act of the procurement officer in the administration of this contract or by his failure to act within the time specified in this num num prosecution and progress contract or if no time is specified within a reasonable time an adjustment shall be made for any increase in the cost of performance of this contract excluding profit necessarily caused by an unreasonable suspension delay or interruption and the contract modified in writing accordingly .
however no adjustment shall be made under this clause for any suspension delay or interruption to the extent that performance would have been so suspended delayed or interrupted by any other cause including the fault or negligence of the contractor or for which an equitable adjustment is provided for or excluded under any other provisions of this contract .
no claim under this clause shall be allowed num for any costs incurred more than num days before the contractor shall have notified the procurement officer in writing of the act or failure to act involved but this requirement shall not apply as to a claim resulting from a suspension order and num unless the claim in an amount stated is asserted in writing as soon as practicable after the termination of a suspension delay or interruption but not later than the date of final payment under the contract .
gpnum termination for defaultdamages for delaytime extensions a if the contractor refuses or fails to prosecute the work or any separable part thereof with such diligence as shall insure its completion within the time specified in this contract or any extension thereof or fails to complete said work within this time the state may by written notice to the contractor terminate his right to proceed with the work or the part of the work as to which there has been delay .
in this event the state may take over the work and prosecute the same to completion by contract or otherwise and may take possession of and utilize in completing the work the materials appliances and plant as may be on the site of the work and necessary therefore .
whether or not the contractors right to proceed with the work is terminated he and his sureties shall be liable for any damage to the state resulting from his refusal or failure to complete the work within the specified time .
num num prosecution and progress b if fixed and agreed liquidated damages are provided in the contract and if the state so terminates the contractors right to proceed the resulting damage shall consist of such liquidated damages until a reasonable time as may be required for final completion of the work together with any increased costs occasioned the state in completing the work .
c if fixed and agreed liquidated damages are provided in the contract and if the state does not so terminate the contractors right to proceed the resulting damage shall consist of these liquidated damages until the work is completed or accepted .
d the contractors right to proceed may not be so terminated nor the contractor charged with resulting damages if num the delay in the completion of the work arises from unforeseeable causes beyond the control and without the fault or negligence of the contractor including but not restricted to acts of god acts of the public enemy acts of the state in either its sovereign or contractual capacity acts of another contractor in the performance of a contract with the state fires floods epidemics quarantine restrictions strikes freight embargoes unusually severe weather or delays of subcontractors or suppliers arising from unforeseeable causes beyond the control and without the fault or negligence of both the contractor and the subcontractors or suppliers and num the contractor within num days from the beginning of any such delay unless the procurement officer grants a further period of time before the date of final payment under the contract notifies the procurement officer in writing of the causes of delay .
the procurement officer shall ascertain the facts and the extent of the delay and extend the time for completing the work when in his judgement the findings of fact justify such an extension and his findings of fact shall be final and conclusive on the parties subject only to appeal as provided in the disputes clause of this contract .
e if after notice of termination of the contractors right to proceed under the provisions of this clause it is determined for any reason that the contractor was not in default under the provisions of this clause or that the delay was excusable under the provisions of this clause the rights and obligations of the parties shall if the contract contains a clause providing for termination for convenience of the state be the same as if the notice of termination had been issued pursuant to the clause .
if in the num num prosecution and progress foregoing circumstances this contract does not contain a clause providing for termination for convenience of the state the contract shall be equitably adjusted to compensate for the termination and the contract modified accordingly failure to agree to any such adjustment shall be a dispute concerning a question of fact within the meaning of the clause of this contract entitled disputes .
f the rights and remedies of the state provided in this clause are in addition to any other rights and remedies provided by law or under this contract .
g as used in paragraph dnum of this clause the term subcontractors or suppliers means subcontractors or suppliers at any tier .
gpnum liquidated damages time is an essential element of the contract and it is important that the work be vigorously prosecuted until completion .
for each day that any work shall remain uncompleted beyond the time specified elsewhere in the contract the contractor andor his surety shall be liable for liquidated damages in the amount provided for in the solicitation provided however that due account shall be taken of any adjustment of specified completion time for completion of work as granted by approved change orders .
gpnum termination for convenience of the state a the performance of work under this contract may be terminated by the state in accordance with this clause in whole or from time to time in part whenever the procurement officer shall determine that such termination is in the best interest of the state .
any such termination shall be effected by delivery to the contractor of a notice of termination specifying the extent to which performance of work under the contract is terminated and the date upon which such termination becomes effective .
b after receipt of notice of termination and except as otherwise directed by the procurement officer the contractor shall num num prosecution and progress num stop work under the contract on the date and to the extent specified in the notice of termination num place no further orders or subcontracts for materials services or facilities except as may be necessary for completion of the portion of the work under the contract as is not terminated num terminate all orders and subcontracts to the extent that they relate to the performance of work terminated by notice of termination num assign to the state in the manner at the times and to the extent directed by the procurement officer all of the right title and interest of the contractor under the orders and subcontracts so terminated in which case the state shall have the right in its discretion to settle or pay any or all claims arising out of the termination of such orders and subcontracts num settle all outstanding liabilities and all claims arising out of the termination of orders and subcontracts with the approval or ratification of the procurement officer to the extent he may require which approval or ratification shall be final for all the purposes of this clause num transfer title and deliver to the state in the manner at the times and to the extent if any directed by the procurement officer a the fabricated or unfabricated parts work in process completed work supplies and other material produced as a part of or acquired in connection with the performance of the work terminated by the notice of termination and b the completed or partially completed plans drawings information and other property which if the contract had been completed would have been required to be furnished to the state num use its best effort to sell in the manner at the times to the extent and at the price or prices directed or authorized by the procurement officer any property of the types referred to in num above provided however that the contractor a may not be required to extend credit to any purchaser and b may acquire any such property under the conditions prescribed by and at a price or prices approved by the procurement officer and provided further that the proceeds of any such transfer or disposition shall be applied in reduction of any payments to be made by the state to the num num prosecution and progress contractor under this contract or shall otherwise be credited to the price or cost of the work covered by this contract or paid in such other manner as the procurement officer may direct num complete performance of such part of the work as may not have been terminated by the notice of termination and num take any action that may be necessary or as the procurement officer may direct for the protection and preservation of the property related to this contract which is in the possession of the contractor and in which the state has or may acquire an interest .
the contractor shall submit to the procurement officer a list certified as to quantity and quality of any or all items of termination inventory not previously disposed of exclusive of items the disposition of which has been directed or authorized by the procurement officer and may request the state to remove such items or enter into a storage agreement covering them .
not later than num days thereafter the state shall accept title to such items and remove them or enter into a storage agreement covering the same provided that the list submitted shall be subject to verification by the procurement officer upon removal of the items or if the items are stored within num days from the date of submission of the list and any necessary adjustment to correct the list as submitted shall be made prior to final settlement .
c after receipt of a notice of termination the contractor shall submit to the procurement officer his termination claim in the form and with certification prescribed by the procurement officer .
this claim shall be submitted promptly but in no event later than one num year from the effective date of termination unless one or more extensions in writing are granted by the procurement officer upon request of the contractor made in writing within the one year period or authorized extension thereof .
however if the procurement officer determines that the facts justify such action he may receive and act upon any such termination claim at any time after the one year period or any extension thereof .
upon failure of the contractor to submit his termination claim within the time allowed or any extension thereof the procurement officer may determine on the basis information available to him the amount if any due to the contractor by reason of the termination and shall thereupon pay to the contractor the amount so determined .
num num prosecution and progress d subject to the provisions of paragraph c the contractor and the procurement officer may agree upon the whole or any part of the amount or amounts to be paid to the contractor by reason of the total or partial termination of work pursuant to this clause which amount or amounts may include a reasonable allowance for profit on work done provided that such agreed amount or amounts exclusive of settlement costs shall not exceed the total contract price as reduced by the amount of payments otherwise made and as further reduced by the contract price of work not terminated .
the contract shall be amended accordingly and the contractor shall be paid the agreed amount .
nothing in paragraph e of this clause prescribing the amount to be paid to the contractor in the event of failure of the contractor and the procurement officer to agree upon the whole amount to be paid to the contractor by reason of the termination of work pursuant to this clause shall be deemed to limit restrict or otherwise determine or affect the amount or amounts which may be agreed upon to be paid to the contractor pursuant to this paragraph .
e in the event of the failure of the contractor and the procurement officer to agree as provided in paragraph d upon the whole amount to be paid to the contractor by reason of the termination of work pursuant to this clause the procurement officer shall pay to the contractor the amounts determined by the procurement officer as follows but without duplication of any amounts agreed upon in accordance with paragraph d num for completed supplies or services accepted by the state or sold or acquired as provided in paragraph bnum above and for which payment has not theretofore been made a sum equivalent to the aggregate price for the supplies or services computed in accordance with the price or prices specified in the contract appropriately adjusted for any saving of freight or other charges num the total of a the costs incurred in the performance of the work terminated including initial costs and preparatory expense allocable thereto but exclusive of any costs attributable to supplies or services paid or to be paid for under paragraph enum hereof b the cost of settling and paying claims arising out of the termination of work under subcontracts or orders as provided in paragraph bnum above which are properly chargeable to the termination portion of the contract num num prosecution and progress exclusive of amounts paid or payable on account of supplies or materials delivered or services furnished by subcontractors or vendors before the effective date of the notice of termination which amounts shall be included in the costs payable under a above and c a sum as profit on a above determined by the procurement officer to be fair and reasonable provided however that if it appears that the contractor would have sustained a loss on the entire contract had it been completed no profit shall be included or allowed under this subdivision c and an appropriate adjustment shall be made reducing the amount of the settlement to reflect the indicated rate of loss and d the reasonable cost of settlement accounting legal clerical and other expenses reasonably necessary for the preparation of settlement claims and supporting data with respect to the terminated portion of the contract and for the termination and settlement of subcontracts thereunder together with reasonable storage transportation and other costs incurred in connection with the protection or disposition of property allocable to this contract .
the total sum to be paid to the contractor under num and num of this paragraph shall not exceed the total contract price as reduced by the amount of payments otherwise made and as further reduced by the contract price of work not terminated .
except for normal spoilage and except to the extent that the state shall have otherwise expressly assumed the risk of loss there shall be excluded from the amounts payable to the contractor as provided in enum and a above the fair value as determined by the procurement officer of property that is destroyed lost stolen or damaged so as to become undeliverable to the state or to a buyer pursuant to paragraph bnum .
f costs claimed agreed to or determined pursuant to c d e and i hereof shall be in accordance with comar num contract cost principles and procedures as in effect on the date of this contract .
g the contractor shall have the right of appeal under the clause of this contract entitled disputes from any determination made by the procurement officer under paragraph c e or i hereof except that if the contractor has failed to submit his claim within the time provided in paragraph c or i hereof and has failed to num num prosecution and progress request extension of such time he shall have no such right of appeal .
in any case where the procurement officer has made a determination of the amount due under paragraph d e or i hereof the state shall pay to the contractor the following num if there is no right of appeal hereunder or if no timely appeal has been taken the amount so determined by the procurement officer or num if an appeal has been taken the amount finally determined on such appeal .
h in arriving at the amount due the contractor under this clause there shall be deducted num all unliquidated advance or other payments or account theretofore made to the contractor applicable to the terminated portion of this contract num any clai m which the state may have against the contractor in connection with this contract and num the agreed price for or the proceeds of sale of any materials supplies or other things acquired by the contractor or sold pursuant to the provisions of this clause and not otherwise recovered by or credited to the state .
i if the term ination hereunder be partial the contractor may file with the procurement officer a claim for an equitable adjustment of the price or prices specified in the contract relating to the continued portion of the contract the portion not terminated by the notice of termination and such equitable adjustment as may be agreed upon shall be made in such price or prices .
any claim by the contractor for an equitable adjustment under this clause shall be asserted within ninety num days from the effective date of the termination notice unless an extension is granted in writing by the procurement officer .
j the state may from time to time under such terms and conditions as it may prescribe make partial payments and payments on account against costs incurred by the contractor in connection with the terminated portion of this contract whenever in the opinion of the procurement officer the aggregate of such payments shall be within the amount to which the contractor shall be entitled hereunder .
if the total of such payments is in excess of the amount finally agreed or determined to be due under this clause such excess shall be payable by the contractor to the num num payment state upon demand together with interest computed at the prime rate established by the state treasurer for the period from the date such excess payment is received by the contractor to the date on which the excess is repaid to the state provided however that no interest shall be charged with respect to any such excess payment attributable to a reduction in the contractors claim by reason of retention or other disposition of termination inventory until num days after the date of the retention or disposition or a later date as determined by the procurement officer by reason of the circumstances .
k unless otherwise provided for in this contract or by applicable statute the contractor shall from the effective date of termination until the expiration of three years after final settlement under this contract preserve and make available to the state at all reasonable times at the office of the contractor but without direct charge to the state all his books records documents and other evidence bearing on the costs and expenses of the contractor under this contract and relating to the work terminated hereunder or to the extent approved by the procurement officer photographs microphotographs or other authentic reproductions thereof .
gpnum successful termination of contractors responsibility a contract will be considered as successfully fulfilled when the work has been completed in accordance with the terms of the contract when final acceptance has occurred when final payment has been authorized when all of the obligations of the contractor and his surety have been complied with and when final payment has been made .
gpsection num payment on administration contracts gpsection num payment does not apply tcsection num payment shall apply .
gpnum scope of payment does not apply tcnum scope of payment shall apply .
payment to the contractor will be made for the actual quantities of contract items performed in accordance with the plans and specifications num num payment and if upon completion of the construction these actual quantities show either an increase or decrease from the quantities given in the bid schedule the contract unit prices will still prevail except as provided in gpnum variations in estimated quantities .
the payment of any partial estimate or of any retained percentage except by and under the approved final estimate and voucher in no way shall affect the obligation of the contractor to repair or renew any defective parts of the construction or to be responsible for all damages due to such defects .
when requested in writing by the contractor and approved by the procurement officer payment allowance will be made for nonperishable material to be incorporated in the work delivered and stockpiled at the work site or other approved site .
material for which payment has been made wholly or partially shall not be removed from the worksite or other approved site .
payment to the contractor under this section for materials on hand in no way will be construed as acceptance by the administration of title to the material .
title shall remain with the contractor until the project has been completed and accepted in accordance with gpnum .
contractor shall indicate his federal tax identification or social security number on the face of each invoice billed to the state .
on contracts in excess of num the contractor prior to receiving a progress or final payment under this contract shall first certify in writing that he has made payment from proceeds of prior payments and that he will make timely payments from the proceeds of the progress or final payment then due him to his subcontractors and suppliers in accordance with his contractual arrangements with them and state finance and procurement article num .
this certification may be required by the procurement officer for contracts of num or less .
the contractor shall also obtain from each subcontractor a certification that it has made payment from proceeds of prior payments to any of its lower tier subcontractors and will make timely payments to its lower tier subcontractors and suppliers in accordance with its contractual arrangements with them .
this certification is not required from subcontractors who have no lower tier subcontracts .
these certifications may be required by the procurement officer for contracts of num or less .
in addition to any other remedies provided by law or this contract any contractor or subcontractor of any tier who fails to make payment as required by the certification set forth in the above paragraphs within thirty num num payment num days from the date such payments is due shall be obligated to include with such payment interest at the rate of num percent per annum from the date the payment was due to the date the payment was actually made to the subcontractor or lower tier subcontractor .
gpnum force account work does not apply tcnum force account shall apply .
when the contractor is required to perform work as a result of additions or changes to the contract for which there are no applicable unit prices in the contract the administration and contractor shall make every effort to come to an agreed upon price for the performance of such work .
if an agreement can not be reached the administration may require the contractor to do such work on a force account basis to be compensated in accordance with the following a labor .
for all labor and for foremen in direct charge of the specific operations the contractor shall receive the actual wages for each and every hour that said labor and foremen are actually engaged in such work .
b materials .
for materials accepted by the procurement officer and used the contractor shall receive the actual cost of such materials delivered on the work including transportation charges paid by him exclusive of machinery rentals as hereinafter set forth .
c equipment .
for any machinery or special equipment other than small tools whether rented or owned the use of which has been authorized by the procurement officer the contractor shall receive the rates agreed upon in writing before such work is begun or the contractor shall receive those rates which may be specified elsewhere in the special provisions .
for the purpose of definition equipment with a new cost of num or less will be considered small tools .
d materials and supplies not incorporated in the work .
for materials and supplies expended in the performance of the work excluding those required for rented equipment and approved by the procurement officer the contractor shall receive the actual cost of such materials and supplies used .
the contractor shall receive a reasonable allowance for materials used but not expended in the performance of the work .
e subcontractors .
the contractor shall receive the actual cost of work performed by a subcontractor .
subcontractors cost is to be num num payment determined as in a b c and d above plus the fixed fee for overhead and profit allowance computed as in g. f superintendence .
no additional allowance shall be made for general superintendence the use of small tools or other costs for which no specific allowance is herein provided .
g contractors fixed fee .
the procurement officer and the contractor shall negotiate a fixed fee for force account work performed pursuant to this gpnum by his forces and by his subcontractors as compensation for overhead and profit for the work performed .
failure of the contractor and the procurement officer to negotiate a fixed fee consistent with applicable cost principles in comar num shall be treated as a dispute pursuant to gpnum and the contractor shall proceed diligently with the performance of the force account work to completion .
the contractors fixed fee shall include an amount equal to the sum of num percent of a which shall include but not be limited to the following num compensation for all costs paid to or in behalf of workmen by reason of subsistence and travel allowances health and welfare benefits pension fund benefits or other benefits that may be required by collective bargaining agreement or other employment contract generally applicable to the classes of labor employed in the work .
num bond premiums property damage liability and workmens compensation insurance premiums unemployment insurance contributions and social security taxes on the force account work .
in addition the contractors fixed fee may include an amount not to exceed num percent of b and num percent of d and num percent of e with the exception of that portion chargeable to equipment as defined above .
h compensation .
the compensation as set forth above shall be received by the contractor as payment in full for change order work done on a force account basis .
at the end of each day the contractors representative and the procurement officer shall compare records of the cost of work as ordered on a force account basis .
i statements .
no payment will be made for work performed on a force account basis until the contractor furnishes the procurement num num payment officer duplicate itemized statements of the cost of such force account work detailed as to the following num name classification date daily hours total hours rate and extension for such laborer or foreman .
num designation dates daily hours total hours rental rate and extension for each unit of machinery and equipment .
num quantities of materials prices and extensions .
num transportation of materials .
num payments of items under inum shall be accomplished by copies of certified payrolls .
under inum original receipted invoices for rentals must be provided if requested by the procurement officer .
paragraphs inum and inum shall be accompanied by original receipted invoices for materials used and transportation charges .
if however the materials used in the force account work are not specifically purchased for such work but are taken from the contractors stock then in lieu of the original invoices the statements shall contain or be accompanied by an affidavit of the contractor which shall certify that such materials were taken from his stock that the quantity claimed was actually used and that the price and transportation of the material as claimed represent actual cost .
any request for payment under this section shall be submitted in the order outlined by the above .
gpnum progress payments does not apply tcnum progress payments shall apply .
a current estimates .
num lump sum contracts .
if requested by the administration the contractor shall furnish an acceptable breakdown of the lump sum contract price showing the amount included therein for each principal category of the work .
said breakdown shall be in such detail so as to provide a basis for estimating monthly progress payments .
num monthly estimates .
each month the administration will pay the contractor for the contract value of the work satisfactorily performed during the preceding calendar month including authorized extras and additions less num percent .
the num percent of the total contract value retained num num payment by the administration will not be released until final payment unless partially released in a semifinal payment .
current estimates will be based upon the procurement officers estimate of quantity including materials andor equipment complete in place satisfactorily performed .
in the instance of lump sum items the procurement officers estimate shall be the proper fraction of the lump sum items satisfactorily performed during the preceding month .
all quantities estimates and fractions will be reasonably accurate approximations and are subject to correction a in subsequent current estimates b in any semifinal estimate and c in final payment .
any andor all partial payments may be withheld in the event current requirements of the specifications have not been complied with by the contractor .
should either the procurement officer or the contractor be of the opinion that any estimates quantities andor fractions either as to an individual current estimate or accumulations thereof do not represent a reasonably accurate approximation of actual work then details questioned shall be reviewed and then any corrections adjusted for in the next current estimate .
num escrow accounts for retained funds .
the contractor may elect to have retained funds paid to an escrow agent who may invest the funds in an approved interestbearing account which upon completion of the contract will be paid to the contractor to the extent to which the contractor is entitled .
the contractors election to use the escrow account procedure must be indicated on the contract documents and the escrow agreement must be in a form and under terms approved by the administration .
the contractor shall forfeit his right to the use of the escrow account if he refuses or fails to indicate an election prior to execution of the contract .
note this provision gpnumanum shall not apply if it conflicts with any federal grant or regulation affecting this contract .
b semifinal estimate payments .
num upon completion of the project and the acceptance by the administration of the project for maintenance the administration at the contractors request and with consent of surety will pay the contractor within num calendar days of said request what is hereby known as a semifinal estimate payment .
such a semifinal estimate payment will be based num num payment upon a quantities the administration has computed and set up as proposed final quantities and b a reasonably accurate estimate for those quantities for which the administration has not yet completed computations .
the quantities which the administration sets forth as proposed final quantities shall be so designated .
to arrive at the amount of semifinal estimate payment there shall be deducted from the apparent estimated value of the contract a total of an amounts previously paid to the contractor as current estimates and b sums deemed chargeable against the contractor properly deductible including liquidated damages and as a retainage a sum not less than num percent the total value of the contract .
num in cases where there has been substantial completion of the project and there are remaining only inconsequential or minor work items such as painting seeding mulching or planting to be completed and such items can not be completed for an extended period of time because of seasonal or weather conditions there shall be made a semifinal inspection and if the work completed is found by the administration to be satisfactory then there is deemed to be partial acceptance on the entire project except for the uncompleted work items .
upon the above referred to partial acceptance the administration within num days from such partial acceptance upon request of the contractor and with consent of surety shall pay to the contractor what is hereby known as a partial semifinal estimate payment .
such a semifinal estimate payment will be based upon a quantities the administration has computed and set up as proposed final quantities and b a reasonably accurate estimate for those quantities for which the administration has not yet completed computations .
the quantities which the administration sets forth as proposed final quantities shall be so designated .
to arrive at the amount of semifinal estimate payment there shall be deducted from the apparent estimated value of the contract a total of all amounts previously paid to the contractor as current estimates and b sums deemed chargeable against the contractor properly deductible including liquidated damages and as a retainage a sum equal to num percent of the total value of the contract .
said retainage is not to be less than num .
num if all retained funds have not been paid to an escrow agent as provided for in gpnumanum the administration shall upon payment of the semifinal estimate place the remaining retainage in an interestbearing escrow account as designated and on such terms and conditions as specified num num payment by the procurement officer .
at the time of final payment any retainage due and any interest accrued on the retainage due from the time of payment of the semifinal estimate shall be paid to the contractor .
gpnum final acceptance and final payment does not apply tcnum final acceptance and final payment shall apply .
a when the contractor has completed a contract and it has been accepted for maintenance in accordance with the provisions of gpnum the administration will promptly proceed num to make any necessary final surveys num to complete any necessary computation of quantities and num to submit to the contractor within num days after final completion and acceptance of the project by the procurement officer for maintenance for his consideration a tabulation of the proposed final quantities .
this tabulation shall be accompanied by a statement setting forth a the additional work performed under change orders andor supplemental agreements b the authorized extension of time c the number of days which have been charged against the contractor as having been used to complete the contract and d any deductions charges or liquidated damages which have been made or imposed .
b the contractor shall then have a period of num calendar days dating from the date upon which he received the aforementioned tabulation from the administration in which num to decide whether or not he will accept final payment upon such a basis and num to notify the administration in writing of his decision .
the contractor may request an additional period up to num calendar days in which to notify the administration of his decision .
in the event the contractor notifies the administration that he protests final payment on such a basis that notification shall outline the reasons for said protest .
c upon receipt of a notification of acceptance as provided for in paragraph b above the administration shall prepare the final estimate and final payment forms and submit them to the num num payment contractor .
these forms shall show all data noted in paragraph a above together with deductions for all prior payments .
the contractor shall execute these forms and return them to the administration within num calendar days from the date they are received for execution and payment .
if such signed forms are not received by the administration within the specified time the administration will prepare duplicate forms for execution and payment .
such action by the administration shall be deemed to constitute acceptance and final payment .
d if under the provisions of paragraph b above the contractor notifies the administration of his protest and nonacceptance of the data submitted to him the administration shall pay the contractor a semifinal estimate or an additional semifinal estimate in the event a semifinal estimate has already been paid based upon the data noted in paragraph a above with deductions for all prior payments .
a retainage equal to num percent of the total value of the contract shall be withheld by the administration .
the acceptance of such semifinal estimate or additional semifinal estimate shall not be considered as a waiver on the part of the contractor of his right to pursue his protest and press for acceptance and final payment .
e in the event the contractor does not accept the data submitted to him as described in paragraph a above andor has outstanding a claim filed in accordance with gpnum the procurement officer and the contractor shall confer at mutually convenient times and endeavor to reconcile all points of disagreement expeditiously .
if such reconciliation is accomplished the administration will promptly proceed with acceptance and final payment on the reconciled basis and in accordance with the provisions of paragraph c above .
if reconciliation is not accomplished within num days the decision of the procurement officer shall be reviewed by the administrator and appropriate legal counsel .
after review by the administrator the decision of the procurement officer is deemed to be the final action .
the procurement officer shall furnish a copy of the final decision to the contractor by certified mail return receipt requested .
this decision may be appealed by the contractor to the maryland state board of contract appeals .
this must be done by filing a written notice of appeal to the appeals board within num days from the date of the final decision .
failure to provide timely notification to the procurement officer shall constitute a waiver by the contractor of his right under the disputes clause and final payment may be made by the administrator based on the procurement officers recommendation .
num num payment f all prior partial estimates and payments shall be subject to correction at the time of acceptance and final payment and if the contractor has been previously overpaid the amount of such overpayment shall be set forth in the final payment forms and the contractor hereby agrees that he will reimburse the administration for such overpayment within six months of receipt of such advice and his surety will not be granted release from obligations under the terms of the contract until reimbursement has been made in full .
g payment for the full apparent value of the contract thus determined shall become due and payable to the contractor within ninety num days after acceptance of the project by the procurement officer for maintenance as hereinafter provided .
as a condition precedent to final payment the contractor shall be required to execute a general release of all claims against the administration arising out of or in any way connected with this contract .
h in accordance with num of the state finance and procurement article of the annotated code of maryland certification must be obtained from the comptroller of the treasury and the employment security administration that all state taxes have been paid prior to release of final payment on a construction contract .
the check will be processed and mailed only after notification is received from both departments that no state tax is owed .
gpnum late payments does not apply tcnum late payments shall apply .
a payments to the contractor pursuant to this contract shall be made no later than num days after the states receipt of a proper invoice from the contractor .
charges for late payment of invoices other than as prescribed by title num subtitle num of the state finance and procurement article annotated code of maryland or by the public service commission of maryland with respect to regulated public utilities as applicable are prohibited .
b a proper invoice shall include a description of the items or services provided the date the goods were received or the inclusive dates the services were rendered the contract pricess retention if any the basis for the billing the contract or purchase order number the contractors federal tax identification number num num payment or social security number the name and address of the proper invoice recipient .
c in order to receive payment of interest the contractor must submit a proper invoice for accrued interest within num calendar days after the payment date of the amount on which the interest is claimed to have accrued .
interest may not be claimed for more than one year following the numst calendar day after the date that a proper invoice was received or on amounts representing unpaid interest or on an amount due under a contract remaining unpaid for any period prior to july num num or if a claim has been filed under state finance and procurement article title num of subtitle num of the code .
d for the purposes of this contract an amount will not be deemed due and payable if num the amount invoiced is inconsistent with the contract .
num the proper invoice has not been received by the person or office specified in the contract .
num the invoice or performance under the contract is in dispute or the contractor has failed to otherwise comply with the provisions of the contract .
num the item or services have not been accepted .
num the quantity of items delivered is less than the quantity invoiced .
num the items or services do not meet the quality requirements of the contract .
num the contract provides for progress payments and the proper invoice for the progress payment has not been submitted pursuant to the schedule contained in the agreement .
num the contract provides for withholding a retainage and the invoice is for the retainage all stipulated conditions for release of the retainage have not been met .
num the contractor has not submitted satisfactory documentation or other evidence reasonably required by the procurement officer or by the contract concerning performance under the contract and compliance with its provisions .
num part ii terms and conditions tc section num language references and definitions tcnum language these specifications incorporate the selective use of the imperative mood .
in general specifications in the imperative mood will imply a direct responsibility upon the subject the contractor to perform an action .
depending on the context of the specification the subject may also be the supplier fabricator or manufacturer .
for example the imperative sentence notify the bureau of mines when coal is encountered implies the contractor shall notify the bureau of mines .
for specifications that are not in the imperative mood the word shall refers to obligatory requirements or actions of the contractor supplier fabricator or manufacturer as applicable will refers to actions of the administration .
all work pertaining to these specifications shall be completed as specified in the contract documents or as directed by the engineer .
when used in these specifications the term specified refers to requirements stated herein or included elsewhere in the contract documents .
refer to gpnum .
terms such as directed accepted acceptable approved approval authorized determined permitted and satisfactory are implicitly followed by the words by the engineer to the engineer or of the engineer .
the word submit or submittal implies that the contractor shall provide the applicable submittal in writing to the engineer for approval .
if otherwise the contract documents will specify where to make the submittal .
no applicable work may proceed without written approval .
these requirements apply to all submittals whether for details methods schedules or materials .
refer to tcnum and section num .
the word ensure obligates the contractor to fulfill a specific requirement or complete an indicated action in conformity with the contract documents .
the phrase remove and dispose obligates the contractor to assume possession of the specified material remove it from the area and properly dispose of it off site .
even when not specifically addressed all waste materials shall be disposed of in this manner .
all costs for this work shall be included in the applicable contract work at no additional cost to the administration .
unless otherwise specified when terms such as repair restore num num language references and definitions replace and remove and replace are used in reference to unacceptable work whatever the reason or cause for the work being rejected it shall be implicitly understood that the contractor shall perform the applicable work in conformance with the contract documents in an acceptable manner and at no additional cost to the administration .
refer to gp num gpnum and gpnum .
unless specifically stated otherwise all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to perform and complete the work as specified and detailed in the contract documents including all generally recognized and inherent aspects of the work shall be included in either the lump sum or unit price for the contract pay item .
when specific aspects of the work are listed in measurement and payment it shall be construed to be an allinclusive list .
tcnum references reference to specifications or procedures beginning with the letters m r or t shall be understood to be aashto .
reference to specifications or procedures beginning with the letters a b c d e f g es or p shall be understood to be astm .
references to all specifications and procedures shall be understood to be the most recently published standard at the time of advertisement unless otherwise specified in the contract documents .
the words using per and meet or meeting when referring to a specification or procedure imply in strict accordance with .
tcnum definitions additional workwork not required or provided for in the original contract .
administrationthe term shall be construed to be the maryland department of transportation state highway administration as established in conformance with the laws of maryland .
base coursethe one or more layers of specified material and thickness placed on a subbase or a subgrade to support a surface course .
bridgea structure including supports erected over a depression or an obstruction such as water highway or railway and having a track or passageway for carrying traffic or other moving loads and having an opening measured along the center of the roadway of more than num feet num num language references and definitions between undercopings of abutments or spring lines of arches or extreme ends of openings for multiple boxes it may also include multiple pipes where the clear distance between openings is less than half of the smaller contiguous opening .
for lengths all dimensions shall be parallel to the center line of the roadway .
the dimensions of handrails will not be taken into account in measuring bridge lengths .
any bridge or highway grade separation structure includes the connecting highways substructure superstructure roadway approaches entrance plazas interchanges overpasses underpasses and other structures which the administration may deem necessary together with all property rights easements franchises and interests acquired by the administration for the construction and operation of the bridge .
certificationa document which verifies that the material and work complies with the applicable specifications and includes the actual test results to confirm the statement .
the contents of the certification shall be on the contractorsvendorsmanufacturers letterhead or approved document and shall be duly signed by a company officer .
certifications for metal products when required shall include a statement that the material was melted and manufactured in the united states except as provided in section num of the surface transportation assistance act of num as amended by section numa and numa of the intermodal surface transportation efficiency act of num with regard to the furnishing and coating of iron and steel products .
a nationwide waiver for this provision has been granted for pig iron and processed pelletized and reduced iron ore. change ordera written document amending the contract by adding deleting or modifying the contract to include price time work and conditions not previously addressed within the contract .
refer to gpnum .
contract timethe number of working days calendar days or a calendar date specified in the contract documents indicating the time period allowed for the completion of the contract work .
controlling operationan operation which at the particular time under consideration has a controlling effect on the progress of the project as a whole .
culvertany structure not classified as a bridge which provides an opening under any roadway .
domestic manufacturewhen referring to metallic items such as structural steel pipe reinforcement bridge rails etc .
the term domestic num num language references and definitions manufacture means those metal products that have been melted and manufactured within the united states .
drainage ditchin general any open water course other than gutters constructed as indicated in the contract documents .
equipmentall machinery tools and apparatus necessary for the proper construction and acceptable completion of the work together with the necessary supplies for upkeep and maintenance .
federal agenciesreference to any federal agency or officer shall be deemed made to any agency or officer succeeding in conformance with law to the powers duties jurisdictions and authority of the agency or officer mentioned .
general provisions gpcontract provisions published as part of or as a supplement to the standard specifications intended for general application and repetitive use .
holidaysin the state of maryland holidays occur on january num new years day numrd monday in january martin luther kings birthday numrd monday in february presidents day numth monday in may memorial day july num independence day numst monday in september labor day numnd monday in october columbus day november num veterans day numth thursday in november thanksgiving day december num christmas day all days of general and congressional elections not primary elections throughout the state .
if a legal holiday falls on a sunday the following monday shall be deemed and treated as a holiday .
if a legal holiday falls on a saturday the friday immediately preceding shall be deemed and treated as a holiday .
laboratorythe testing laboratory of the state highway administration or other administrations or any other testing laboratory designated by the procurement officer .
medianthe portion of a divided highway separating the traveled ways for traffic in opposite directions .
num num language references and definitions mdmutcdmaryland manual on uniform traffic control devices .
pavement structurethe surface base or subbase course placed in layers on a subgrade to support and distribute the traffic load to the roadbed .
plansthe official drawings issued by the administration as part of the contract documents including those incorporated in the contract documents by reference .
these include the official approved plans profiles typical cross sections working drawings and supplemental drawings or exact reproductions that show the location character dimensions and details of the work to be done .
profile gradethe trace of a vertical plane intersecting the top surface of the proposed wearing surface usually along the longitudinal center line of the roadway .
profile grade means either elevation or gradient of the vertical plane .
rampa connecting roadway between two intersecting highways at a highway separation .
rightofwaythe area acquired and reserved by the administration for use in constructing the proposed improvement and appurtenances .
roadbedthe graded portion of a highway within the top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
road or highwayboth the word road and the word highway include rightsofway surfaces subgrades shoulders median dividers drainage facilities and structures roadway cuts roadway fills traffic barriers bridges highway grade elimination structures tunnels overpasses underpasses interchanges entrance plazas approaches and other structures forming an integral part of a street road or highway including bicycle and walking paths and related storm water management facilities and structures .
any other property acquired for the construction operation or use of the highway .
roadsidea general term denoting the area adjoining the outer edge of the roadbed within the rightofway .
extensive areas between the roadways of a divided highway may also be considered roadside .
roadside developmentwork for the preservation of natural and landscaped areas and the rehabilitation and protection against erosion of all areas disturbed by construction through turf establishment and the placing of other ground covers suitable planting and other improvements to increase the effectiveness and enhance the appearance of the highway .
num num language references and definitions seal coatan application of asphalt material followed by an application of cover coat aggregate .
shoulderthe portion of the roadbed contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of stopped vehicles for emergency use and for lateral support of base and surface courses .
sidewalkthe portion of the roadway constructed for use by pedestrians .
slopesthe inclined graded areas beyond the shoulder extending from the shoulders to the natural undisturbed surface of the ground .
special provisions spspecifications for a specific item or condition requirement peculiar to an individual project and not otherwise thoroughly or satisfactorily detailed in the contract documents .
special provisions insert spiadditions and revisions to the standard specifications that have been officially approved .
standard specificationsthe most current book of specifications entitled standard specifications for construction and materials published by the administration and intended for general application and repetitive use .
standardsthe official standards for highway and incidental structures maintained on the administration website .
the latest incorporated revisions issued on or before the date of advertisement of the contract .
state highway systemthat system of roads owned operated or maintained by the administration .
state roadany public road included in the state highway system .
structuresbridges culverts catch basins drop inlets retaining walls cribbing manholes end walls buildings sewers service pipes underdrains foundation drains steps fences and other features that may be encountered in the work and not otherwise classified .
subbasethe layers of specified or selected material of designed thickness placed on a subgrade to support a base course or surface course .
num num bidding requirements and conditions subgradethe top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure shoulders and curbs are constructed .
substructureall of that part of the structure below bottoms of bearings of simple and continuous spans skewbacks of arches and tops of footings of rigid frames together with the back walls and wing walls .
superstructureall of that part of the structure above bottoms of bearings of simple and continuous spans skewbacks of arches and tops of footings of rigid frames except as noted above for substructure .
surface courseone or more layers of a pavement designed to accommodate the traffic load .
traveled waythe portion of the roadway for the movement of vehicles exclusive of shoulders .
trenchan excavation made for the purpose of installing or removing pipes drains catch basins etc .
which is later refilled .
working daya calendar day upon which in the judgement of the engineer weather and soil conditions are such that the contractor can advantageously work more than half of his current normal force for more than five consecutive hours on a controlling operation .
working days will not be charged on saturdays sundays and state recognized holidays unless the contractor actually works more than five hours on a controlling operation .
working drawingsstress sheets shop drawings fabrication details erection plans plans for false work forms centering cribs cofferdams and masonry layouts bending and placing drawings bar schedules for reinforcement steel and any other supplementary plans or similar data that the contractor may be required to furnish .
tc section num bidding requirements and conditions tcnum project classification the administration will estimate the cost of the contract and classify it within one cost group and letter designation as follows num num bidding requirements and conditions cost group estimate cost group letter class up to num num a num num to num num b num num to num num num c num num num to num num num d num num num to num num num e num num num to num num num f num num num to num num num g num num num to num num num h num num num to num num num i num num num to num num num j num num num to num num num k over num num num l the letter designation will be published as part of the notice to contractors .
tcnum preparation of bid the requirements of gpnum preparation of bid is modified for administration contracts to include the following after paragraph a the contractor may elect to submit the bid on forms generated in the development of the bid .
when approved these forms may be submitted in lieu of the schedule of prices bid forms furnished by the administration in the invitation for bids .
they shall emulate the forms currently furnished by the administration and contain the following information .
num state and federal contract nos .
num administration item nos .
num administration category code nos .
num administration proposed quantities num description of items num num bidding requirements and conditions num unit price num total cost of each item num total bid amount the document shall be num x num inches and in landscape format .
the font size shall be at least num points with horizontal lines dividing each item .
addendums that revise items or quantities shall be noted on all affected schedule of prices sheets .
any special bid requirements that are noted in the schedule of prices shall also be listed on the form .
a sample of the form shall be submitted to the administration at least num days prior to the scheduled bid opening .
contractor generated forms shall be approved in writing prior to use .
if the forms were previously approved on another administration project and were not changed they need not be resubmitted for each project .
sample forms shall be submitted to maryland state highway administration director office of construction contracts award team num traffic drive hanover maryland num tcnum value engineering change proposals the contractor may submit to the district engineer in writing value engineering change proposals vecp for modifying the contract documents for the purpose of reducing the total cost of construction without reducing design capacity or quality of the finished product .
the district engineer will then forward the proposal to the chief engineer with recommended action .
the final decision to accept or deny the vecp will be made by the chief engineer .
the administration will not consider appeals once the final decision is made .
if accepted by the administration net savings resulting from a vecp will be equally divided between the administration and the contractor .
the contractor may elect to pursue one of the following options option num submit the detailed plans specifications and estimate of savings or num num bidding requirements and conditions option num submit a written concept of the vecp for tentative approval and if accepted submit the detailed plans specifications and estimate for final approval at a later date .
each vecp shall result in a net savings to the contract cost without impairing essential functions and characteristics of the items or of any other part of the project including but not limited to service life reliability economy of operation ease of maintenance desired aesthetics and safety .
as a minimum the contractor shall submit the following information before final approval of a vecp can be given a a statement that the proposal is submitted as a vecp .
b a statement concerning the basis for the vecp and benefits to the administration together with an itemization of the contract items and requirements affected by the vecp .
c a detailed estimate of the cost under the existing contract and under the vecp .
d proposed plans specifications and recommendations as to how the vecp changes shall be accomplished .
e a statement as to the time by which a change order adopting the vecp must be issued so as to obtain the maximum cost effectiveness .
the administration will require num days to review and approve a vecp .
f the contractors engineering cost for the vecp .
the administration will process the vecp in the same manner as prescribed for any other proposal that would necessitate issuance of a change order .
the administration may accept in whole or in part any vecp by issuing a change order which will identify the vecp on which it is based .
the administration will not be liable to the contractor for failure to accept or act upon any vecp submitted pursuant to these requirements nor for any delays to the work attributable to any vecp proposal .
until a proposal is affected by a change order the contractor shall remain obligated to the terms and conditions of the existing contract .
if an executed change order has not been issued by the date upon which the contractors proposal specifies that a decision should be made or any other date as the contractor may subsequently have specified in writing the proposal shall be deemed rejected .
num num bidding requirements and conditions the change order affecting the necessary contract modification will establish the net savings agreed upon will provide for adjustment in the contract prices or contract time and will indicate the net savings to be equally divided between the contractor and the administration .
the contractors costs for preparation of the vecp and the administrations costs to review and administer the vecp will be deducted from the gross savings .
the administration reserves the right to include in the agreement any conditions it deems appropriate for consideration approval and implementation of the proposal .
the contractors num percent share of the net savings shall constitute full compensation for affecting all changes pursuant to the agreement .
acceptance of the vecp and performance of the additional work will not change the contract time limit as a result of the vecp unless specifically provided for in the change order authorizing the vecp .
the administration expressly reserves the right to adopt a vecp for general use in contracts administered by the administration when it determines that the proposal is suitable for application to other contracts .
vecps identical or similar to previously submitted proposals will be eligible for consideration and compensation under these provisions if such proposals were not previously adopted for general application to other contracts administered by the administration .
when a vecp is adopted for general use compensation pursuant to these requirements will be applied only to those contracts awarded and for which the subject vecp has been submitted prior to the date of adoption of the specific vecp .
proposed changes in the basic design of a bridge or pavement type or requiring modification to the rightofway limits will not normally be considered as an acceptable vecp .
quantity decreases or elimination of any contract pay items as a result of changing field conditions errors etc .
will not be considered as an acceptable vecp .
if a vecp is based upon or similar to a change in the plans specifications or special provisions adopted by the administration prior to submission of the vecp the chief engineer will reject the proposal .
these requirements apply to all vecps initiated and developed by the contractor and which are identified as such by the contractor at the time of its submission to the chief engineer however nothing herein shall be construed as requiring the chief engineer to consider or approve a vecp submitted by the contractor .
subject to these provisions the administration or any other public agency will have the right to use all or part of any accepted vecp on other projects without obligation or compensation of any kind to the contractor .
num num bidding requirements and conditions in the event a vecp is accepted by the administration the provisions of the contract documents that pertain to adjustment of contract unit prices due to alterations of contract quantities will not apply to the items adjusted or deleted as a result of affecting the vecp by change order .
tcnum owneroperator for the purpose of labor compliance the term owneroperator will be defined as being the individual who owns and operates their own vehicle .
the prevailing wage rates shall not apply to these individuals .
however they shall appear on the payroll of the contractor or subcontractor with the notation owneroperator .
employees of owneroperator shall be subject to prevailing wage rates and shall appear on a certified payroll .
tcnum debarmentsuspension pursuant to the emergency regulations which were approved by the administrative and executive legislative review aelr committee of the maryland general assembly on july num num and which went into effect on july num num the maryland department of transportation state highway administration has pursuant to applicable laws and regulation established a list of debarred or suspended contractors .
the current list of debarred or suspended contractors or suppliers is available at the administrations cashiers office baltimore maryland .
tcnum partnering the administration invites the contractor subcontractors and suppliers to participate in a voluntary partnership agreement for the work .
the partnership will be structured to draw on the strengths of each organization through open communication teamwork and cooperative action to identify and achieve reciprocal goals .
the objectives are effective and efficient contract performance completion within the contract bid price on schedule and in conformance with the contract documents .
this partnership will not change the legal relationship of the parties to the contract nor relieve any party from any of the terms of the contract .
the administration will contact the contractor to determine if there is an interest in partnering .
if the contractor is interested the administrations assistant district engineer construction and the num num scope of work contractors management representative will meet plan and organize a partnering development team .
persons recommended to be on the team are the administrations district engineer assistant district engineer area engineer construction project engineer and project design engineer the contractors designated onsite project manager and key project supervision personnel of both the contractor and principal subcontractors and suppliers .
fhwa and key local government personnel will also be invited to attend as necessary .
the initial workshop team meeting will be held prior to the preconstruction conference .
followup workshops may be held regularly as agreed by the contractor and the administration .
the partnership will be bilateral .
participation is voluntary .
all partnering costs will be shared equally by the contractor and the administration .
tc section num scope of work tcnum governing order of contract documents the contract documents including but not limited to the standard specifications the special provisions inserts the plans special provisions and all supplementary documents are essential parts of the contract and a requirement occurring in one is as binding as though occurring in all .
they are intended to be complementary and to describe and provide for a complete work .
in the event of any discrepancy between the drawing and figures written thereon the figures unless obviously incorrect will govern over scaled dimensions .
in the event of any discrepancy between the various contract documents the governing order from highest to lowest shall be special provisions plans special provisions inserts and standard specifications .
general provisions will govern over all contract documents unless expressly provided for in the contract .
tcnum construction documents to successful bidder the successful bidder on each contract advertised by the administration will be sent upon award of the contract five sets of plans five invitation for bids books and two sets of cross sections free of charge .
any additional plan sets required by the contractor may be num num scope of work purchased at the price noted in notice to contractors .
individual plan sheets and individual sheets of cross sections or complete sets of plans or cross sections may be purchased at the prevailing price set by the administration .
tcnum rights in and use of materials found on the project the contractor with the approval of the engineer may use on the project any excavated stone gravel sand or other material conforming to the requirements of the contract documents .
when these materials are used for select capping modified or common borrow and conform to the pertinent materials specifications payment will only be made at the contract unit price for the class of excavation from which the materials are obtained .
in the event these materials are processed through a crushing screening washing or sorting plant for use as another pay item the contractor will be paid both for the excavation of such materials at the contract unit price and at the contract unit price for which the material is used .
the contractor shall replace with other acceptable material all of the portion of the excavated material removed and used that was needed for use in the embankments backfills approaches or otherwise at no additional cost to the administration .
if however these materials are not processed and paid for as described in the preceding paragraph and their use creates a shortage of embankment backfill approaches or other material the contractor shall provide acceptable replacement material for all the material needed for embankments backfills approaches or otherwise .
in this case the replacement material shall be paid for at the unit price for the item the class num excavation is used for or the unit price bid for the class num excavation whichever is the lower unit price bid .
the contractor shall not excavate nor remove any material that is not within the limits of excavation as indicated by the slope and grade lines without written authorization from the engineer .
tcnum safety hazards in confined spaces the contractor shall be responsible for gas detection in and ventilation of confined spaces .
when procedures require workers to enter confined spaces such as steel or concrete box section type superstructures particularly when the num num control of work interior is closed off at both ends the contractor shall be cognizant of the potential health hazards .
the contractor shall adhere to all applicable mosh regulations .
the contractor shall have approved detecting devices available and shall conduct tests for oxygen content and presence of gases such as combustible gas carbon dioxide methane carbon monoxide and hydrogen sulfide whenever any fabrication erection or inspection operations are to be performed within the confined spaces .
the contractor shall apply mechanical ventilation continuously to the confined space during occupancy to maintain the proper oxygen content and shall conduct air tests periodically during the occupancy .
tc section num control of work tcnum working drawings a general .
the plans shall be supplemented by working drawings as necessary to adequately control the work .
all authorized alterations affecting the requirements and information given on the working drawings shall be in writing to the engineer .
when reference is made to the working drawings the interpretation shall be the working drawings as affected by all authorized alterations then in effect .
working drawings shall show details of all structures lines grades typical cross section of roadway general cross sections location and designation of all units and elements .
the contractor shall provide at no additional cost to the administration all required working drawings and shall have them adequately checked after which they shall be submitted to the engineer for review .
the engineer may reject working drawings and return them for revisions in which case the contractor shall submit revised working drawings as required .
no items involving the drawings shall be incorporated into the work until the engineer has accepted the drawings for use however acceptance shall not relieve the contractor of any responsibility in connection with them .
all working drawings shall be furnished in duplicate for preliminary examination for projects prepared by the administration and in triplicate for projects prepared by consultant engineering firms for the administration .
after the engineer has accepted working num num control of work drawings for use the contractor shall furnish additional copies as requested .
all working drawings shall be on sheets measuring num by num inches and shall have a standard title block at the lower right corner approximately num by num inches num inches for the revision column on the left side and the remaining num inches for the title indicating the following information in the order named name of contractor and subcontractor if applicable address of contractor and subcontractor if applicable sheet title reinforcement details etc .
name of structure crossing for maryland state highway administration by indicate name of contractors official or engineer or other parties authorized to sign official documents .
list all administration contract numbers complete federal aid number if any and the date the drawing was completed .
the left portion of the title block shall be headed revisions and the space used as needed .
working drawings for standard scuppers are not required .
a sketch or statement specifying the type and number of standard scuppers required and the length of the downspout is acceptable .
the working drawings shall be submitted for review to the applicable directors office .
a copy of the transmittal letter shall be forwarded to the appropriate district engineer .
the number of working drawings to be furnished shall be as specified above and addressed to one of the following maryland state highway administration director office of bridge development num north calvert street baltimore md num refer to category num of the contract documents for working drawing submissions .
maryland state highway administration director office of construction num traffic drive hanover md num num num control of work maryland state highway administration director office of environmental design num north calvert street baltimore md num maryland state highway administration director office of highway development num north calvert street baltimore md num maryland state highway administration director office of maintenance num connelley drive hanover md num maryland state highway administration director office of materials technology num traffic drive hanover md num maryland state highway administration director office of traffic and safety num connelley drive hanover md num refer to category num of the contract documents for working drawing submissions .
b working drawings for falsework systems .
falsework systems design plans and construction shall be the responsibility of the contractor including submitting and obtaining written acceptance of the design and plans by the engineer before erection .
the contractor shall utilize a professional engineer p.e .
registered in the state of maryland who has at least five years experience in falsework design for bridge construction and repair .
the falsework design calculations and plans shall be signed by the p.e .
and bear the seal of the p.e .
the submittal of the design and falsework plans shall include the p.e.s resume showing evidence of the required experience .
the p.e.s plans and design calculations shall evaluate and qualify all products and components including manufactured products and proprietary items for their intended service .
acceptance by the engineer of falsework systems shall not in any way relieve the contractor of the responsibility for the safety and num num control of work adequacy of the design and construction for the falsework systems and operations including all components .
every structure in the construction contract will require a separate falsework design analysis separate plans and design submittal as set forth above .
this applies even though structures may appear to be identical .
each falsework system shall be designed to support all vertical and horizontal loading with enough redundancy to prevent progressive failure .
vertical loading differential settlement forces live load where applicable and all horizontal lateral and longitudinal forces shall be taken into account .
unbalanced temporary loading caused by placement sequence shall also be provided for in the design .
adequate diagonal bracing in all planes shall be employed .
all falsework systems designs plans and construction shall provide for adequate foundations with bearings below the frost line or on rock or on piling and for possible settlement .
if additional subsurface data is necessary it shall be obtained and analyzed for proper design of the plans and performance of construction .
falsework designs and plans shall include protection against impact from uncontrolled highway vehicles accidental collision of a crane boom or other construction equipment and vehicles traffic vibration flood waters high winds and any other envisioned contingent situations .
tcnum failure to maintain project gpnum failure to maintain entire project is not applicable to administration contracts .
the provisions of this tc shall apply .
if the contractor at any time fails to respond to the provisions of gpnum maintenance of work during construction the procurement officer will immediately notify the contractor to comply with the required maintenance provisions .
if corrective actions do not begin within four hours after receipt of the notice the procurement officer may a notify the contractor to suspend all other work until the unsatisfactory maintenance is corrected or b proceed at anytime with adequate forces and equipment to maintain the project .
the entire cost of this maintenance will be num num control of work deducted from monies due the contractor on the next progress payment .
tcnum use and possession prior to completion in addition to the provisions of gpnum use and possession prior to completion the following will apply on administration contracts upon written authorization of the procurement officer the contractor may be relieved of maintenance during the time the administration has taken possession .
any portion of the work that may be disturbed or damaged shall be restored at respective contract prices for items involved or on the basis of a predetermined arrangement entered into by the contractor and procurement officer before the performance of the restoration work .
tcnum suspension of work in addition to the provisions of gpnum suspension of work the following shall apply on administration contracts .
the engineer will have the authority to suspend the work wholly or in part due to the failure of the contractor to correct conditions unsafe for the workers or the general public for failure to carry out the requirements of the contract documents or as directed in conformance with the contract documents for conditions considered unsuitable for the prosecution of the work .
tcnum dispute mediation when a dispute arises out of or relates to the contract or breach thereof and if the dispute can not be settled through negotiation or the partnering issue resolution process either party may first elect to try in good faith to settle the dispute by nonbinding mediation administered by a mutually agreed upon qualified mediator before proceeding with other dispute resolution procedures including litigation .
num num legal relations and progress tc section num legal relations and progress tcnum insurance in addition to the provisions of gpnum liability insurance the following shall apply on administration contracts .
the contractor shall maintain in full force and effect third party legal liability insurance necessary to cover claims arising from the contractors operations under this agreement that cause damage to the person or property of third parties .
the insurance shall be under a standard commercial general liability cgl form endorsed as necessary to comply with the above requirements or other liability insurance form deemed acceptable by the state .
the state of maryland shall be listed as an additional named insured on the policy .
the limit of liability shall be no less than num num num per occurrencenum num num general aggregate .
the insurance shall be kept in full force and effect until all work has been satisfactorily completed and accepted .
the policies shall be endorsed to provide num days notice of cancellation or nonrenewal to maryland state highway administration director office of construction num traffic drive hanover md num evidence of insurance shall be provided to the administration prior to the award of the contract by means of a certificate of insurance with copies of all endorsements attached or in the event insurance is provided by a policy form other than a cgl form by certified copy of the complete policy with all endorsements .
any policy exclusions shall be shown on the face of the certificate of insurance .
the certificate of insurance shall be accompanied by a document a copy of state license or letter from insurer that indicates that the agent signing the certificate is an authorized agent of the insurer .
when specified in the contract documents the contractor shall carry the type and amounts of insurance in addition to any other forms of insurance or bonds required under the terms of the contract and these specifications .
the cost of the insurance will not be measured but will be incidental to the contract lump sum price for mobilization .
if an item for mobilization num num legal relation and progress is not provided the cost of the insurance will be incidental to the other items specified in the contract documents .
contractor and railroad public liability and property damage insurance shall be provided as specified in tcnum .
tcnum notice to proceed and project schedule within num days after the contract has been executed the administration will issue to the contractor a notice to proceed .
this notice will stipulate the date on or before which the contractor is expected to begin work .
no work shall be started before receipt of the notice to proceed .
the requirement of gpnum progress schedule to submit a progress schedule within num days after notice to proceed is modified as follows unless otherwise specified on administration projects the proposed project schedule shall be submitted within num days after receiving the notice of award .
the contractor shall not begin work on the project until the project schedule is approved by the administration .
however time charges shall begin no later than the time stipulated in the notice to proceed .
tcnum subcontracting and subcontractors in addition to the provisions of gpnum subcontracting the following shall apply on administration contracts the subcontractors named in the contractors bid and approved by the administration and those approved when subsequently submitted shall perform the contract items as approved by the administration .
requests for permission to sublet assign or otherwise dispose of any portion of the contract shall be in writing and include the item number or numbers and the dollar value .
the contractor shall give assurance that the minimum wage for labor as specified in the contract documents shall apply to labor performed on all work sublet assigned or otherwise disposed of .
when a subcontractor has been approved by the administration for the performance of specific items of work on the contract the administration will not allow the contractor to substitute another subcontractor except in the event the contractor requests in writing that the approved subcontractor be relieved of the necessity of performance of the work .
any change of subcontractors shall be requested in writing by the contractor and shall have the written concurrence of the previously num num legal relations and progress designated subcontractor .
concurrence shall not be unreasonably delayed in the judgement of the administration .
if a subcontractor does not perform to the satisfaction of the contractor the contractor may request to be allowed to perform the work with his own forces or request that another subcontractor mentioned by name be substituted .
when reasons submitted for the substitution of the subcontractor indicate that the change will be in the best interest of the administration approval of the request will be granted .
roadside production of materials unless performed by the contractor shall be considered as subcontracting .
this shall be construed to mean the production of crushed stone gravel or other materials by means of portable or semiportable crushing screening or washing plants established or reopened in the vicinity of the work for the purpose of supplying materials to be incorporated into the work on a designated project or projects .
the purchase of sand gravel crushed stone crushed slag batched concrete aggregates ready mix concrete or other materials produced at and furnished from established and recognized commercial plants together with the delivery of the materials to the site of the work by the producer or by recognized commercial hauling companies will not be considered as subcontracting .
subcontractors prompt payment .
the contractor shall promptly pay a subcontractor any undisputed amount including retainage to which the subcontractor is entitled for work under the contract within num days of receiving a progress semifinal or final payment in conformance with the latest edition of the state finance and procurement article num of the annotated code of maryland .
the administration has established the following time frame for subcontractor payment when a progress semifinal or final payment is processed and payment is received by the contractor payment shall be made to all subcontractors within num days .
each month the construction project engineer cpe will review the current pay items with the contractor and all involved subcontractors to ensure that all work satisfactorily completed in conformance with the contract documents is included in the monthly progress payment .
for payment purposes the same quantity totals used to compute the payment to the contractor will be the basis for payment to the subcontractor .
if the contractor withholds payment from a subcontractor beyond num days the contractor shall num num legal relation and progress a notify the subcontractor in writing and state the reason why payment is being withheld and b provide a copy of the notice to the cpe and the district engineer .
if the subcontractor does not receive payment within the required num days the subcontractor shall give written notice of nonpayment to the cpe and the district engineer .
the notice shall a state the name of the contractor the contract number and the amount in dispute .
b provide an itemized summary on which the amount is based and c if known provide an explanation for any dispute concerning payment by the contractor .
the cpe will then notify the assistant district engineer construction ade of the dispute .
the ade will verbally contact the contractor within num hours to ascertain whether the amount withheld is an undisputed amount .
if the ade determines that a part or all of the amount withheld is an undisputed amount the ade will instruct the contractor to pay the subcontractor the undisputed amount within three days .
the instructions will be confirmed in writing .
the ade will verbally communicate to the subcontractor the results of the discussion with the contractor and confirm the results in writing .
if the contractor fails to pay the subcontractor the undisputed amount within the specified three days the subcontractor may report the nonpayment in writing to the ade .
upon receipt of notification of nonpayment from the subcontractor the ade will schedule a meeting to verify and discuss the nonpayment issue .
this meeting will be held at the district office no later than num days after receiving notice from the subcontractor .
invited to this meeting will be the contractor the subcontractor the ade and the cpe .
the purpose of this meeting will be to establish why payment was not made to the subcontractor in the required time period .
if it is determined that the contractor is delinquent in payment to the subcontractor further progress payments to the contractor may be withheld until the subcontractor is paid .
num num legal relations and progress if payment is not made to the subcontractor within seven days after the ade determines that the contractor is delinquent in paying the subcontractor and the next progress payment becomes due the progress payment will not be processed and a second meeting will be held at the district office to address the dispute .
the second meeting will be held no later than five days after the close of the sevenday period .
if the results of this second meeting reveal that payment to the subcontractor continues to be delinquent the ade may order a suspension of work based upon the failure of the contractor to carry out the provisions of the contract or he may allow work to continue and withhold future progress payments as stated above .
in addition the administration may require the contractor to pay a penalty to the subcontractor in an amount not exceeding num per day from the date the payment was required .
a penalty will not be imposed for any period that the ade determines the subcontractor was not diligent in reporting nonpayment in conformance with the contract documents .
the contractor shall notify the cpe when payment has been made to the subcontractor .
the cpe will verify the payment with the subcontractor to ensure payment was received .
a contractor or subcontractor may appeal the decision of the district engineer to the chief engineer procurement officer in conformance with gpnum disputes .
the chief engineer will render a final decision on this issue in conformance with gpnum disputes .
a decision of the administration under these terms and conditions is not subject to judicial review or the provisions of comar num .
any administrative costs incurred by the administration will be deducted from the contractors retainage at the conclusion of the project .
nothing in this provision will prevent the subcontractor from pursuing a claim with the surety under the contractors payment bond at any time .
tcnum cultural resources the contractor shall be aware of the potential of cultural resources on the project .
during the construction phase whenever anything that might appear to be a cultural resource of a historical archeological or paleontological nature is encountered such an object shall not be disturbed .
work shall be stopped and rescheduled in a way that shall avoid not only the objects but also the area of discovery and the engineer shall be notified at once .
the engineer will arrange for the evaluation of num num legal relation and progress the situation by the appropriate authorities and for the ultimate disposition of the matter taking the evaluation of the situation by the appropriate authorities into consideration .
tcnum determination and extension of contract time the contractor shall complete the work contracted for in an acceptable manner within the number of working days calendar days or calendar date as specified in the invitation for bids .
the engineer will make available to the contractor each week a record showing the number of days charged to the contract for the preceding week .
the contractor will be allowed one week in which to protest and num days in which to file a written statement setting forth in what respects time charges are incorrect .
if satisfactory fulfillment of the contract with extensions and increases authorized under gpnum variations in estimated quantities and changes specified in the general provisions require the performance of work in greater quantities than specified in the invitation for bids the contract time allowed for performance may be adjusted based on the quantities cost and the nature of the work involved .
the contractor under certain conditions may be granted permission or be ordered to suspend operations as defined in gpnum suspension of work on working day contracts .
if the contractor elects and is permitted to do any work the time charged shall bear the same ratio to the total time allowed for the completion of the work as the value of the work done during such time bears to the total value of the contract .
however the resultant number of days to be charged for any particular month will never exceed the number of calendar days for that month excluding saturdays sundays or official holidays on which no work was performed on a controlling item .
time used in performing work of an emergency nature ordered by the engineer for the convenience of the traveling public or for the production or delivery of materials for storage if performed during the period of suspension will not be charged against the contract time .
following the date on which all work has been completed except those landscaping items on which work is restricted to specified seasons and when inspection and acceptance for maintenance is being deferred pending completion of those landscaping items on which work is not permissible at the time because such work is currently out of season and for no other reason no time will be charged against the contract until such time as it is again permissible to proceed with such work .
however num num restrictions and permits time will be charged during any extensions of the specified season that may be granted the contractor .
request for extension of contract time shall be submitted in conformance with sections num or num as specified in the contract documents .
tc section num restrictions and permits tcnum moving of equipment the contractor will not be permitted to move over or operate on any road except on the road under construction any power shovels rollers concrete mixers cranes tractors or any other heavy equipment of weight or dimensions in excess of maryland motor vehicle law or administrations regulations without first obtaining the usual permit .
in case of permits for oversize and overweight vehicle movements attention is directed to maryland motor vehicle laws requiring the administration to collect a fee on every such vehicle movement using highways of the state .
the payment of and securing of such permit is required irrespective of whether the movement is in connection with a subject contract or for other purposes .
tcnum load and speed limitations the bidders attention is directed to the annotated code of maryland transportation article section num authorizing the appropriate county authorities of the counties listed below to establish such load limits and appropriate speed limits on county roads as may be necessary to preserve the roads and provide adequately for public safety .
the bidder is advised to consult with the county engineer in order to ascertain the extent of any restrictions applicable to county roads that the county authorities may propose to establish in connection with the construction of a contract .
num num restrictions and permits counties with load and speed limitations allegany al anne arundel aa baltimore ba carroll cl frederick fr harford ha howard ho montgomery mo prince georges pg st. marys sm washington wa tcnum compliance with maryland vehicle laws the maryland vehicle law requires each motor vehicle trailer semitrailer and pole trailer driven on a highway to be registered .
there are some exceptions to this general requirement concerning nonresidents .
if a nonresident is operating a vehicle in maryland as described below the nonresident exemption is not applicable and the vehicle being operated shall be titled and registered in conformance with the applicable motor vehicle laws when the vehicle is a used for transporting persons for hire compensation or profit b regularly operated in carrying on business in this state c designed used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property or d in the custody of any resident for more than num days during any registration year .
in addition to the titling and registration requirements for vehicles being operated in maryland all equipment being used shall be properly identified .
maryland classifies this equipment as special mobile equipment which is defined as a vehicle that num num restrictions and permits a is not used primarily for highway transportation or property and b is operated or moved on highway only as an incident to its nonhighway use .
special mobile equipment includes a road construction or maintenance machine mobile crane ditch digger well driller concrete mixer job site office vehicle or portable power generator .
an interchangeable license plate is issued to special mobile equipment however titling is not required .
for additional information concerning the requirements for titling and registering vehicles in maryland contact the motor vehicle administration chief division of vehicle registration .
the contractor shall adhere to all state motor vehicle laws and safety regulations .
tcnum restoration of surfaces opened by permit the right to construct or reconstruct any utility in the highway or to grant permits for same at any time is reserved by the administration .
upon the presentation of a duly authorized and satisfactory permit which provides that all necessary repair work shall be paid for by the party to whom the permit is issued the contractor shall allow parties bearing such permits to make openings in the highway .
the contractor shall when directed by the engineer make all necessary repairs due to such openings .
this work will be paid for as additional work as provided in these specifications and will be subject to the same conditions as original work performed .
tcnum railroadhighway grade crossings and separations when the contractor is required to haul materials across the tracks of any railroad or elects to do so the contractor shall make arrangements with that railroad for any new private crossings or for the use of any existing private crossing .
all work to be performed by the contractor in the construction of railroadhighway separation structures on the railroad rightofway shall be done in a manner satisfactory to the engineer of the railroad company num num restrictions and permits and shall be performed at times and in a manner that does not interfere with the movement of trains or traffic upon the tracks .
the contractor shall take precaution to avoid accidents damage or unnecessary delay or interference with trains or other property .
in addition to the insurance specified in tcnum and when work covered under the contract is to be performed within num feet of the rails of the railroads tracks the contractor shall carry contractor and railroad public liability and property damage insurance as specified in the contract documents .
prospective bidders on contracts crossing railroad rightofway are advised that the railroad company will require the contractor to obtain pay for and have approved by the railroad certain broad forms of public liability and property damage insurance policies before entering upon the railroad property .
as a general rule details of these policies are set forth in the contract provisions but in case of omission from the contract provisions the contractor is required to communicate with the railroad to ascertain the type of insurance required if any and make provisions for the insurance in the bid .
unless otherwise specified cost for the insurance policies whether described in the contract provisions or ascertained by the contractor will not be paid for but will be incidental to the other items specified in the contract documents .
all work on portions of structures over railroad rightofway shall conform to all rules and regulations of the owners of the rightofway .
the contractor shall acquire full knowledge of these rules and regulations and comply therewith to the satisfaction of the owners of the railroad rightofway .
tcnum bridges and other work in or over waters of the state all work in on or over waters under control of the department of the army or the environmental protection agency of the united states shall conform to all applicable federal permits rules and regulations .
all of these rules and regulations are hereby part of the contract .
the contractor is cautioned and charged with the responsibility of obtaining complete knowledge thereof and compliance therewith .
the contractor shall also comply with the provisions of other applicable federal state and local laws and is cautioned to become knowledgeable with any pertinent regulations of the maryland department of natural resources and maryland department of environment .
num num restrictions and permits tcnum use of explosives all blasting operations including the storage and handling of explosives and blasting agents shall be performed in conformance with the applicable provisions of the contract documents and all other pertinent federal state and local regulations .
all explosives shall be stored in a secure manner and all of these storage places shall be marked clearly dangerous explosives and shall be in the care of competent watchpersons at all times .
whenever explosives are used they shall be of such character and in such amount as is permitted by the state and local laws and ordinances and all respective agencies having jurisdiction over them .
the use or storage of explosives will not be permitted under adjacent to or on any existing structures unless authorized in writing by the engineer .
at least num days prior to commencing drilling and blasting operations or any time the contractor proposes to change the drilling and blasting methods the contractor shall submit a blasting plan to the engineer for review .
the blasting plan shall contain the full details of the drilling and blasting patterns and controls the contractor proposes to use .
the blasting plan submittal is for quality control and record keeping purposes .
review of the blasting plan by the engineer shall not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for the accuracy and adequacy of the plan when implemented in the field .
if at any time during the progress of the work the method of drilling and blasting does not produce the desired result the contractor shall submit a revised blasting plan until a technique is arrived at that shall produce the desired results .
before firing any blast in areas where flying rock may result in personal injury or damage to property or the work the rock to be blasted shall be covered with approved blasting mats soil or other equally serviceable material to prevent flying rock .
the contractor shall notify each public utility company having structures in proximity to the site of the work of the intention to use explosives .
this notice shall be given sufficiently in advance to enable the companies to take any steps they may deem necessary to protect their property from damage .
this notice shall not relieve the contractor of responsibility for any damage resulting from the contractors blasting operations .
the engineer will have the authority to prohibit or halt the contractors blasting operations when the methods being employed are not obtaining the required results an unstable condition exists or the safety and convenience of the traveling public is jeopardized .
num num restrictions and permits tcnum aerial electric lines num volts or more the contractor shall be aware that state law requires that a num foot radial clearance shall be maintained for all construction equipment and materials in relation to electric lines carrying num volts or more .
because the state law is more stringent than the federal laws the state law shall be considered the minimal distance .
the contractor shall also be aware of and comply with all other federal state and local laws and utility company requirements and regulations as specified in gpnum compliance with laws .
tcnum hazardous material a if the contractor encounters or exposes during construction any abnormal conditions that indicate the presence of a hazardous material or toxic waste work in the area shall immediately be suspended and the engineer notified .
the contractors operations in this area shall not resume until permitted by the engineer however the contractor may continue working in other areas of the project unless directed otherwise .
abnormal conditions shall include but not be limited to the presence of barrels obnoxious or unusual odors excessively hot earth smoke or any other condition that could be a possible indicator of hazardous material or toxic waste .
where the contractor performs necessary work required to dispose of these materials and no items have been identified in the contract documents the work shall be performed under a change order .
b for any material furnished on the project by the contractor suspected to be hazardous or toxic the engineer may require the contractor to have it tested and certified to be in conformance with all applicable requirements and regulations .
material found to be hazardous or toxic shall not be incorporated into the work .
the required testing will be determined by the engineer and may include but not be limited to the epa toxicity characteristic leaching procedure tclp or its successor .
the evaluation and interpretation of the test data will be made by the engineer .
testing and certification shall be at no additional cost to the administration .
c disposition of the hazardous material or toxic waste shall be made in conformance with all applicable requirements and regulations .
num num restrictions and permits tcnum recycled or rehandled material for recycled or rehandled material furnished by the contractor for use on the project the engineer may require the contractor to have the material tested and certified to be in conformance with all applicable environmental requirements .
the required testing will be determined by the engineer and may include but not be limited to the epa toxicity characteristic leaching procedure tclp or its successor .
the evaluation and interpretation of the test data will be made by the engineer and be based upon the project environment .
testing and certification shall be at no additional cost to the administration .
this does not preclude the normal materials process and the recycled material shall conform to all applicable specifications .
typical recycled materials are a crumb rubber .
any rubber derived from processing whole scrap tires or shredded tire materials from automobiles vehicles or other equipment owned and operated in the united states provided the processing does not produce waste casings or other round tire material that can hold water when stored or disposed of above ground .
rubber tire buffings produced by the retreading process qualify as a source of crumb rubber .
b recycled asphalt pavement .
existing asphalt pavement milled or otherwise removed .
recycled inplace material is excluded .
c glass .
waste glass crushed to be used as aggregate .
d blast furnace slag .
the nonmetallic byproduct of iron production .
e recycled concrete pavement .
existing concrete pavement crushed to be used as aggregate .
f mining waste rock .
the coarse material removed during the ore mining process .
g coal fly ash .
fine material collected from the stack gases after coal combustion .
h other .
any materials not listed above that are recycled as the original product or incorporated into other products .
num num restrictions and permits tcnum construction and waste material all wood trash debris and other foreign matter shall be removed from within the rightofway limits and disposed of by the contractor .
the contractor shall make all necessary arrangements to obtain suitable disposal locations and shall furnish the engineer with a copy of resulting agreements .
disposal shall be in conformance with all federal state and local ordinances .
tcnum structure underclearances and overhead clearances general .
the requirements for underclearances at structures shall apply to the entire usable roadway areas including shoulders .
unless otherwise specified in the contract documents or directed by the engineer the contractor shall ensure that the following underclearances are maintained .
a all bridges except pedestrian bridges over interstate united states or state highways shall have a num foot minimum vertical underclearance .
b all bridges except pedestrian bridges over secondarycounty roads and local roads shall have a num foot minimum underclearance .
c all pedestrian bridges shall have a minimum vertical underclearance num foot higher than those specified above .
however if there are bridges in the general vicinity of the proposed pedestrian bridge that have an underclearance greater than the minimum required underclearance of the pedestrian bridge then the pedestrian bridge will have its underclearance increased to equal the highest overpass bridge .
removal of existing pavement under an existing pedestrian bridge to conform to the num foot higher requirement will not be required unless specified in the contract documents .
refer to the requirements included under the resurfacing portion of this specification .
d all bridges with overhead structural elements e.g .
through truss bridges movable bridges with overhead bracing for counterweights etc .
shall have a num foot minimum overhead vertical clearance .
when the above requirements are not met the engineer will contact the district engineer and the office of bridge development to determine the need for remedial actions .
when remedial actions are required and there are no pay items for the work in the contract documents the provisions of gpnum changes and gpnum negotiated payment num num restrictions and permits provisions shall apply .
the cost of measurements to determine clearance heights will be incidental to other pertinent items in the contract documents .
throughout construction a minimum of num foot underclearance shall be maintained at all bridges over each lane or shoulder open to traffic .
no portion of formwork temporary protective shields etc .
including connection devices shall encroach on this underclearance .
if during the construction less than num foot of vertical underclearance is provided on bridges specified in a c or d above the engineer will inform the district engineer the office of bridge development and the chief of the administrations motor carrier division of the exact reduced minimum clearance and the effective dates of the reduction .
the contractor shall furnish and erect signs indicating the exact minimum underclearance .
the signs and their locations shall be approved by the engineer .
signs shall be removed and become the property of the contractor when the intended underclearance is restored .
resurfacing .
these minimum underclearances shall be maintained whenever resurfacing a roadway .
this may require grinding the existing pavement prior to placing the resurfacing material .
whenever highway overpass bridges are in the general vicinity of a pedestrian bridge and grinding is not required to maintain the specified clearances the roadway under the pedestrian bridge shall be ground to provide a higher underclearance than the adjacent bridges .
this requirement will be waived whenever the engineer contacts the district engineer and the office of bridge development and determines that the grinding would have an adverse effect on drainage utilities etc .
tcnum hauling over proposed structures if the contractor desires to haul across the proposed structures they shall first apply for and obtain written permission from the administrations district engineer for each type of hauling equipment to be used .
the approval will include the following provisions which shall be complied with a maximum total gross load vehicle plus load num tons .
b maximum actual load of any axle num tons .
c minimum axle spacing num feet does not apply to tandum axles .
d only rubber tired vehicles will be permitted .
e maximum speed of loaded vehicle num miles per hour .
num num restrictions and permits f maximum speed of unloaded vehicle num miles per hour g minimum distance between traveling vehicles num feet .
h travel path across structures shall be midway between curbs parapets .
i bridge deck shall be kept clean at all times .
j at the conclusion of hauling the contractor shall thoroughly clean the entire roadway surface of the bridges and other parts of the bridges requiring cleaning as a result of the hauling operations .
the contractor shall submit bonafide evidence to the administrations district engineer as to total weight of the loaded vehicle as well as he maximum weight of any axle thereon .
the engineers representative will be in frequent observation to enforce speeds position of vehicles on the bridge and limitations as to vehicle spacing .
any violation will result in the immediate cancellation of the approval for hauling operations predicted thereby .
the contractor is responsible for damages to the bridges caused by their operations .
tcnum storing materials and equipment on against structures restrictions materials and equipment shall not be stored on or against any structure unless written permission is obtained from the administrations district office and the office of bridge development for each type of material or equipment to be stored .
submittals to the district office shall include the type of material or equipment the proposed storage location the area at the base of the material or pallet and its total weight height of stockpiles number of axles load per axle and axle spacing vehicle gross weight and any other information necessary to calculate the stresses applied to the structure .
stockpiles shall not be placed against piers parapets or any other structure that could be possibly overstressed .
for structures under construction or rehabilitation the contractor shall also submit information pertaining to the phase of construction which members have been modified or separated from the remainder of the structure or have been newly constructed .
num num payment any materials or equipment that would have a detrimental affect to the structure such as aluminum products placed against concrete surfaces shall be adequately protected to prohibit them from coming in contact with each other .
any discoloration or damage to the structure as a result of material or equipment being stored onagainst the structure shall be removed or repaired .
tc section num payment gpsection num payment is not applicable to administration contracts .
the provisions of tc section num shall apply .
tcnum measurement of quantities for all items of work other than those to be paid by lump sum after the work is completed and before final payment is made the engineer will make final measurements to determine the quantities of various items of work performed as the basis for final settlement .
the contractor in case of unit price items will be paid for the actual amount of work performed and for the actual amount of materials in place in conformance with the specifications and final measurements .
all work completed under the contract will be measured by the engineer in conformance with the united states standard measure .
all longitudinal measurements for area will be made along the actual surface and not horizontally and no deductions will be made for individual fixtures having an area of num square feet or less .
for all transverse measurements for area of base course and pavements the dimensions to be used in calculating the pay area will be the neat dimensions shown on the plans or directed in writing by the engineer .
structure measurements shall conform to the neat lines shown on the plans or as directed in writing unless otherwise provided for elsewhere in the contract documents .
volumes of excavation tamped fill and borrow pits will be calculated per cubic yard from the cross section and the use of average end area formulas .
volumes of other work such as masonry removal of masonry etc .
will be calculated using arithmetical formulas .
where the volume is bounded by varying dimensions and there are no simple volumetric formulas applicable frequent cross sections will be taken and the cubic yard volume computed from average end area formulas .
num num payment cement will be measured by weight .
all items that are measured by the linear foot such as pipe culverts traffic barrier underdrains etc .
will be measured parallel to the base or foundation upon which such structures are placed unless otherwise specified in the contract documents .
the term gauge when used in connection with the measurement of uncoated steel sheet and light plates shall mean the u.s. standard gauge except that when reference is made to the measurement of galvanized or aluminum sheets used in the manufacture of corrugated metal pipe metal plate pipe culverts and arches and metal cribbing the term gauge shall mean that specified in m num m num m num or m num .
when the term gauge refers to the measurement of wire it shall mean the washburn moen wire gauge as referenced in the new departure handbook .
a tolerance of plus or minus num inch shall apply .
the term ton shall mean the short ton consisting of num pounds avoirdupois .
all materials that are specified by the ton shall be weighed on accurate approved scales conforming to the requirements of the national bureau of standards handbook num .
a digital recorder and printout shall be required on all truck scales .
the digital recorder shall produce a printed record of the gross tare net weights the time date truck identification and contract number .
provisions shall be made so that the scales may not be manually manipulated during the process .
the system shall be interlocked to allow printing only when the scale has come to rest .
except for computer operated scales all weights shall be certified by a bonded weigh person supplied by the contractor producer or supplier .
the security bond shall be num num .
if the material is shipped by rail the car weight shall be accepted but the payment will be limited to the actual weight of material .
car weight will not be acceptable for material to be passed through mixing plants .
all materials for which measurements are obtained by the cubic yard shall be hauled in approved vehicles and measured at the point of delivery .
no allowance will be made for the settlement of material in transit .
approved vehicles for this purpose shall be of any size or type acceptable to the engineer provided that the body is of such shape that the actual contents may be readily and accurately determined .
unless all approved vehicles are of uniform capacity each approved vehicle shall bear a plainly legible identification mark indicating the specific approved capacity .
all vehicles shall be loaded to at least their water level num num payment capacity and all loads shall be leveled when the vehicles arrive at the point of delivery .
when requested by the contractor and approved by the engineer in writing material specified to be measured by the cubic yard may be weighed and the weight will be converted to cubic yard for payment purposes .
factors for conversion from weight measurement to volume measurement will be determined by the laboratory and shall be agreed to by the contractor before the method of measurement of pay quantities will be approved by the engineer .
liquid asphalt material delivered for the project will be measured by volume in each railroad tank car tank truck distributor tank or drums in which it is delivered .
the measurements will be taken when the asphalt material is of a uniform temperature and free from air bubbles .
the temperature of the material will be recorded .
the volumetric measurement of the asphalt material will be based upon a temperature of num f. reference is made to d num petroleum measurement tables .
only the quantity of asphalt material actually placed in the work and accepted will be considered in determining the amount due the contractor .
timber will be measured by the thousand board foot measurement mbm actually incorporated in the structure .
measurement will be based on nominal widths and thicknesses and the extreme length of each piece .
the term lump sum when used as an item of payment will mean complete payment for the unit of work described .
when complete structure or structural unit in effect lump sum work is specified as the unit measurement the unit will be construed to include all necessary fittings and accessories .
rental of equipment will be measured in hours of actual working time moving in and moving out costs if any and necessary traveling time of the equipment within the limits of the project except when special conditions make some other method of measurement desirable .
num num payment tcnum payment allowances for stored material when the contractor requests payment allowance for materials the following terms and conditions shall apply a for superstructure members delivered on the project site an allowance of num percent of the material cost plus freight charges as invoiced may be made provided the cost does not exceed num percent of the contract price of the applicable contract item .
the allowance will be based upon validated invoices or bills for material including freight charges and a copy thereof shall be made a part of the documented records for the project .
b for reinforcement steel piling pipe traffic barrier signs and sign assemblies and other nonperishable material in storage on the project but excluding aggregates cement seed plants fertilizer or other perishable items an allowance of num percent of the invoiced cost of the material plus freight charges to the contractor may be made provided the cost does not exceed num percent of the contract price of the applicable contract item .
such material shall be delivered and stockpiled at the project site after being tested by the administration and found to have conformed to the specifications or to have been accepted under an approved certification program prior to the allowance .
c no allowance will be made for fuels form lumber falsework temporary structures or other materials of any kind that will not become an integral part of the finished construction .
no payment for stored material will be made if it is anticipated that the material will be incorporated into the work within num days of the written request .
only end product manufactured material or fully fabricated products that are awaiting installation or incorporation into the finished work are eligible for prepayment .
components elements or ingredients of a finished product are not eligible for prepayment .
d material for which an allowance is requested shall be stored in an approved manner in areas within the state of maryland where damage is not likely to occur .
if any of the stored materials are lost or become damaged in any manner the contractor shall be responsible for repairing or replacing the damaged materials .
the value of the lost or damaged material will be deducted from the contractors subsequent estimates until replacement has been num num payment accomplished .
the request for allowances for any materials stored on private property within the state of maryland shall be accompanied by a release from the owner andor tenant of such property agreeing to permit the removal of the materials from the property at no cost to the administration .
the material shall be clearly marked with the administrations contract number on individual units .
if the material is normally shipped to the project in bundles or other forms of packaging the administrations contract number shall be clearly marked or affixed to the package .
when the material is not stored at the actual project site the material shall be physically separated by fencing or equivalent barrier from other materials stored at the same site .
the material shall be accessible to the administration at all times .
when it is considered impractical to store materials on the actual project the engineer may approve storage areas in the vicinity of the actual project which will be considered at the project site .
when storage of the materials within the state of maryland is not practical approval shall be obtained from the district engineer for storage elsewhere .
storage of materials outside the state of maryland will be subject to the conditions set forth in this provision and limited to materials exceeding num num which are designed and fabricated exclusively for use on a specific project .
e material for which payment has been made either wholly or partially shall not be removed from the approved location until such time that it is to be incorporated into the work unless authorized by the engineer .
f the contractor shall submit a written request for payment to the district engineer at least two weeks prior to the estimate cutoff date established by the district engineer .
the following items shall accompany the written request for payment num consent of surety specifying the material type and the items in which the material is to be used .
num validated invoices with the signature of an officer of the company supplying the material showing actual cost .
num a notarized statement attesting that the invoices as submitted do not include charges or fees for placing handling erecting or any other charges or markups other num num payment than the actual material cost sales tax if applicable and freight charges .
num bills of lading showing delivery of the material .
the request for allowances for any materials stored on property outside the state of maryland shall be accompanied by a release from the owner or tenant of such property agreeing to permit verification by the inspector that the material is stored at the approved location and to permit the removal of the materials from the property at no cost to the administration .
num inspection test reports certifications andor a written statement from the inspector attesting to the inspection and approval of the material .
num a statement explaining why the material can not be stored on the project if the contractor is requesting to store material at a location other than the project site .
the statement shall include the methods of storage separation and identification to be used by the contractor .
the contractor shall provide a method of inventory control and withdrawal satisfactory to the administration which shall be used by the contractor to monitor materials not stored on the project .
num a breakdown of the contract line item bid unit price showing the relationship of the cost of the stored material to the costs of all other materials labor and components of the work included in the contract line item unit price bid by the contractor .
upon receipt of the above by the district engineer and verification by the inspector that the material is stored at the approved location the district engineer will authorize payment .
the contractor shall pay the material provider the amount shown on the invoice within num days of receipt of payment from the administration .
evidence of payment shall be provided to the administration .
failure to make invoice payments as specified will be cause to deduct the monies from future estimates andor deny future stored materials payment requests .
copies of all pertinent data shall be made by the contractor and distributed to the inspector for retention as part of the documented records for the project .
num num payment tcnum force account work when the contractor is required to perform work due to additions or changes to the contract for which there are no applicable unit prices the administration and contractor will make every effort to come to an agreed price for the performance of the work .
if an agreement is not reached prior to the time that work must begin the administration will give written notification to the contractor to proceed with the work on a force account basis while continuing to pursue a negotiated settlement .
failure to reach agreement prior to the completion of the work will necessitate that the work be completed and compensated in conformance with the following a labor .
before any force account work begins the engineer and the contractor must agree on the hourly labor rates for all laborers and foremen to be engaged in the work .
the number of laborers and foremen engaged in the work will be subject to regulation by the engineer and shall not exceed the number the engineer deems most practical and economical for the work .
for all labor and foremen in direct charge of the force account work excluding general superintendence compensation will be as follows num certified pay rate .
the contractor shall receive the hourly pay rate shown on the certified payrolls for each hour that labor and foremen are actually engaged in the work .
hourly pay rates that exceed those previously agreed upon must be authorized by the engineer .
submit certified payrolls in conformance with the contract documents .
num fringe benefits .
the contractor shall receive the direct cost for fringe benefits that are required by collective bargaining agreements or other employment contracts and that are not included in the certified hourly pay rate .
num payroll burden .
the contractor shall receive the following indirect costs at the applicable percentage of the certified hourly pay rate .
social security tax medicare tax unemployment taxes workers compensation insurance contractors public liability insurance contractors property damage liability insurance num overhead and profit on labor .
the contractor shall receive an allowance of num percent of the sum total of num num and num .
num num payment to substantiate the cost for num and num the contractor shall furnish the engineer a certified itemized breakdown .
instead of submitting an itemization for num the contractor may elect to receive for payroll burden an amount equal to num percent of the certified hourly pay rate .
b materials .
for materials required to perform the work and accepted by the procurement officer the contractor shall receive the actual cost of the materials delivered on the work including tax and transportation charges paid by the contractor exclusive of machinery rentals as specified in c below .
in addition the contractor will be allowed num percent of the actual cost of materials tax and applicable transportation charges .
to substantiate materials and transportation cost original receipted invoices shall be submitted .
if the materials used in the force account work are not specifically purchased for the work but are taken from the contractors stock then in lieu of the original invoices the statements shall contain or be accompanied by an affidavit from the contractor that shall certify that the materials were taken from the contractors stock that the quantity claimed was actually used and that the price and transportation cost of the material as claimed represents the actual cost .
the administration reserves the right to furnish materials as it deems appropriate and the contractor shall have no claim for any costs overhead or profit on these materials .
c equipment .
for all equipment other than small tools the contractor shall receive rental rates as established herein and agreed to in writing before the work is begun for the actual time the equipment is in operation on force account work .
transportation costs directly attributable to force account work will be allowed .
for the purpose of definition equipment with a new cost of one thousand dollars num or less will be considered small tools .
num contractor owned equipment .
for all equipment utilized on force account work the hourly rate for each piece of equipment and attachments will be the blue book monthly rate for the make and model multiplied by the appropriate rate adjustment factor divided by num plus the hourly operating costs .
the contractor shall furnish to the engineer a complete description including the serial numbers and year of num num payment manufacture for all pieces of equipment used on force account work .
the hourly rate for each piece of equipment will be the sum of the base machine rate attachment rate and operating rates established in the rental rate blue book for construction equipment current at the time the equipment is used .
num equipment rented exclusively for force account work .
in cases where a piece of equipment is rented or leased by the contractor from a third party exclusively for force account work the actual invoiced amount will be paid when the rates are reasonably in line with established rental rates for the equipment in question and are approved by the engineer .
in addition the contractor will be allowed num percent of the actual invoiced amount .
num moving equipment .
when it is necessary to obtain equipment exclusively for force account work from sources beyond the project limits the cost of transferring the equipment to the site of the work and return will be allowed as an additional expense .
where the move requires the use of a hauling unit the move in allowance will be limited to the rental rate for the hauling unit as computed in c num above plus operator wages .
when equipment is transferred under its own power the moving allowance will be limited to half the hourly rental rate as computed in c num above plus operators wages .
if the move out is to a different location payment will in no instance exceed the amount of the move in .
move in allowance will not be made for equipment brought to the project for force account work if it is subsequently retained on the project and utilized for contract items or related work .
num standby time .
standby rates shall apply when a piece of equipment is required to remain on the project on standby status when authorized by the engineer .
when a unit works for a portion of a day and is on standby for a portion the total time allowed shall not exceed num hours for that day .
standby rates shall be half of the normal hourly base rates without the operating expenses .
standby rates shall not exceed num hours per day and will be allowed for working days only .
equipment that is required to be on the project for transporting personnel or materials will be paid at the hourly rental rate for num num payment the actual hours per day it is utilized with the remainder being standby time as computed above .
no compensation will be allowed for equipment that is inoperable due to breakdown .
d subcontracting .
the contractor shall receive the cost of work performed by a subcontractor as determined in a b and c. in addition the contractor will be allowed an allowance of five hundred dollars num or num percent of the total combination of a b and c whichever sum is greater .
e compensation .
the compensation as specified in a through e above shall be received by the contractor as payment for work done on a force account basis which shall be full compensation for all costs associated with the force account including overhead and profit for the work performed .
f force account daily report .
at the end of each days work on any force account the engineer and contractors representative must complete a daily force account report .
this report must be signed by both the engineer and the contractors representative on a daily basis .
daily force account reports for work performed and signed by a subcontractor must also be signed by the contractor .
each party shall retain a copy as substantiation of all labor equipment and materials used in the performance of the force account work .
g partial payment .
the contractor may request partial payment for force account work prior to submitting final documentation .
partial payment will be limited to num percent of the estimated amount for the work accomplished until all documentation has been received and approved .
h final payment .
the final force account payment request from the contractor will be subject to audit as specified in gpnum retention of records .
tcnum scope of payment payment to the contractor will be made from the actual quantities of contract items performed in conformance with the plans and specifications .
if upon completion of the construction these actual quantities show either an increase or decrease from the quantities given in the bid schedule the contract unit prices will still prevail except as provided in gpnum variations in estimated quantities .
num num payment the payment of any partial estimate or of any retained percentage except by and under the approved final estimate and voucher shall in no way affect the obligation of the contractor to repair or renew any defective parts of the construction or to be responsible for all damages due to such defects .
when requested in writing by the contractor and approved by the procurement officer payment allowance will be made for nonperishable material to be incorporated in the work delivered and stockpiled at the work site or other approved site in conformance with tcnum .
payment to the contractor under this section for materials on hand shall not be construed in any way as acceptance by the administration of title to the material .
title shall remain with the contractor until the project has been completed and accepted in conformance with gpnum acceptance for maintenance .
the contractor federal tax identification or social security number shall be included on the face of each invoice billed to the state .
on contracts in excess of num num the contractor and any subcontractor with a lower tier subcontract prior to receiving a progress or final payment under this contract shall first certify in writing that he has made payment from proceeds of prior payments and that he will make timely payments from the proceeds of the progress or final payment then due him to his subcontractors and suppliers in conformance with his contractual arrangement with them .
the contractor shall also obtain from each subcontractor a certification that payment from proceeds of prior payments have been made to any lower tier subcontractors and that timely payments will be made to the lower tier subcontractors and suppliers in conformance with contractual arrangements with them .
this certification is not required from subcontractors who have no lower tier subcontracts .
these certifications may be required by the procurement officer for contracts of num num or less .
in addition to any other remedies provided by law or this contract any contractor or subcontractor of any tier who fails to make payment as required by the certifications set forth in the above paragraph within num days from the date such payment is due shall be obligated to include with such payments interest at the rate of num percent per annum from the date the payment was due to the date the payment was actually made to the subcontractor or lower tier subcontractor .
num num payment tcnum progress payments a current estimate .
num lump sum contracts .
the contractor shall furnish an acceptable breakdown of the lump sum contract price showing the amount included therein for each principal category of the work .
said breakdown shall be in such detail so as to provide a basis for estimating monthly progress payments .
num monthly estimates .
each month the administration will pay the contractor for the contract value of the work satisfactorily performed during the preceding calendar month including authorized additions less variable retainage specified in num variable retainage .
retainage will not be released until final payment unless partially released in a semifinal payment .
current estimates will be based upon the procurement officers estimate of quantity including materials andor equipment complete in place satisfactorily performed .
in the instance of lump sum items and each items the procurement officers estimate will be the proper percentage of the item satisfactorily performed during the preceding month .
all quantities estimates and fractions will be reasonably accurate approximations and are subject to corrections a in subsequent current estimates b in any semifinal estimate and c in final payment .
any or all partial payments may be withheld in the event the contractor has not complied with current requirements of the specifications .
should either the procurement officer or the contractor be of the opinion that any estimates quantities or fractions either as to an individual current estimate or accumulations thereof do not represent a reasonably accurate approximation of actual work then the details questioned will be reviewed .
any necessary corrections and adjustments will be made in the next current estimate .
num variable retainage .
the contract will be subject to a variable retainage based upon the administrations performance evaluations of the low bidder .
those qualifying may have retainage reduced upon request of the contractor with consent of surety .
this request shall be processed through the district engineer .
if at any time during the performance of the work the evaluation of the contractor changes retainage reduction may be reconsidered .
num num payment after num percent project completion and upon request contractors with a evaluations for the last two years may be reduced from num percent to zero percent .
project completion percentage will be based upon actual work completed excluding monies paid for stored materials .
an interim evaluation of the current project would need to be completed and would need to be an a .
at num percent project completion and upon request contractors with b evaluations or any combination of a and b evaluations for the last two years may be reduced from num percent to num percent and remain at that level until released upon final payment .
project completion percentage will be based upon actual work completed excluding monies paid for stored materials .
an interim evaluation of the current project would need to completed and would need to be an a or b .
contractors with c evaluations or any combination of c and d evaluation for the past two years will begin and remain at num percent for the life of the project .
contractors with a d evaluation for the last two years will begin at num percent .
project performance will be evaluated monthly with the retainage being raised to num percent for continued d performance .
new bidders .
contractors who have not been previously rated by the administration may be eligible for a reduction in retainage .
to be eligible their past performance on highway and bridge work shall be documented by the government agency with whom they had a contract and their performance shall be documented on administration forms .
contractors who do not fit into the above criteria would require a num percent retainage throughout the life of the contract .
num escrow accounts for retained funds .
the contractor may elect to have retained funds paid to an escrow agent who may invest the funds in an approved interestbearing account which upon completion of the contract will be paid to the contractor to the extent to which the contractor is entitled .
the contractors election to use the escrow account procedure shall be indicated on the contract documents and the escrow agreement shall be in a form and under terms approved by the administration .
the contractor shall forfeit the right to the use of the escrow num num payment account for refusal or failure to indicate an election prior to execution of the contract .
note this shall not apply if it conflicts with any federal grant or regulation affecting the contract .
b semifinal estimate payments .
num upon completion of the project and the acceptance by the administration for maintenance the administration at the contractors request and with the consent of surety will initiate a memorandum of action by the director office of construction state highway administration authorizing semifinal payment .
such a semifinal estimate payment will be based upon a quantities the administration has computed and set up as proposed final quantities and b a reasonably accurate estimate for those quantities for which the administration has not yet completed computations .
the quantities that the administration sets forth as proposed final quantities shall be so designated .
to arrive at the amount of the semifinal estimate the following will be deducted from the apparent estimated value of the contract a total of all amounts previously paid to the contractor as current estimates and b sums deemed chargeable against the contractor including liquidated damages and as a retainage a sum not less than num percent of the total value of the contract .
num in cases where there has been substantial completion of the project and there are remaining only inconsequential or minor work items such as painting seeding mulching or planting to be completed and such items can not be completed for an extended period of time because of seasonal or weather conditions a semifinal inspection will be made .
if the work completed is found to be satisfactory then there is deemed to be a partial acceptance on the entire project except for the uncompleted work items .
upon the above referred to partial acceptance the administration within num days from such partial acceptance upon request of the contractor and with consent of surety shall pay to the contractor what is hereby known as a partial semifinal estimate payment .
such a semifinal estimate will be based upon a quantities the administration has computed and set up as proposed final quantities and b a reasonably accurate estimate for those quantities for which the administration has not yet completed computations .
the quantities that the administration sets forth as proposed final quantities shall be so designated .
to arrive at the amount of the semifinal num num payment payment the following will be deducted from the apparent estimated value of the contract a total of all amounts previously paid to the contractor as current estimates and b sums deemed chargeable against the contractor including liquidated damages and as a retainage a sum equal to num percent of the total value of the contract or num which ever is greater .
num if all retained funds have not been paid to an escrow agent as provided for in anum the administration shall upon payment of the semifinal estimate place the remaining retainage in a interestbearing escrow account as designated and on such terms and conditions as specified by the procurement officer .
at the time of the final payment any retainage due and any interest accrued on the retainage due from the time of payment of the semifinal estimate shall be paid to the contractor .
tcnum final acceptance and final payment a when the contractor has completed a contract and it has been accepted for maintenance in conformance with the provisions of gpnum acceptance for maintenance the administration will promptly proceed num to make any necessary final surveys num to complete any necessary computations of quantities and num to submit to the contractor for consideration within num days after final completion and acceptance for maintenance by the procurement officer a tabulation of the proposed final quantities and a list of deficiencies required to be corrected prior to issuing a materials clearance .
this tabulation shall be accompanied by a statement setting forth a the additional work performed under change orders andor supplemental agreements b the authorized extension of time c the number of days that have been charged to complete the contract and d any deductions charges or liquidated damages that have been made or imposed .
b the contractor shall then have a period of num days from the date of receiving the aforementioned tabulation from the administration in which num num payment num to decide whether or not to accept final payment upon such a basis and num to notify the administration in writing of the decision .
the contractor may request an additional period up to num days in which to notify the administration of the decision .
in the event the contractor notifies the administration that he protests final payment on such a basis that notification shall outline the reasons for said protest .
c upon receipt of a notification of acceptance as provided for in paragraph b above final acceptance of the completed contract will be contingent upon the administrations authorized materials clearance .
within num days after the above conditions are met the administration will prepare the final estimate and final payment forms and submit them to the contractor .
these forms will show all data noted in paragraph a above together with deductions for all prior payments .
within num days from the date these forms are received the contractor shall execute them and return them to the administration for execution and payment .
if such signed forms are not received by the administration within the specified time the administration will prepare duplicate forms for execution and payment .
such action by the administration shall be deemed to constitute acceptance and final payment .
d if under the provisions of paragraph b above the contractor notifies the administration of his protest and nonacceptance of the data submitted to him the administration shall pay the contractor a semifinal estimate or an additional semifinal estimate in the event a semifinal estimate has already been paid based upon the data noted in paragraph a above with deductions for all prior payments .
a retainage equal to num percent of the total value of the contract will be withheld by the administration .
the acceptance of such semifinal estimate or additional semifinal estimate shall not be considered a waiver on the part of the contractor of his right to pursue his protest and press for acceptance and final payment .
e in the event the contractor does not accept the data submitted to him as described in paragraph a above andor has outstanding a claim filed in conformance with gpnum filing of claim by contractor the procurement officer and the contractor shall confer at mutually convenient times and endeavor to reconcile all points of disagreement expeditiously .
if such reconciliation is accomplished the administration will promptly proceed with num num payment acceptance and final payment on the reconciled basis and in conformance with the provisions of paragraph c above .
if reconciliation is not accomplished within num days the decision of the procurement officer shall be reviewed by the administrator and appropriate legal counsel .
after review by the administrator the decision of the procurement officer is deemed to be the final action .
the procurement officer shall furnish a copy of the final decision to the contractor by certified mail return receipt requested .
this decision may be appealed by the contractor to the maryland state board of contract appeals .
this shall be done by filing a written notice of appeal to the appeals board within num days from the date of the final decision .
failure to provide timely notification to the procurement officer shall constitute a waiver by the contractor of his right under gpnum disputes and final payment may be made by the administration based on the procurement officers recommendation .
f all prior partial estimates and payments shall be subject to correction at the time of acceptance and final payment .
if the contractor has been previously overpaid the amount of such overpayment shall be set forth in the final payment forms and the contractor hereby agrees that he will reimburse the administration for such overpayment within num days of receipt of such advice and his surety will not be granted release from obligation under the terms of the contract until reimbursement has been made in full .
g within num days after the provisions of a through f have been fulfilled the procurement officer shall notify the contractor that final acceptance of the project has been made .
this notice will initiate the processing of the memorandum of action by the administrations chief engineer authorizing final payment .
final payment will be due and payable within num days of the chief engineers memorandum of action .
as a condition precedent to final payment the contractor shall be required to execute a general release of all claims against the administration arising out of or in any way connected with the contract .
h in conformance with subsection num of the state finance and procurement article of the annotated code of maryland certification must be obtained from the comptroller of the treasury and the employment security administration that all state taxes have been paid prior to the release of final payment on a construction contract .
the check will be processed and mailed only after notification is received from both departments that no state tax is owed .
num num payment tcnum late payments a payments for semifinal estimates shall be made within num days of the date when the amount becomes due and payable as evidenced by the directors memorandum of action .
payments for final estimates shall be made within num days of the date when the contract amount becomes due and payable as evidenced by the chief engineers memorandum of action .
charges for late payments of invoices other than as described by title num subtitle num of the state finance and procurement article annotated code of maryland or by the public service commission of maryland with respect to regulated public utilities as applicable are prohibited .
b a proper invoice shall include a description of the items or services provided the date the goods were received or the inclusive dates the services were rendered the contract prices retention if any the basis for the billing the contract or purchase order number the contractors federal tax identification number or social security number and the name and address of the proper invoice recipient .
c in order to receive payment of interest the contractor must submit a proper invoice for accrued interest within num days after the payment date of the amount on which the interest is claimed to have accrued .
interest may not be claimed for more than one year following the numst day after the date that a proper invoice was received or on amounts representing unpaid interest or on an amount due under a contract remaining unpaid for any period prior to july num num or if a claim has been filed under state finance and procurement article title num of subtitle num of the code .
d for the purposes of this contract an amount will not be deemed due and payable if num the amount invoiced is inconsistent with the contract .
num the proper invoice has not been received by the person or office specified in the contract .
num the invoice or performance under the contract is in dispute or the contractor has failed to otherwise comply with the provisions of the contract .
num the items or services have not been accepted .
num num payment num the quantity of items delivered is less than the quantity invoiced .
num the items or services do not meet the quality requirements of the contract .
num the contract provides for progress payments but the proper invoice for the progress payment has not been submitted pursuant to the schedule contained in the agreement .
num the invoice is for the retainage but not all stipulated conditions for release of the retainage have been met .
num the contractor has not submitted satisfactory documentation or other evidence reasonably required by the procurement officer or by the contract concerning performance under the contract and compliance with its provisions .
tcnum eliminated items in addition to the provisions of gpnum variations in estimated quantities the following shall apply to administration contracts .
should any contract items contained in the invitation for bids be found unnecessary for the proper completion of the work contracted the engineer may upon written order to the contractor eliminate such contract items from the contract and no allowance will be made for items so eliminated in making final payment to the contractor except for material costs incurred prior to notification of the elimination of the items .
num part iii technical requirements category num section num clearing and grubbing num description .
clear and grub within the specified limits .
num definitions .
a clearing .
the removal and disposal of trees fallen timber and rotten wood brush shrubs vegetation rubbish fences and structures not specified in the contract documents for removal and disposal .
unless otherwise specified clearing outside the lod includes the removal of rubbish only .
b grubbing .
an earthdisturbing activity which includes the removing from the ground and disposing of all stumps roots and stubs brush and debris .
c limits of disturbance lod .
the maximum allowable limit of earth disturbance as delineated in the contract documents .
when not delineated in the contract documents the lod will be the top of cut toe of slope or limit of ditch excavation .
do not perform earthdisturbing activities beyond the lod without authorization .
d limits .
clearing and grubbing is confined to the lod and authorized modifications to the lod .
when indicated in the contract documents the limit of clearing may include the area between the lod and the rightofway or easement lines .
e grading unit .
the area o f erodible material exposed at one time not to exceed num acres .
f disturbed area .
an area where erodible material is exposed by construction activities .
g stabilization measures .
activities that provide vegetation or otherwise prevent erosion .
these activities include the placement of temporary or permanent seeding or mulching soil stabilization matting riprap stone aggregate and asphalt or concrete paving .
the placement of one or more of these temporary or permanent stabilization measures to the satisfaction of the engineer will meet the requirements for proceeding to the next grading unit or operation .
num materials .
not applicable .
num num clearing and grubbing num construction .
num erosion and sediment control .
unless otherwise specified or approved the clearing and grubbing area shall be limited to a single numacre grading unit per grading operation .
once this first unit is half graded and stabilization measures are in place and approved the work may proceed to a second num acre grading unit .
when approved by the engineer the clearing and grubbing area may exceed the one grading unit requirement when necessary to balance earthwork or when grading interchanges .
maintain erosion and sediment controls as specified .
the grading operation will be limited to the contractors ability to provide adequate resources to perform the grading in a timely manner and to provide and maintain the proper erosion and sediment control measures .
the engineer is the final authority in this determination .
a grading unit need not be num contiguous acres .
when wet soil conditions are encountered the clearing grubbing and grading of another unit will be allowed once stabilization of the initial unit is approved .
no more than two grading units may be active at any time .
num vegetation .
the engineer will designate and mark trees shrubbery and plants that are to remain in place .
protect them from any damage as specified in gpnum .
cut and properly trim the branches of trees overhanging the roadway to maintain a vertical clearance of num ft .
employ a tree expert licensed by the state of maryland to supervise all trimming operations .
perform all trimming and repair of cuts and scars as specified in section num .
num fences .
remove and dispose of all fences within the right of way unless otherwise specified .
num mailboxes .
remove and reset mailboxes as directed .
num grubbing .
a excavation areas .
remove all embedded stumps and roots to a depth of at least num ft below the subgrade or slope surface .
refill all depressions made below the subgrade or slope surfaces with materials suitable for embankment and compact as specified in section num. b low embankments .
grub areas where the total depth of the embankment is less than num ft. c high embankments .
in areas where the embankment is num ft or more in depth cut off trees and stumps as close to the ground as num num clearing and grubbing practical but not greater than num ft above the ground surface .
near the toe of embankment slopes remove trees and stumps that are within num ft of the slope surface .
num stream and channel changes .
when an lod is not specified clear and grub num ft beyond the top of the cut slopes or as directed .
num disposal .
a burning .
perform burning under the constant care of a watchperson and in accordance with applicable laws and ordinances of respective jurisdictions .
b disposal locations .
remove from the rightofway and dispose of all unburned material and debris .
make all necessary arrangements to obtain suitable disposal locations .
furnish the engineer with a copy of resulting agreements .
c wood disposal .
if disposal of wood to the public is proposed submit the disposal plan to the district engineer for review and obtain approval prior to beginning the clearing and grubbing operation .
perform this method of disposal from a location that is off the job site .
num damage to trees and other protected resources .
ensure that the lod and all protected resources are demarcated as specified in section num .
perform damage repair and damage compensation as specified in section num for damage beyond the lod due to work operations .
refer to occupying wetlands provisions in the contract documents for unauthorized impacts to wetlands wetland buffers waters of the united states wus and floodplains .
num measurement and payment .
clearing and grubbing will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
the payment will be full compensation for the removal and disposal of fences removal and resetting of mailboxes selective tree trimming and scar repair repair or replacement of damaged trees restoration measures for damaged or destroyed protected resources repair to other damaged properties removal and disposal of existing buildings when not covered as a specific pay item in the contract documents and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num num removal and disposal of existing buildings section num removal and disposal of existing buildings num description .
remove and dispose of existing buildings including foundations footings or any part thereof and backfill as specified .
locations of buildings included in the work will be designated in the contract documents by the circled numbers num num num etc .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction .
schedule the removal razing or occupation of buildings and appurtenances as one of the first items of work .
post and protect the buildings from vandalism and theft .
remove and dispose of buildings scheduled for temporary use immediately when vacated .
buildings and appurtenances may be disposed of by burning if they are not located close to habitable dwellings and if not prohibited by local or state laws regulations ordinances or by the fire marshal .
salvaged materials shall become the property of the contractor .
selling of merchantable material and removal by the purchaser shall be done only during daylight working hours and accompanied by a contractors representative .
num measurement and payment .
removal and disposal of existing buildings will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
buildings not designated for removal and disposal in the contract documents will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to section num .
the administration reserves the right to eliminate from this item any or all buildings or structures .
for each building eliminated from this item the item will be credited to the extent of the cost eliminated which will be determined from a breakdown submitted by the contractor showing the tabulation of individual unit costs used in arriving at the contract price for this item .
submit a breakdown of the contract lump sum price for removal and disposal of existing buildings to the engineer prior to beginning work .
num engineers office num section num engineers office num description .
furnish clean and maintain in good condition an engineers office at an approved location within the immediate vicinity of the project .
the office shall be separate from any offices used by the contractor and it and all items therein shall be for the exclusive use of the administrations engineers and inspectors .
rented properties that conform to the type of office specified in the contract documents will be acceptable .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction .
set up equip and make the office ready for use at least five days prior to commencement of other work on the project .
leave the office and appurtenances in place until all field records are complete .
upon removal of the office restore the location to a condition acceptable to the engineer .
unless otherwise specified the office and all furnished equipment and accessories shall become the property of the contractor at the completion of the project .
num mobile housing unit .
provide a mobile housing unit having floor space of at least num ftnum and window area of at least num ftnum .
ensure it is entirely enclosed and waterproofed and has a door that locks .
provide a table num x num x num in .
high and one closet equipped with a lock .
furnish two keys for each lock .
provide satisfactory heating and cooling .
relocate the unit as directed .
num handicap accessibility .
when handicap accessibility is necessary comply with the federal registervolume num no .
numamericans with disability act ada accessibility guidelines for buildings and facilities .
num mobile office trailers .
anchor in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
office trailers as defined under the industrial building and mobile act of maryland shall be approved by the maryland department of housing and community development and bear the maryland certification insignia in the interior of the office .
num quality control laboratory .
section num .
num num engineers office num requirements for all offices .
a entirely enclosed waterproofed and completely insulated to at least an rnum rating .
b double thick floor with building paper placed in between the floor layers .
c finished inside and outside as approved .
d a ceiling height of at least num ft a pitched roof and a ventilating louver in each gable .
e a num x num ft sign with the message engineers office state highway administration attached to or mounted in front of the office .
the sign shall have a black background and have white lettering at least num in .
high .
f a num x num in .
no smoking sign posted on the outside of each entrance to the office plant laboratory and mobile housing unit .
g interior and exterior doors equipped with different key locks .
interior doors keyed alike .
exterior doors keyed alike .
an additional dead bolt lock for each exterior door .
four keys for each interior and exterior lock .
h windows capable of being opened and closed .
equip with latches screens and venetian blinds or shades .
i electrified in accordance with national and state electrical codes with satisfactory artificial lighting and lighting services .
ensure an illumination level of at least num ftc .
j equipment capable of heating the office to at least num f and cooling to at least num f. k a restroom facility in accordance with the state department of health and mental hygiene or other authorities having jurisdiction .
connect to water and sewage or a well and septic system .
provide a pressurized water system capable of maintaining at least num psi .
furnish a wash basin water closet soap holder paper towel holder and mirror .
l maintain the facilities in a clean and sanitary condition .
sweep the floor and remove the trash daily .
damp mop and wax the floor biweekly .
clean the interior and exterior of all windows monthly .
perform all work on an as needed basis and when requested .
num num engineers office m protect the administration and administration employees from any loss or damage to their property stored in the engineers office .
provide protection in the amount of twenty thousand dollars num num nondeductible per each occurrence for any loss or damage due to fire theft vandalism storms or floods .
complete the reimbursement replacement or repair within num days from the date the engineer reports the loss .
n a parking area for the exclusive use of administration employees .
provide the specified number of spaces .
post signs to designate the assigned parking areas .
stabilize the parking area as directed .
o fire extinguishers of a dry chemical or multipurpose abc type at least num lb equipped with a visual air pressure gauge and maintained in accordance with osha standards .
p a num unit first aid kit furnished and maintained as described in the code of federal regulations title num subpart d section numdnum .
q a num x num ft waterproof bulletin board .
place in an easily accessible area within the project limits and conspicuously displayed to all employees .
post and maintain all pertinent and required notices for the duration of the project .
r touchtone telephones equipped with an answering device capable of answering recording storing and playing back incoming messages at least num minutes in length and recording outgoing messages up to num seconds in length .
the device shall be voice activated beeperless record as long as the speaker speaks and play back recorded messages without dial tone or pauses .
replace stolen equipment and equipment that becomes defective or for any other reason does not function as intended .
provide an equal or better unit within eight hours after notification .
replacement shall be at no additional cost to the administration .
post emergency telephone numbers at a conspicuous location .
s one num ftnum electric refrigerator .
t an approved cassette playerrecorder with cassettes or digital recording device .
u one paper copier machine with automatic document feed capable of printing at least num copies per minute and documents of up to num x num in .
supply paper and provide service as needed .
num num engineers office v one sanitary electric water cooler including bottled water and disposable cups .
num microcomputer system for all offices .
as specified in the contract documents .
num facsimile fax transceiver for all offices .
provide a fax machine that a is connected to a dedicated phone jack with a separate independent telephone line and phone number .
b is in accordance and compatible with ccitt group transmission standards see specific line items for compatibility requirements .
c uses public switched telephone networks and standard two wire leased line through rjnumc jacks or similar devices .
d transmits at least num bps with automatic stepdown to compensate for phone line conditions .
e is capable of transmitting a standard num x num in .
page within num seconds through a clear phone line based on ccitt num test chart .
f is capable of two levels of resolution with contrast control num standard num lines num fine num lines g is capable of selftest and providing activity reports with page headers time and date .
h uses standard copy paper for receiving transmissions .
i has an automatic document feeder tray see specific requirements for each transceiver class .
j has handsets .
k has automatic answer receive and disconnect features .
l provide the fcc registration number ringer equivalence and connection circuitry for each transceiver .
num num engineers office num specific field office requirements .
type a engineers office standard office trailer with at least num ftnum of floor area under one roof .
type b engineers office standard office trailer with at least num ftnum of floor area under one roof .
type c engineers office standard office trailer with at least num ftnum of floor area under one roof .
type d engineers office onestory structure containing at least num ftnum of floor area under one roof .
modular construction is acceptable .
office trailers are not acceptable .
num num engineers office table num specific requirements engineers office item a b c d num num inner officesnum ftnum each num num general office area num inner officesnum ftnum each num conference roomnum ftnum num storeroom with shelvesnum ftnum num num num num restroom num ftnum num num num inner office ingress and egress to the other rooms num num num num num x num in .
executive type desks with center drawers num num num num swivel chairs padded with arm rests num num num num num x num in .
slant top drafting table and stool approximately num in .
high at the front edge num num num num num x num in .
folding utility table num in .
high num numperson conference table with padded chairs num num num num additional padded chairs num num num num plan racks num num num num coat racks num num num num num x num ft blackboard or whiteboard num num num num electronic desk calculators with memory and tape readout including manuals and tapes as needed num num num num legal size steel filing cabinets num drawer fire resistant d label with locks num num num standard size steel filing cabinets num drawer with locks num num num num bookcases having four shelves num x num in .
num num num num closets full height measuring at least num x num in .
equipped with locks and at least two shelves in each num num num utility cabinet with num adjustable shelves num num num overhead cabinet at least num ft long num in .
deep and num in .
high num num num num fire extinguisher as specified in num num num num num telephones with separate lines as specified in num num num num num batteryoperated smoke detectors num num num num designated parking spaces num recyclable materials paper bottles cans etc ..
recycling of suitable material is encouraged at all engineers offices and contractors facilities .
however when the project includes a type d num num maintenance of traffic engineers office recycling will be required at both the engineers office and the contractors facilities for the project .
provide the necessary containers and arrange for the removal of the recycled material from the site .
num measurement and payment .
engineers office will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for the pertinent engineers office specified .
payment of num percent of the contract lump sum price will be payable on the first estimate subsequent to complete installation of the engineers office .
the remaining num percent will be prorated and paid in equal amounts on each subsequent monthly estimate .
the number of months used for prorating will be the number estimated to complete the work .
the final months prorata amount will not be paid until the office is removed and the area is restored .
the payment will be full compensation for site preparation utility costs all specified furnishings to provide equip clean maintain insure remove and dispose of the office restore the site recycling and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the only exception to the allinclusive contract lump sum price is the stabilization of the parking area which will be measured and paid for using the pertinent items as directed .
section num maintenance of traffic num general .
this section sets forth the traffic control requirements necessary for the safe and continuous maintenance of traffic throughout the area affected by the work and is intended to minimize inconveniences to the traveling public while providing for the safety of motorists pedestrians and workers .
maintain vehicular and pedestrian traffic on or along any transportation facility as specified in the contract documents .
when speed of traffic is noted this means the posted speed or prevailing travel speed whichever is higher unless otherwise specified .
all applicable maintenance of traffic equipment shall conform to nchrp report num criteria for test level num .
when no longer needed remove items used for temporary maintenance of traffic from the project site .
all removed items shall become the property of the contractor unless otherwise specified .
num num maintenance of traffic ensure that at least num percent of all reflective barrier markers warning lights and raised pavement markers are operational at any given time .
correct deficiencies within numhours after notification .
upon initial installation temporary traffic control signs shall have at least num percent of the reflectivity specified in num over num percent of the reflectorized surface .
channelizing devices shall have at least num percent of the reflectivity specified in num over num percent of the reflectorized surface .
replace damaged traffic control signs within four hours of notification .
take necessary corrective action as approved to adequately warn and protect the public until the signs are replaced .
the contract documents will specify one or more of the items listed in the following sections .
when work is specified to be accomplished under the maintenance of traffic item the work will be incidental to the contract price for maintenance of traffic .
num traffic control plan tcp .
num description .
develop and implement a tcp .
the tcp will include the design and placement of items such as signing pavement markings delineation channelization barriers crash cushions and other items as required .
tcps may be implemented within a single project or jointly between two or more projects .
in situations where tcps are jointly implemented ensure that correct and nonconflicting guidance is presented to the traveling public .
prior to commencement of contract work the successful bidder shall complete a traffic control plan certification .
indicate whether the administrations tcp will be implemented option num the administrations tcp will be modified option num or a tcp will be developed option num .
submit the tcp in writing to the engineer at least num days prior to starting any work .
submit changes to the approved tcp in writing at least five days prior to implementing the change .
for emergencies the approval process will be completed within four hours .
all changes to the tcp shall be approved in writing by the engineer prior to implementation .
submit for approval supporting documentation containing an assessment of safety and mobility impacts of the modified or proposed tcp .
contact the engineer to determine what level of detail and types of analysis are required for the assessment .
no work shall begin until the required traffic control patterns and devices are in place .
num maintenance of traffic num refer to the contract documents for work restrictions .
when tcp option num or option num is selected the following shall apply a plans and revisions to plans shall be drawn to the same degree likeness and sophistication as that of the contract plans .
b submittals shall be on sheets measuring num x num in .
with a standard margin and a standard title block at the lower right corner approximately num x num in .
or on num x num in .
paper with a num in .
margin and a title block .
include the following information in the title block and in the order listed .
num name of contractor and subcontractor if applicable .
num address of contractor and subcontractor if applicable .
num sheet title .
num administration contract numbers and complete federal aid number .
num prepared for maryland state highway administration .
num signature block for approval by contractors traffic manager and date of approval .
c all lines shall be clean sharp solid and heavy enough for adequate reproduction .
the scale of phase details on the tcp shall be num in .
equals num ft. additional plans that revise the design plans shall be at the same scale as the contract plans .
d do not use white pigment to cover lines .
e plans shall indicate the proposed traffic movements throughout the area affected by the work for each phase of construction .
label all routes and show north arrow and any other information that would clarify the tcp .
any monetary savings from changes to the tcp made by the contractor and approved by the engineer will be divided equally between the contractor and the administration .
num num maintenance of traffic num materials .
not applicable .
num construction .
not applicable .
num measurement and payment .
any traffic control plan developed by the contractor will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items specified in the contract documents .
num maintenance of traffic mot .
num description .
maintain traffic safely and efficiently through and around the area affected by the work .
num materials .
traffic materials num num construction .
a maintenance of existing roadway .
maintain the existing roadway surface and shoulders including crossroads ramps approaches crossovers medians detour roads entrances and pavement markings within the limits of the project throughout the duration of the contract .
repair potholes shoulder defects and hazardous conditions that exist or develop throughout the duration of the contract .
b existing regulatory signs warning signs guide signs and pavement markings .
relocate turn completely cover with opaque material or remove with the approval of the engineer signs that are not applicable due to temporary traffic conditions .
properly redisplay signs to traffic as soon as conditions warrant .
replace any signs misplaced or damaged by the contractors operations .
prior to construction and in the company of the engineer inventory and note the location type size and color of all existing pavement markings legends and symbols .
submit the results on a marked up set of the contract plans or on contractor prepared sketches or drawings .
num num maintenance of traffic c storage and movement of equipment material and vehicles .
all equipment material storage and parking areas shall have advance written approval from the engineer .
employee vehicles shall not be parked within the rightofway of the through highway without a written exception .
equipment and material shall not be stored or permitted to stand in unprotected areas or open areas within num ft of traffic except as follows num approved temporary traffic barrier is in place prior to storage of any equipment or materials .
num equipment and material is at least num ft behind the face of the traffic barrier .
num equipment or material is stored in conformance with the aashto roadside design guide .
restore areas used for storage of equipment and material to original condition immediately upon completion of use at no additional cost to the administration .
vehicles and equipment shall enter and leave the work area in the direction of traffic flow .
work on or adjacent to the traveled way shall be performed in the direction of traffic flow unless written approval is obtained prior to beginning the work .
the contractors vehicles and equipment shall enter on and exit from the roadway at interchanges or legally allowed public use crossovers .
do not make uturns across medians and crossovers signed for use of authorized and emergency vehicles only without written approval .
d warning lights and devices .
use warning lights and flags on warning signs as specified in the tcp the contract documents or as directed .
during hours of darkness attach one type a low intensity flashing warning light to the traffic side of channelizing devices used to warn of a spot hazard .
attach two type a low intensity flashing warning lights to the top of each type iii barricade .
e general requirements for temporary pavement markings tpms .
for pavement marking dimensions refer to pavement marking dimension table following fnum below .
num num maintenance of traffic num temporary pavement markings are those markings placed upon the roadway to serve an area of work activity or a work phase for a period of time after which they are to be removed .
when approved a less than full complement of pavement markings and reduced dimension markings for dashed center lines and lane lines may be used but for a period of not more than two weeks .
num tpms may be either full dimension or reduced dimension as specified in the contract documents or as directed .
num full dimension tpms shall be in accordance with the mdmutcd and the pavement marking dimension table following fnum .
num reduced dimension tpms shall be in accordance with the mdmutcd and the pavement marking dimension table following fnum except that the dashed center lines and lane lines may consist of num ft segments and num ft gaps .
f specific requirements for tpms .
num as a minimum place all center and lane lines at the close of each day .
num during the work day while work activities are underway clearly define all vehicle paths by center and lane lines channelizing devices signs or other traffic control devices .
num along twolane twoway roadways place a center line consisting of a continuous double solid yellow center line a single dashed yellow center line at full dimension or a single dashed yellow center line at reduced dimension as directed .
num mark and sign no passing zones as specified or as directed .
a no passing zone may be identified by signing for a period not to exceed seven days .
num along multilane undivided roadways identify the center line using a continuous double solid yellow line .
if a twoway left turn is present see num below .
if the roadway is three lanes the center line may be either a continuous double solid yellow center line or where passing is permitted in the single lane direction a continuous single solid num num maintenance of traffic yellow and single dashed yellow combination center line .
for the placement of no passing zones see fnum above .
num along multilane undivided roadways having a twoway left turn lane the leftturn lane need not be marked provided that the lane is continuously delineated using channelizing devices spaced at no more than numft .
the devices shall separate the opposing flows of traffic and provide areas where leftturning vehicles may store while awaiting the opportunity to turn .
num along multilane roadways having reversible lanes mark the lanes with the full complement of pavement markings as described in the mdmutcd .
num where edge lines are not in place delineate the edge of the roadway by using appropriate channelizing devices or other delineation .
num specific pavement marking and complementary signing details are shown on the temporary traffic control ttc typical applications .
num contact the office of materials technology omt for the latest approved tpm materials .
num num maintenance of traffic pavement marking dimension table line type material required minimum effective width in .
expressways and freeways other roadways lane lines paint num num preformed tape num num lane shifts lane divides and severe alignment changes paint num num preformed tape num num center lines see note paint num num preformed tape num num edge lines paint preformed tape num num ramp edge lines paint num num preformed tape num num gore marking paint num num preformed tape num num auxiliary paint preformed tape same as particular line being extended same as particular line being extended note provide a discernible space of num to num in .
between double lines .
g channelizing devices .
install traffic channelizing in accordance with the mdmutcd the contract documents and the following num spacing in feet for channelizing devices in a taper shall be no more than the posted speed limit in mph .
num spacing in feet for channelizing devices in a tangent shall be no more than twice the posted speed limit in mph .
num to define interchange gore areas or other unusual alignments space channelizing devices at num ft intervals unless the engineer directs a closer spacing .
num space channelizing devices at approximately numft intervals at driveways and intersections so that sight distance at these locations is not restricted .
num num maintenance of traffic num the contractors name or identification mark may be placed in an inconspicuous location on the channelizing device facing away from traffic .
no advertising is permitted .
num measurement and payment .
unless otherwise specified maintenance of traffic will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
the payment will be full compensation for relocating turning completely covering and uncovering or removing and resetting maintaining in like new condition and cleaning existing and temporary traffic signs and other traffic control devices .
included is the inventory of all existing pavement markings and the treatment of any other traffic control device not included in these specifications but necessary for the fulfillment of the contract requirements and implementation of the approved traffic control plan and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
payment of the contract lump sum price will be prorated and paid in equal amounts on each monthly estimate .
the number of months used for prorating will be the number estimated to complete the work .
a when additional contract pay items for maintenance of traffic are specified in the contract documents measurement and payment will conform to the pertinent pay items .
b cones reflective collars anchoring devices stopslow paddles sign flags and warning lights will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract price for maintenance of traffic unless otherwise specified .
c temporary traffic control devices that need replacement shall be replaced immediately as directed .
the cost of replacement including all material labor equipment and tools will not be measured but will be incidental to the contract price for maintenance of traffic except when specifically set up in the contract documents as a separate contract pay item .
d material equipment and labor necessary for the construction and removal of temporary or detour roads will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for the pertinent items used .
num when specified in the contract documents maintenance of traffic will be measured and paid for at the contract price per unit day .
num when there is no item in the contract documents maintenance of traffic will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items specified in the contract documents .
num num maintenance of traffic num temporary raised pavement markers rpms .
num description .
furnish install and remove as necessary temporary rpms .
num materials .
temporary rpms qpl num construction .
install temporary rpms as specified in the contract documents and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
increases or decreases in quantities will not be a basis for renegotiation of the contract unit price .
a temporary raised pavement markers will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
b removal of temporary raised pavement markers will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
c reimbursement will be made at the contract unit price for each marker damaged by snowplow operations .
num temporary concrete traffic barrier tcb for maintenance of traffic .
num description .
furnish place reset and remove tcb .
num materials .
precast concrete traffic barrier num vertical panels and reflective .
barrier markers qpl num maintenance of traffic num num construction .
maintain tcb in alignment and in a like new condition .
remove and relocate tcbs as directed .
install reflective barrier markers and vertical panels object markers on the tcb as specified .
connections .
in addition to the pin and loop connection shown on the standards the channel splice vertical i beam and lapped joint connections specified in the aashto roadside design guide and the proprietary tlok and jj hook systems will be allowed provided only one type of joint connection is used for the length of the barrier .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for furnishing placing maintaining and removal from the project site as directed and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
a temporary concrete traffic barrier for maintenance of traffic and reset temporary concrete traffic barrier for maintenance of traffic will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot measured along the center line of the top of the barrier .
the payment for reset temporary concrete traffic barrier for maintenance of traffic will include removal from its original placement transporting and resetting it in its new temporary location .
b reflective barrier markers and vertical panels will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
num traffic barrier w beam tbwb for maintenance of traffic .
num description .
furnish install maintain reset and remove temporary tbwb .
num materials .
traffic barrier w beam num traffic barrier posts num hardware for traffic barriers num wood offset blocks num composite offset blocks num num num maintenance of traffic num construction .
tbwb .
use construction methods in accordance with the applicable portions of section num .
tbwb replacement .
immediately replace damaged portions of the tbwb .
install the tbwb to the correct horizontal and vertical alignment using offset blocks in kind .
tbwb reset .
when work is sufficiently completed through a traffic control area and tbwb is no longer required remove and reset the tbwb and all components to a new work area as specified .
restore the previous location to original condition .
tbwb end treatments .
num and num .
place an approved end treatment at all ends of tbwb prior to opening to traffic .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing all cables posts brackets traffic barrier w beam hardware galvanizing excavation backfilling connections to rigid structures removal restoration of the area and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work as directed .
a traffic barrier w beam for maintenance of traffic will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
b replacing sections of the traffic barrier that have been damaged by vehicular traffic while in place will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the traffic barrier w beam replacement for maintenance of traffic item .
c reset traffic barrier w beam for maintenance of traffic will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
d temporary traffic barrier end treatments will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
num tubular markers .
num description .
furnish install and remove tubular markers for maintenance of traffic .
num maintenance of traffic num num materials .
tubular markers qpl reflectorization num num construction .
install tubular markers as recommended by the manufacturer and as approved by the engineer .
num measurement and payment .
tubular markers will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
the payment will be full compensation for removal and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
tubular markers damaged due to traffic operations will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for replacement of tubular marker mast .
if the base detaches from the pavement replace the entire tubular marker assembly at no additional cost to the administration unless damaged by administration snow removal operations .
num arrow panel ap .
num description .
furnish and place aps for temporary use .
furnish aps that are selfcontained vehicle mounted or portable and approved by the engineer .
use selfcontained trailer units unless otherwise specified .
aps shall have both manual and automatic dimmer devices capable of reducing the light intensity by num percent .
periodically clean the photocells in order to prevent malfunctioning of the brightness control .
dimmer devices are mandatory during night operation .
the devices shall include a fail safe system ensuring that maximum brightness is displayed during sunlight and num percent brightness is displayed during darkness regardless of which dimmer device is operational .
num materials .
arrow panel qpl num construction .
furnish and test the aps as directed num hours in advance of actual use .
the ap unit shall conform to the arrow panel table and be arranged with double pointed arrow configuration capable of displaying a left arrow right arrow double arrow and a four corner caution mode .
num num maintenance of traffic a sequential chevron shall not be displayed .
arrow panel ap unit mdmutcd type lamp options no .
num apar num no .
numa num ge portable a d x x vehicle mounted b x selfcontained trailer c x or as approved .
use an ap to close any lane of a multilane highway .
place aps as specified .
maintain aps in good operating order .
a the ap shall conform to the applicable requirements of the mdmutcd and only be used to supplement other required traffic control devices .
use the arrow mode when closing a through travel lane on a multilane roadway .
place only one ap in the arrow mode for each stationary lane closure .
moving work operations may utilize one or more aps for a single lane closure .
ensure that placement does not cause driver confusion near ramps median crossovers and side road intersections .
b aim the ap at approaching traffic in conformance with the minimum legibility distance specified in the mdmutcd .
ensure that the display is level .
c for stationary lane closures place the ap on the shoulder at the beginning of the taper nearest to oncoming traffic .
where there are narrow or no existing shoulders in the closed lane behind the channelizing devices place the ap as near to the beginning of the taper as possible .
d for a lane closure on a twolane twoway roadway or for a shoulder closure on any roadway use the caution mode .
in caution mode one light is displayed in each corner .
e for moving operations refer to num .
num measurement and payment .
arrow panels will be measured and paid for at the contract price per unit day .
a unit day shall consist of any approved usage within a num hour calendar day num num maintenance of traffic period .
each arrow panel will be paid for only once per unit day regardless of how many times it is relocated .
when an arrow panel is used for part of a day it will be measured and paid for as a unit day .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools incidentals required to set up and operate at the site as required and at any relocated site as required by the traffic control plan or as directed .
num temporary traffic signs tts .
num description .
furnish install and maintain tts on or along all transportation facilities .
num materials .
wood sign supports num and num square perforated tubular steel sign supports as approved by the office of traffic and safety reflectorization num signs num portable sign supports composite aluminum signs plastic signs and flexible roll up signs qpl num construction .
place signing in accordance with the mdmutcd the administrations standard highway sign book shsb and the contract documents .
all work area warning signs shall be num x num in .
unless otherwise specified .
the shsb may be obtained from the office of traffic and safety traffic engineering design division .
designs of signs not included in the shsb may be prepared by the contractor in sketch form to scale and for approval .
sign designs may be obtained upon a sevenday request to the office of traffic and safety .
make requests in written form directed to the engineer .
mount signs that will be in place for more than three working days on two num x num in .
wood posts or on two num x num in .
square perforated tubular steel posts unless otherwise specified .
mount the sign at a height of at least num ft or as specified .
do not place any additional bracing on wood posts unless the sign is behind the protective barrier .
the tops of the wood posts shall not protrude more than num in .
beyond the nearest edge of the sign .
place num x num in .
wood posts at least num ft into the ground .
place num x num in .
wood posts at least num ft into the ground .
num num maintenance of traffic signs on portable supports shall be mounted so that the bottom of the sign is at least num ft above the roadway pavement elevation .
portable sign supports shall be selferecting able to withstand a wind velocity of num mph and able to maintain themselves within five degrees rotation around their vertical axis .
use the following minimum thickness for fabricated aluminum signs mounted on wood or steel tubular posts .
longest dimension of sign in .
minimum thickness in .
num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num num when composite aluminum plastic or flexible roll up signs are used on portable supports the support shall be approved by the office of traffic and safety to hold that sign material .
when supported on portable sign supports composite aluminum signs shall be at least num in .
thick .
tts shall not be installed until inspected and approved .
do not display signs to traffic until directed .
properly maintain the tts leave in place while applicable and remove immediately when no longer required .
when operations are performed in phases or stages only signs that apply to the present conditions shall be displayed to traffic .
properly space the signs along the highway to provide adequate sight distance to work zone signs and existing signs .
when a sign is not indicative of actual conditions such as during periods of temporary shutdown or extended periods of no work being performed including lunchtimes and overnight periods either remove the entire work zone setup and remove the sign turn it away from all traffic turning parallel to traffic is prohibited or completely cover it with an approved opaque material .
this will not be required for nonwork periods up to one hour .
num num maintenance of traffic ensure that signs are not obscured or obstructed and that they meet all specified sight distance requirements .
use reflectorized tts for both daytime and nighttime use .
maintain sign faces free of tape tape residue or any other foreign matter .
remove all advertisements from signs and supports .
ensure that supplemental signs do not cover any part of the face of the primary sign .
sign replacement .
maintain signs in a new or like new condition .
when directed replace signs that become faded illegible or damaged .
signs that are not new may be used only if the reflective intensity at a divergence angle of num degrees and incidence angle of minus num degrees conforms to at least num percent of the values specified in num over num percent of their reflectorized surface .
at other times throughout the duration of the contract the sign reflectivity intensity shall be at least num percent .
the acceptability of the signs shall be determined by num ft square test plates calibrated in accordance with these requirements .
num measurement and payment .
temporary traffic signs will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square foot for the pertinent temporary traffic sign item .
the payment will be full compensation for furnishing the signs and supports installation relocation maintenance cleaning replacement due to non traffic damage and normal wear removal and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
where signs have been set and damaged by traffic and the engineer determines that they are not repairable replacement will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price .
when no longer needed temporary traffic signs and all associated materials and incidentals shall be removed from the project site and become the property of the contractor .
num temporary traffic barrier end treatments .
num description .
furnish install maintain reset and remove temporary traffic barrier end treatments in conformance with the manufacturers recommendations or as directed .
num materials .
temporary traffic barrier end treatments refer to the contract documents or qpl num num maintenance of traffic temporary crash cushion sand filled plastic barrels sfpb num num construction .
temporary end treatments .
a install temporary type e and j traffic barrier end treatments in conformance with the manufacturers recommendations and as approved .
the nose section shall be reflectorized as approved by the office of traffic safety .
b install sfpb as specified in num .
inspection of end treatments .
a perform a daily visual inspection of the devices to ensure that no damage has occurred and that the end treatment is capable of functioning as intended .
b following an impact an approved reflectorized drum will suffice temporarily as reflectorization for the end treatment .
repair or replace the damaged end treatment within four hours after notification .
num measurement and payment .
temporary traffic barrier end treatments remove and reset temporary traffic barrier end treatments and repairing temporary traffic barrier end treatments will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for one or more of the items listed below unless otherwise specified .
a temporary traffic barrier end treatments will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for the type specified .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to provide a complete temporary traffic barrier end treatment .
b temporary crash cushion sand filled plastic barrels will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num num maintenance of traffic c remove and reset temporary traffic barrier end treatments will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for the type specified .
the conditions specified for the initial installation and removal of the end treatment shall be applicable to removing and resetting the end treatment .
d temporary traffic barrier end treatment spare parts package furnished and installed will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for the type specified .
the payment will be full compensation for the complete clearing and removal of debris and damaged unsalvageable parts and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to construct the temporary end treatment to the configuration specified .
when spare parts packages are furnished by the administration repairing temporary traffic barrier end treatments will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for the type specified .
the payment will be full compensation for pickup and all transportation installation reconnection to fixed objects where necessary complete clearing and removal of debris and damaged unsalvageable parts and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to construct the temporary end treatment to the configuration specified .
payment will not be made for spare parts packages used for end treatments damaged due to the contractors operations .
e removal of the temporary traffic barrier end treatments will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the initial contract unit price per each .
removal shall include patching of any holes made to anchor or stabilize the end treatment and cleaning and clearing the area of all debris .
num temporary crash cushion sand filled plastic barrels sfpb .
num description .
furnish and install sfpb .
num materials .
sand num plastic barrels yellow qpl num construction .
prior to installing the sfpb level the ground supporting the system utilizing material comparable to the existing ground or as approved .
num num maintenance of traffic the components assembly placing configuration and filling of the individual plastic barrels with varying weights of sand shall be in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations or as specified in the contract documents .
barrels shall be watertight .
sfpb may stand on pallets up to num in .
high .
reflectorize the first barrel of the sfpb configuration as specified .
following an impact an approved reflectorized drum will suffice temporarily as reflectorization for the sfpb .
replace damaged barrels within four hours after notification .
use dry and loose sand in the barrels .
do not use bags of sand .
add an antifreeze agent to the sand in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
have sufficient replacement materials available .
immediately after the sfpb have served the intended purpose remove the installation and restore the site as directed .
num measurement and payment .
temporary crash cushion sand filled plastic barrels will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per barrel for one or more of the items listed below and specified in the contract documents .
a temporary crash cushion sand filled plastic barrels for maintenance of traffic .
b replace temporary crash cushion sand filled plastic barrels for maintenance of traffic .
c remove and reset temporary crash cushion sand filled plastic barrels for maintenance of traffic .
the payment will be full compensation for excavation regrading and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num temporary pavement markings .
num description .
furnish install and remove temporary pavement markings .
these markings include lines striping legends letters and numbers and symbols .
the requirements of section num apply to this specification .
num num maintenance of traffic num materials .
pavement marking paint refer to contract documents removable pavement marking tape refer to contract documents black out tape qpl num construction .
num quality controlquality assurance .
perform quality control testing in conformance with msmt num .
technicians will be certified by the administration .
the engineer will complete the quality assurance checks by performing the nighttime visibility evaluations .
retroreflectance .
the initial retroreflectance readings for temporary pavement markings shall be at least num millicandelas per lux per square meter for white and num for yellow .
the engineer will monitor the pavement markings in conformance with msmt num during the service life of the material .
num service life .
maintain the pavement markings for the applicable service life of the materials .
the service life shall be at least num days for tape and num days for paint .
replace the materials if the retroreflectance falls below num millicandelas per lux per square meter for white and num for yellow .
replace or repair the pavement markings as necessary within this period and within four hours or as directed at no additional cost to the administration .
refer to gpnum .
num application .
apply pavement markings in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and the contract documents .
apply markings prior to allowing traffic on the pavement and in the same direction as the flow of traffic .
surface condition .
the pavement surface shall be clean dry and free of all contaminants including curing compound dirt and loose particles .
remove all residual loose and poorly constructed pavement markings .
num pavement marking removal .
completely remove all removable pavement markings prior to application of the permanent markings .
on stage construction or final surfaces of portland cement concrete pavements remove any objectionable adhesive residue by water blasting or other approved methods .
do not use open flame to remove adhesive residue or any pavement markings .
completely remove or obscure pavement markings within the travel way or adjacent to the travel way that are not applicable .
num num maintenance of traffic ensure that neither the existing nor the final surface is damage by the operations .
refer to the contract documents for the removal of existing permanent paving markings .
completely remove or obscure all nonapplicable pavement markings within the travel way or adjacent to the travel way with removable pavement marking tape as specified in num .
num measurement and payment .
pavement marking paint and removable pavement marking tape will be measured and paid for using one or more of the items listed below and as specified .
the payment will be full compensation for furnishing installing and removal of lines letters numbers arrows symbols and the removal of all residue .
in addition payment will cover maintenance and replacement during the service life and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
a replacement of pavement marki ngs required beyond the service life per linear foot for the specified pavement marking item .
b replacement of removable markings during the service life as a result of plowing as determined by the engineer per linear foot for the specified removable marking item .
c pavement marking paint lines in width specified per linear foot .
d pavement marking paint legends letters and numbers and symbols per square foot .
the square foot quantity for legends letters and numbers and symbols will be as specified in the administrations standard details .
e removal of removable pavement marking tape lines in width specified per linear foot .
f removal of removable pavement marking tape legends letters and numbers and symbols per square foot .
the square foot quantity for legends letters and numbers and symbols will be as specified in the administrations standard details .
g placement of removable pavement marking tape lines any type any width per linear foot .
h placement of removable pavement marking tape legends letters num num maintenance of traffic and numbers and symbols per square foot .
the square foot quantity for legends letters and numbers and symbols will be as specified in the administrations standard details .
i black out tape lines any type any width per linear foot .
num drums for maintenance of traffic .
num description .
furnish set reset maintain and remove drums for maintenance of traffic .
num materials .
reflectorization num plastic drums qpl drums shall be manufactured of low density polyethylene pe num in .
in height and have a diameter of at least num in .
the drum shall have four num in .
wide horizontal circumferential alternating orange and white stripes with the top stripe being orange .
drums may have one or more flat sides as long as the minimum num in .
diameter is satisfied .
use high performance wide angle white and fluorescent orange sheeting on all drums .
num construction .
use sandfilled bases or bags of sand to keep the drums from moving .
install sandbags on the base of the drum only .
rubber or plastic bases or recycled tires weighing between num and num lbs .
may be used as a substitute for sand bags .
the contractors name or identification mark may be neatly stenciled at the bottom of the nonreflective portion of the drum in letters no more than num in .
high .
no other markings or wording may be on the vertical side of the drum .
maintain drums in a new or like new condition .
replace drums damaged by traffic within four hours after notification .
num measurement and payment .
drums for maintenance of traffic will be measured and paid for once at the contract unit price per each .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
where drums have been set and damaged by traffic and the engineer determines that they are not repairable replacement will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price .
num num maintenance of traffic num barricades for maintenance of traffic .
num description .
furnish set reset maintain and remove barricades for maintenance of traffic .
num materials .
reflectorization num barricades qpl num construction .
use barricade rails conforming to the mdmutcd with a minimum rail length of num ft. use approved reflective sheeting and installation procedures .
replace barricades damaged by traffic within four hours after notification .
mount signs so that no more than half of the top two rails or one third of the barricade is covered .
mount signs on the barricade so that the bottom of the sign is at least num in .
above the ground or surface .
the bottom of rectangular signs shall not be mounted higher than the bottom of the top rail .
do not use aluminum signs .
num measurement and payment .
barricades will be measured and paid for once at the contract unit price per each for the pertinent barricade item specified in the contract documents .
the payment will be full compensation for warning lights when required the maintenance and removal of any required warning lights and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
where barricades have been set and damaged by traffic and the engineer determines that they are not repairable replacement will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price .
num cones for maintenance of traffic .
num description .
furnish set reset maintain and remove cones for maintenance of traffic .
num materials .
reflectorization num qpl cones num num maintenance of traffic cones shall be new or like new condition .
cones shall be at least num in .
high at least num in .
diameter at the inside of the base reflectorized and equipped with approved anchor collars as needed to maintain an upright position .
num construction .
the contractors name or identification mark may be neatly stenciled at the bottom of the cone in maximum num in .
high letters .
place no other markings or writings on the vertical area of the cone .
turn the cone so that contractors name or identification mark faces away from traffic .
replace cones damaged by traffic within four hours or as directed after being notified .
num measurement and payment .
cones for maintenance of traffic and cones that have to be replaced will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract price for maintenance of traffic .
num flagger .
num description .
furnish flaggers when specified or directed .
flaggers shall have completed an administration approved flagger training course within the last four years .
the failure of any flagger to perform the required duties will be grounds for replacement .
flaggers shall utilize twoway radios field telephones or pilot vehicles when not within sight distance of each other or when directed .
num materials .
reflective sheeting on the stopslow paddle num paddles shall be num x num in .
with letters at least num in .
high and mounted at least num ft above the ground .
num construction .
flagging shall conform to mdmutcd .
all outfits and equipment stopslow paddles pilot cars or other vehicles air horns or bullhorns field telephones twoway radios site illumination etc .
will be subject to approval .
use stopslow paddles unless otherwise permitted .
num measurement and payment .
flagger will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract price for maintenance of traffic .
num num maintenance of traffic when an item for flagger is included in the contract documents flagger will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per hour .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num modification of existing signs .
num description .
relocate remove cover modify copy reinstall or change existing highway signs relating to the construction activity .
this work is in addition to the temporary traffic signs specified in num .
num material .
sign panel supports and hardware num num num num a num a num and a num reflective and nonreflective sheeting num sign materials num use an approved opaque sign covering material .
num construction .
modify existing signs as specified .
num measurement and payment .
modification of existing signs will be measured and paid for using one or more of the items listed below and specified in the contract documents .
the payment will be full compensation for all excavation backfill and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
a relocate wood sign supports per each support .
b sign modifications to overhead sign structures per square foot .
c relocate sign per square foot .
d remove sign per square foot .
e modify copy per each character .
f install or remove shield per each .
g cover sign per square foot .
h relocate sign luminaire per each .
num num maintenance of traffic num temporary movable type concrete traffic barrier mctb .
num description .
furnish place assemble maintain move and remove and dispose of movable interlocking type concrete traffic barrier .
movable barrier systems shall consist of individual units that remain connected for the total length when being moved in one continuous operation .
num material .
precast movable concrete barrier and transfer device qpl reflective barrier markers qpl num construction .
perform all transfer shifts using the transfer device .
the transfer device shall be capable of moving and transferring the barrier as required and of operating on the curve and grades specified .
ensure that the device does not extend into traffic .
the engineer will inspect the movable barrier upon delivery and throughout the life of the project .
replace any damaged or defective units as directed .
install reflective barrier markers as specified .
maintain the barrier and reflective barrier markers in a like new condition .
perform all maintenance operations for the transfer device .
have sufficient spare parts and personnel available to ensure that the required lane configurations are in place at the required times .
failure to move the mctb at the proper time will be cause for penalty under tcnum .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
a the initial installation of the temporary movable type concrete traffic barrier will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot measured in place from end to end .
b transfer shifts of the barrier will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the transfer shift of movable type concrete barrier item .
the measurement will be end to end of the barrier actually shifted .
the contract unit price will apply to each shift .
c replacing sections of the barrier that have been damaged by vehicular traffic while in place will be measured and paid for at the num num maintenance of traffic contract unit price per each for the replacement sections for movable type concrete barrier item .
replacement of sections damaged by the contractors operations shall be at no additional cost to the administration .
d resetting the barrier will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the reset movable type concrete barrier item .
the payment will also include removal from its original placement and transporting and resetting it in its new temporary location .
e reflective barrier markers will be measured and paid for as specified in numb .
f end treatments will be measured and paid for under the pertinent item specified in the contract documents .
num traffic manager tm .
num description .
provide a traffic manager tm .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction .
submit the tms name for approval at least num days prior to commencing any work on the project .
provide proof that the tm has completed an administration approved temporary traffic control training course within the last four years .
a change in the appointment of any tm throughout the duration of the contract will require a written submittal for approval .
any failure of the tm to perform the required duties will be grounds for replacement .
the tm shall be available at all times and be on site within num hour during periods of active work in the work zone .
the tm shall do the following a implement the traffic control plan tcp maintain an uptodate tcp and provide a copy to the engineer following any changes .
b closely coordinate the operations with the engineer and supervise the maintenance of traffic on the project including those involving subcontractors .
c make onsite inspections of the area affected by the work on a regular basis including saturdays sundays and holidays and be available for consultation at all times .
when the tcp is in place num num maintenance of traffic make daily inspections during hours of operations and at least one night inspection per week .
perform additional inspections as directed .
d during holiday periods in addition to the monitoring of the maintenance of traffic conduct a surveillance of any area affected by the contract work .
e maintain a daily log of the inspections and include the date time hours worked condition of maintenance of traffic and any corrective action taken .
furnish a copy of the daily log to the engineer by the following day .
f provide coordination between adjacent work zone operations to ensure that inappropriate or conflicting messages or devices are not displayed to traffic .
g immediately notify the engineer of any accident or incident within the area affected by the contract .
h make inspections during and immediately after adverse weather conditions to ensure that the traffic control devices are clean undamaged and in the correct position .
num measurement and payment .
the traffic manager will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract price for maintenance of traffic .
num portable variable message signs pvms num description .
furnish install and relocate portable selfcontained trailer mounted variable message signs .
num materials .
pvms qpl all materials shall be like new corrosion resistant and unaffected by water spray salt oil gasoline and all other contaminants in the quantities normally found along the edge of the traveled roadway .
construction materials and operation shall meet nfpa ul and nec .
ensure that sign messages are visible and legible for a distance of num ft from any point along the traveled approach roadway at all times .
the pvms shall be equipped with a sighting device to provide alignment for maximum visibility .
num num maintenance of traffic num construction .
num equipment .
trailer .
in accordance with maryland motor vehicle law .
structural support .
the structural support framework shall allow the system to be assembled into a unit and be mounted on the trailer and shall provide the support mechanism between the sign panel assembly the power supply and the controller .
the framework shall provide sufficient support to prevent damage to any unit component when the sign is in down and locked position during normal highway travel .
the deployed structure shall supply adequate support to allow complete sign operation including raising and lowering of the sign panel during sustained wind speeds of num mph .
the display windows shall be made of impactresistant clear lexan or as approved .
sign panel .
not to exceed num in .
length num in .
height num in .
depth .
display .
a capable of displaying three lines of text .
b each line of text shall be constructed using either a discrete matrix or a full matrix display .
c capable of displaying eight characters per line .
d the character height shall be at least num in .
e if discrete matrix display is used each character shall be displayed using a num x num array with at least eight array modules per line .
a num to num in .
space shall exist between each display line with no glare reflection .
f if full matrix display is used the sign shall have at least num rows and num columns of disks .
each display line shall have at least num rows and num columns of disks and a num to num in .
space between each display line with no glare reflection .
num num maintenance of traffic flip disk mechanism .
a be electromagnetically activated with a service life of at least num million operations .
b have a reflective surface that will maintain color intensity for at least three years .
c be circular or rectangular with a visible surface area between num and num innum .
led illumination .
led illumination for each matrix element shall a meet ite specification for amber color .
b utilize alingap substrate .
c each led shall produce at least a num candela output on center at num ma drive current .
d each matrix element shall have at least two leds located within the perimeter of the flipping disk .
e provide full illumination within at least a num degree cone perpendicular to the sign face .
f have an operating temperature range of num to num f. pvms unit .
lift mechanism .
a electric or electrically assisted hydraulic mechanism capable of raising and lowering the sign panel .
b capable of being raised or lowered manually .
c furnished with a stainless steel safety bolt to prevent the sign panel from lowering once in the raised position .
a selflocking mechanism shall be incorporated into the safety bolt to prevent it from being inadvertently dislodged .
d designed to allow the raised sign panel to rotate num degrees about the vertical axis .
num allow rotation clockwise and counterclockwise .
num num maintenance of traffic num a mechanism shall be provided to lock the sign panel in place at any position .
electrical connections and gauges .
a all wiring from power sources to pvms equipment shall use locking cable connectors .
b volt and amp gauges shall be provided for both ac and dc .
c standard negative ground system shall be tied to the sign chassis .
c lightning protection shall be supplied to the load side of the sign systems distributed power lines to withstand multiple surges in excess of num volts .
power supply .
either a solar powered electrical system or existing commercial electrical service .
solar powered electrical system .
battery power system and solar array panels capable of displaying a two page message for num consecutive days without auxiliary charge .
sign controller .
a capable of driving the matrix display panel operating over a num to num f range and in a num to num percent noncondensing humidity range .
b accommodate num preprogrammed userdefined messages .
c capable of displaying three sequenced messages .
onoff time for each message in a sequence shall be user adjustable within a range of num to num seconds .
d designed for failsafe prevention of improper information display in the case of a system malfunction .
e cause a user defined default message to be displayed in case of failure of the pvms unit when flip disk mechanism is used .
f have the capability of retrieving all messages stored in temporary memory .
num temporary memory shall be nonvolatile .
num num maintenance of traffic num all messages and programs shall remain resident in the controllers memory in the event of a power failure .
num have an rsnum port to facilitate connection of an external communication device .
g capable of automatic system recovery after power outages to the central controller without operator intervention including the ability to maintain an uptodate status on a remote unit if sign is operated from a remote location .
h monitor and display the battery output voltage and solar array activities chargingdischarging and blank the sign when the battery output voltage drops below the manufacturers recommended output level .
i capable of monitoring and displaying the status of the photocell and adjusting the sign illumination to match the ambient light conditions .
the controller shall have at least nine levels of dimming from num to num percent brightness .
j contained in a weatherproof cabinet located on the controller housing and insulated to protect against excessive vibration and temperature .
num equipped with a lockable door latch and interior cabinet dome light .
num provided with a keyboard storage location inside the cabinet .
character set software .
a have all of the standard ascii characters and symbols .
b provide left and right arrows .
c have all alphanumeric entries performed with a keyboard or keypad that causes the same character to be displayed on the matrix .
arrow symbols shall be generated via a cursor pad on the keyboard or keypad .
d have messages default to selfcentering display with the ability to left or right justify a display when full matrix is used .
num set up and operate the pvms on the project site num hours in advance of actual use .
ensure that each unit is functioning properly and approved .
locate the pvms as specified .
num num maintenance of traffic aim the pvms at approaching traffic in accordance with the num ft minimum visibility and legibility requirement .
ensure that the pvms is level and that the sign face is not obscured by highway alignment or glare from either sunlight or vehicle headlights .
num measurement and payment .
the portable variable message sign will be measured and paid for at the contract price per unit day .
a unit day shall consist of any approved usage within a numhour calendar day period .
each unit will be paid for only once per unit day regardless of how many times it is relocated .
when a unit is used for part of a day it will be measured as a unit day .
this unit price will be the same regardless of the type of unit used .
the payment will be full compensation for the electrical power and hook up setup and maintenance of computer programs changing messages and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num temporary orange construction fence .
num description .
furnish install and maintain new or like new temporary orange mesh construction fence .
this fence is not to be used as a safety barrier .
num materials .
precast concrete blocks num tie wire tension wires tension wire clips and hardware num orange mesh fencing as approved fence posts shall be num ft high num in .
diameter round posts or num ft high num in .
steel u channel posts as specified herein .
submit samples of the fence fabric fence posts movable precast concrete blocks tie wire tension wires and other miscellaneous hardware for approval .
num construction .
temporary orange construction fence shall be at least num ft high and with a maximum post spacing of num ft .
when installed on a paved surface support the fence by inserting the round post into a precast concrete block having a round hole through the center of the block .
when installed in unpaved areas use steel u channel fence posts driven num ft into the ground .
installation of the fence in any other manner will require approval .
num num maintenance of traffic secure the fabric to the posts by wrapping a tie wire around the horizontal fence strands and the posts .
install a top tension wire to prevent sagging .
when installed on paved surfaces the engineer will determine if a bottom tension wire is required .
remove the fence when the engineer determines that the fence is no longer required .
the removed fence is the property of the contractor .
damaged construction fence .
repair or replace damaged construction fence within four hours after notification .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
temporary orange construction fence will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the actual number of linear feet measured to the centers of end posts .
remove and reset temporary orange construction fence will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num protection vehicle pv .
num description .
furnish a pv as required .
the pv shall consist of a work vehicle with approved flashing lights as required by the standard tcps and either a a truckmounted attenuator tma with support structure designed for mounting the system to the work vehicle or b a trailer truckmounted attenuator ttma designed for attaching the system to the work vehicle by a pintle hook .
provide an arrow panel arrow mode for multilane roadways and caution mode on twolane twoway roadways in accordance with num .
the arrow panel shall be integral to either the work vehicle or the tmattma .
the size of the work vehicle and the method of attachment shall be as specified in the tmattma manufacturers specifications and as tested per nchrp report num at test level num .
num no part of the tmattma shall be designed to intrude under the support vehicle during impact or require a safety clearance under the support vehicle that extends forward of the rear axle .
general .
the ballast of the work vehicle shall meet the manufacturers specification for the tmattma and be firmly secured to prevent movement during an impact .
all exposed steel on the attenuator shall be primed and painted yellow .
the undercarriage and support frame may be primed and painted black .
all welding shall be performed by or under the direct supervision of a certified welder .
the rear facing surface of the tmattma shall have an inverted v chevron pattern formed by alternating num in .
wide black and yellow stripes as shown in standard no .
md num .
the sides of the tmattma shall have a border of num in .
red and white reflective tape as shown on standard no .
md num .
the tmattma shall have a standard lighting system including brake lights tail lights turn signals and icc bar lights .
all wiring shall be protected and adequately supported .
the ttma trailer shall conform to maryland motor vehicle law governing trailers .
impact performance .
tmattmas manufactured prior to january num num shall have passed nchrp report num tests num and num level num .
tmattmas manufactured after january num num shall have passed nchrp report num tests num num num and num level num .
dimensions .
a road clearance for the tmattma shall be num num in .
or as specified by the manufacturer .
b total weight of the tma exclusive of the work vehicle shall not exceed num lb unless it is trailermounted .
durability .
the manufacturer shall ensure that travel vibration in either a vertical for tma or horizontal position will not affect the performance of the work vehicle or the tmattma .
certifications .
provide certification that the tmattma is in good working order has not been damaged conforms to the requirements of the manufacturers specifications model number roll ahead distance truck weight etc .
and includes the date of manufacture .
num maintenance of traffic num num maintenance of traffic the manufacturer shall certify that moisture penetration will not impede the energy impact absorption properties or add significantly to the weight of the tmattma .
tilting .
an electrically powered tilt system shall be incorporated to facilitate the tilting of the tma cartridge to a num degree position from horizontal .
the unit shall have a locking device to secure the tma system in the vertical position .
the completed tilt system shall be factory assembled .
num material .
not applicable .
num construction .
not applicable .
num measurement and payment .
protection vehicles will be measured and paid for at the contract price per unit day .
a unit day shall consist of any approved usage within a num hour calendar day period .
if a protection vehicle is used for part of a day it will be measured as a unit day regardless of how many times it is relocated .
the payment will be full compensation for the complete protection vehicle including the truck mounted attenuatortrailer truck mounted attenuator and arrow panel licensed work vehicle operator relocating the protection vehicle and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num removable rumble strips .
num description .
furnish install maintain and remove removable rumble strips .
num materials .
removable rumble strips qpl rumble strips shall be white in color num in .
wide and num in .
thick .
num construction .
num quality assurancequality control .
perform quality control testing using technicians certified by the administration .
num warranty period .
maintain the rumble strips and repair defects for a period of num days from the date of application .
replace as necessary within this period as directed at no additional cost to the administration .
refer to gpnum .
num num maintenance of traffic at least num percent of the total number of rumble strips in any lane shall be free from signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking discoloration smearing or spreading under heat chipping spalling or poor adhesion to the pavement .
replace rumble strips showing wear or a thickness less than num in .
num application and removal .
the pavement surfaces shall be completely dry and free of oil grease sand dirt dust loose aggregate soil salt and other contaminants .
apply the rumble strips in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and the contract documents .
place perpendicular to the flow of traffic and located as specified .
space the strips between num and num ft on center with a pattern of at least num but not more than num strips per set .
decrease the spacing within each set as motorists approach the work zone .
the spacing between the sets shall be as specified .
do not place on sharp horizontal or vertical curves .
use in conjunction with other traffic control devices or visual cues that will assist drivers in identifying the appropriate action to take .
for installations where the roadway is wider than one lane in each direction install in onelane width segments utilizing butt joints .
do not overlap .
continue at least num ft onto each shoulder .
do not install over pavement seams joints or deteriorating markings and substrates .
when no longer required remove rumble strips and residue .
return the pavement surface to its original condition .
num measurement and payment .
removable rumble strips will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
removal and replacement required beyond the num day period will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for the removable rumble strip item .
replacements made during the service life due to plowing will be paid for at the contract unit price for the removable rumble strip item .
num removal replacement and corrective actions .
any additional cost including maintenance of traffic for the removal of rumble strips that are installed inaccurately or incorrectly shall be at no additional cost to the administration .
in addition the current road user fee will be applied when traffic disruption occurs during corrective actions .
num num maintenance of traffic num speed display trailer sdt num description .
furnish install and relocate a portable selfcontained trailer mounted dynamic speed display with static speed limit sign .
num materials .
speed display trailer qpl each unit shall include the trailer structural support system sign panel assembly lift mechanism power supplies sign mounted controller non invasive speed detection device and ancillary equipment .
all materials for the sdt shall be like new corrosion resistant and unaffected by water spray salt oil gasoline and all other contaminants in the quantities normally found along the edge of the traveled roadway .
construction materials and operation shall be in accordance with nfpa uli and nec .
sign messages shall be visible and legible for a distance of num ft from any point along the traveled approach roadway at all times .
num equipment .
trailer .
in accordance with maryland motor vehicle law governing trailers .
structural support .
refer to num sign panel .
sign panel dimensions shall not exceed num in .
wide by num in .
high .
display .
a each line of text shall be constructed using either a full or discrete matrix display .
b the character height shall be at least num in .
c if discrete matrix display is used each character shall be displayed using a num x num array with at least two array modules per line .
d if a full matrix display is used the sign shall have a pixel arrangement of at least num rows by num columns with num leds per pixel .
e attach one rnum num x num in .
speed limit sign to the trailer .
the sign shall be easily removed and replaced .
num num maintenance of traffic led illumination .
led illumination for each matrix element shall have the following characteristics a led shall conform to the ite specification for amber color for warning applications .
b the pixels shall be white on a black background .
c led shall utilize anumingap substrate .
d each led shall produce at least num candela output on center at num ma drive current .
e led shall provide full illumination within at least a num degree cone perpendicular to the sign face .
f operating temperature range of the led shall be num to numof .
sdt unit .
submit a catalog cut and character set for any sdt approval to the office of traffic and safety chief of traffic operations .
lift mechanism .
a the lift mechanism shall be installed such that the sign panel can be raised and lowered manually .
b a stainless steel safety bolt shall be provided to prevent the sign panel from lowering once in the raised position .
a selflocking mechanism shall be incorporated into the safety bolt to prevent it from being inadvertently dislodged .
electrical connections and gauges .
a all wiring from power sources to sdt equipment shall use locking cable connectors .
b volt and amp gauges shall be provided for both ac and dc .
c standard negative ground system shall be tied to the sign chassis .
power supply .
the sdt shall operate from a solar powered electrical system .
this system shall consist of battery power system and solar array panels and be capable of displaying and storing vehicle speeds for num consecutive days without an auxiliary charge .
sign controller .
the controller shall num num maintenance of traffic a be capable of driving the matrix display panel operating over a num to numof range and in a num to num percent noncondensing humidity range .
b be designed for failsafe prevention of improper information display in the case of a system malfunction .
c monitor and display the battery output voltage and solar array activities charging and discharging .
the controller shall blank the sign when the battery output voltage drops below the manufacturers recommended output level .
d be capable of monitoring and displaying the status of the photocell and adjusting the sign illumination to match the ambient light conditions .
the controller shall have at least nine levels of dimming from num to num percent brightness .
e be contained in a sheet metal weatherproof cabinet located on the controller housing and insulated to protect against excessive vibration and temperature .
the cabinet shall have a lockable door latch and interior cabinet dome light .
f be capable of storing vehicle speed readings with a time and date stamp and have sufficient memory to store num num readings .
g be capable of having remote access to modify sign messages speed thresholds and download vehicle speed readings .
speed display software .
a the sdt shall be supplied with a noninvasive speed detection unit .
the unit shall be able to be rotated on a separate vertical axis from the sdt to allow for better aiming and detection .
the unit shall detect and display the speed of only approaching traffic .
b the speed display software shall be able to display vehicle speeds that are traveling over a set threshold .
the sdt shall also be capable of not displaying a vehicle speed over a separate set threshold .
the speed display software shall have the capability of modifying speed thresholds .
num num maintenance of traffic num .
construction .
set up and operate the sdt on the project site num hours in advance of actual use to ensure that each unit is functioning properly and approved .
aim the std at approaching traffic that is at least num ft in advance of the std and in accordance with the num ft minimum visibility and legibility requirement .
ensure that the std is level and that the sign face is not obscured by highway alignment or glare from either sunlight or vehicle headlights .
num measurement and payment .
the speed display trailer will be measured and paid for at the contract price per unit day .
a unit day shall consist of any approved usage within a numhour calendar day period .
each speed display trailer will be paid for only once per unit day regardless of how many times it is relocated .
when a unit is used for part of a day it will be measured as a unit day .
the payment will be full compensation for the setup and maintenance of computer programs changing messages and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num truck mounted variable message sign tvms .
num description .
furnish install and relocate a portable selfcontained truck mounted variable message sign .
num materials .
each unit shall contain the work vehicle structural support system sign panel assembly lift mechanism power supplies sign mounted controller and ancillary equipment .
all materials for tvms shall be like new corrosion resistant and unaffected by water spray salt oil gasoline and all other contaminants in the quantities normally found along the edge of the traveled roadway .
the tvms construction materials and operation shall meet nfpa uli and nec .
ensure that sign messages are visible and legible for a distance of num ft from any point along the traveled approach roadway at all times .
the tvms shall not block the drivers rear view vision when either in the transport or the deployed position .
num construction .
num equipment .
num num maintenance of traffic truck .
the work vehicle size and the method of attachment shall be as specified in the manufacturers specifications .
all vehicles shall be in accordance with maryland motor vehicle law .
structural support .
the structural support framework shall allow the system to be assembled into a unit and be mounted on the truck and shall provide the support mechanism between the sign panel assembly the power supply and the controller .
the framework shall provide sufficient support to prevent damage to any tvms components when the sign is in the down and locked position during normal highway travel .
the sign panel shall be mounted as a permanent fixture of the truck and provide a minimum height of num ft from the bottom of the sign to the surface of the roadway when in its operating position .
affixing a trailer mounted unit to a truck is prohibited .
the deployed structure shall supply adequate support to allow complete sign operation including raising and lowering of the sign panel during sustained wind speeds of num mph .
the display windows shall be made of impactresistant clear lexan or as approved .
sign panel .
sign panel dimensions shall not exceed num in .
wide by num in .
high unless approved .
the tvms shall be capable of displaying three lines of text with the following requirements a each line of text shall be constructed using a full matrix display .
b the sign shall be capable of displaying six characters per line .
c the character height shall be at least num in .
d the sign shall have a pixel arrangement of at least num rows by num columns with at least num leds per pixel .
led illumination .
led illumination for each matrix element shall have the following characteristics a led shall meet to the ite specification for amber color .
b led shall utilize anumingap substrate .
c each led shall produce at least one candela output on center at num ma drive current .
num num maintenance of traffic d led shall provide full illumination within at least a num degree cone perpendicular to the sign face .
e operating temperature range of the led shall be num to numof .
tvms unit .
submit a catalog cut and character set for any tvms approval to the office of traffic and safety chief of traffic operations .
furnish examples of standard messages to be used on the sign .
lift mechanism .
a the lift mechanism shall be capable of being raised and lowered manually .
b a selflocking mechanism shall be provided to prevent the sign panel from lowering once in the raised position .
electrical connections and gauges .
a all wiring from power sources to tvms equipment shall use locking cable connectors .
b each sign shall be equipped with an automatic lamp intensity regulator that maintains a constant output with a varying battery voltage .
c standard negative ground system shall be tied to the vehicle chassis .
power supply .
the tvms shall operate from a solar powered electrical system .
sign controller .
the controller shall a be capable of driving the matrix display panel operating over a num to numof range and in a num to num percent noncondensing humidity range .
b accommodate num preprogrammed userdefined messages .
c be capable of displaying three sequenced messages .
onoff time for each message in a sequence shall be user adjustable at onetenth of a second increments within a range of num to num seconds .
d be designed for failsafe prevention of improper information display in the case of a system malfunction .
in the event of a system malfunction the sign shall display a blank message .
num num maintenance of traffic e have the capability of retrieving all messages stored in temporary memory .
num temporary memory shall be nonvolatile .
num all messages and programs shall remain resident in the controllers memory in the event of a power failure .
num have an rsnum port to facilitate connection of an external communication device .
f monitor and display the battery output voltage and solar array activities charging and discharging and blank the sign when the battery output voltage drops below the manufacturers recommended output level .
g be capable of monitoring and displaying the status of the photocell adjust the sign illumination to match the ambient light conditions and have at least nine levels of dimming from num to num percent brightness .
h be contained in a sheet metal or high density polyethylene hdpe weatherproof cabinet located on the controller housing and insulated to protect against excessive vibration and temperature .
num the cabinet shall have a lockable door latch .
num the keyboardinput device storage location shall be provided inside the cabinet .
character set software .
the character set software shall a have all the standard ascii characters and symbols .
b provide left and right arrows .
c have all alphanumeric entries performed with a keyboard or keypad that causes the same character to be displayed on the matrix .
arrow symbols shall be generated via a cursor pad on the keyboard or keypad .
d have messages default to selfcentering display with the ability to left or right justify .
num operation .
set up and operate the tvms numhours in advance of actual use to ensure that each unit is functioning properly and approved .
num num maintenance of traffic variable message sign mode .
use the tvms in variable message sign mode on roadways where the posted speed limit is less than or equal to num mph .
the tvms is intended for mobile operations .
if used for stationary construction or maintenance operations do not leave the tvms in place for more than eight consecutive hours .
arrow panel mode .
the tvms may be used in lieu of a type c arrow panel on any roadway as long as the tvms is capable of displaying a left arrow right arrow double arrow and a fourcorner caution mode .
use the tvms only as a supplement to other required traffic control devices .
when closing a through travel lane on a multilane roadway use the arrow mode only .
only one tvms in the arrow mode shall be used for each stationary lane closure .
moving work operations may utilize one or more tvms for a single lane closure .
a ensure that the placement does not cause driver confusion near ramps median crossovers and side road intersections .
b for stationary lane closures place the tvms on the shoulder at the beginning of the taper nearest to oncoming traffic .
where there are narrow or no existing shoulders in the closed lane behind the channelizing devices place the tvms as near to the beginning of the taper as possible .
c for moving maintenance type activities along multilane highways where a lane is closed place the tvms at the rear of the activity in the closed lane on a vehicle separate from the maintenance vehicle itself .
for paint striping activities additional vehicles with tvms or arrow panels in the arrow mode may be required to supplement the work operation .
tvms shall always remain upstream of the maintenance vehicles where adequate recognition distance is available .
the vehicle carrying the tvms shall be equipped with signing and lighting as required by the standard tcps .
d tvms shall only display the caution mode for a lane closure on a twolane twoway roadway or for a shoulder closure on any roadway .
the caution mode on a tvms shall show displays of circular appearance in each of the four corners of the tvms .
the circle diameters shall range from num to num in .
and utilize approximately num pixels .
the circles shall be offset from the left and right edge between num and num in .
and from the top and bottom edge between num and num in .
the vertical spacing between the centers of the circles shall range from num to num times the diameter of the circles .
the horizontal spacing between the centers of the circles shall range from num to num times the vertical spacing .
num aggregate for m intenance of traffic a num install the tvms as specified .
the tvms shall be designed so that it supplies a minimum visibility and legibility distance of num ft .
ensure that the tvms is level and that the sign face is not obscured by highway alignment or glare from either sunlight or vehicle headlights .
num measurement and payment .
the truck mounted variable message sign will be measured and paid for at the contract price per unit day .
a unit day shall consist of any approved usage within a num hour calendar day period .
each truck mounted variable message sign will be paid for only once per unit day regardless of how many times it is relocated .
when a unit is used for part of a day it will be measured as a unit day .
the payment will be full compensation for the vehicle setup and maintenance of computer programs changing messages and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num aggregate for maintenance of traffic num description .
place aggregate material for the maintenance of traffic .
num materials .
crusher run aggregate crnum num bank run gravel subbase num graded aggregate base num num construction .
refer to num .
num measurement and payment .
crusher run aggregate crnum for maintenance of traffic bank run gravel subbase for maintenance of traffic and graded aggregate base for maintenance of traffic will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
the payment will be full compensation for all aggregate hauling placing compacting removal rehandling reworking disposal and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
when aggregate is part of any base or pavement course used for the construction and maintenance of temporary detours approaches crossings and widenings the item of work will be measured and paid for num num hot mix asphalt for maintenance of traffic as specified in num .
refer to num which states that the materials manipulation or addition of chemical additives will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for bank run gravel base course item .
aggregate for maintenance of traffic when used for temporary and permanent patching at pipe culverts and utilities will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contact unit price for pipe culvert or utility item .
section num hot mix asphalt hma for maintenance of traffic num description .
place hma for maintenance of traffic .
num materials .
tack coat rapid setting num hma num crack filler num num production plant num num construction .
refer to num .
num measurement and payment .
hot mix asphalt for maintenance of traffic will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
the payment will be full compensation for all tack coat crack filler hauling placing compacting maintaining removal rehandling reworking disposal and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
when hot mix asphalt is part of any base or pavement course used for the construction and maintenance of temporary detours approaches crossings and widenings the item of work will be measured and paid for as specified in section num .
for payment of temporary tieins refer to num .
hot mix asphalt for maintenance of traffic when used for temporary and permanent patching at pipe culverts and utilities will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for pipe culvert or utility item .
num num construction stakeout section num construction stakeout num description .
furnish place and maintain construction layout stakes .
demarcate flag the limit of disturbance lod and protected resources including wetlands wetland buffers waters of the united states floodplains and tree preservation areas .
the lod is defined as the maximum allowable limit of earth disturbance as delineated in the contract documents .
when not delineated in the contract documents the lod will be the top of cut toe of slope or limit of ditch excavation .
no clearing or earth disturbance activity may begin until the lod and all protected resources are demarcated as specified .
num materials .
refer to num .
num construction .
num line and grade .
the engineer will provide the following a roadway stakeout .
num a staked center line of the roadway with stations not over num ft apart .
num appropriately spaced bench marks and necessary references including all points of curvature p.c .
and points of tangency p.t .
for the preservation and control of the center line .
num two sets of prints of the cross sections .
use the cross sections as a guide only .
dimensions or elevations scaled from the cross sections are not sufficiently precise for use in construction .
b structure stakeout .
num a staked center line or working line whichever applies with stations not over num ft apart and extending at least num ft beyond each end of the structure .
num when the structure is on a curve a staked center line or working line whichever applies consisting of stations not over num ft apart and including the p.c .
p.t .
and at least one point on the tangents beyond each end of the curve .
num num construction stakeout num at least two bench marks one on each end of the structure .
num equipment and personnel .
use competent personnel and state of the art equipment for all engineering work required to set and maintain the specified elevations and dimensions .
num control markers .
preserve the center line and bench marks set by the engineer .
replace any disturbed or destroyed controls at no additional cost to the administration .
num control stakes .
for roadways as specified in numa furnish set and preserve stakes at each station along each side of the project on the rightofway or easement line whichever is farther from the center line of construction .
where only part of an ultimate dual highway is to be constructed set the stakes on the side of the future improvement num ft beyond the construction limits .
on each of these stakes mark the offset distance from the center line and its top elevation or the cut or fill to the profile grade line .
place additional stakes as necessary or as directed to ensure the correct layout of the work .
num layout .
for structures proceed with the layout work as specified in numb .
before any actual construction begins rerun and check the engineers lines and grades .
then establish all center line or working line intersections with the center line or center of bearing of all piers bents and abutments .
from these field layouts check the proposed span lengths by either electronic distance measurement or chaining from the field layouts .
when chaining compensate for temperature sag and horizontal alignment .
check the location of the structure to affirm its correct location with relation to existing structures roads and existing conditions that are to remain .
if any discrepancies are found notify the engineer at once in writing .
ensure that all lines established on the ground are preserved or referenced marked and kept available at all times .
ensure that the field elevations of all bridge seats are correct and that they are finished to proper grade .
when steel beams or girders are incorporated in the project determine the deflection of each member by running elevations over the tops of the beams or girders after they are in place and before attaching any forms .
apply this information to the deflection diagram to determine the corrected elevation of bottom slab forms and screed supports .
the engineer will check the assembled information .
make necessary adjustments prior to placing concrete .
num utilities .
promptly upon request furnish references to control points alignment and grade data to the utility companies or agencies working within the limits of the project so that they may properly locate and coordinate their work and improvements .
num num construction stakeout intersection utility stakeout .
notify the appropriate agencies at least num hours excluding weekends and holidays prior to the anticipated time for beginning any underground work .
a request a miss utility stakeout and possess a valid miss utility clearance ticket number for any underground work .
b contact all utilities within the limits of the project who are not a member of miss utility and obtain a stakeout of their respective facilities .
c request the office of traffic safetys signal operations section to stakeout administration maintained traffic signal facilities .
d request the district engineer to stakeout their lighting facilities .
stakeout the proposed construction as indicated in the contract documents .
allow the engineer to verify the location of the proposed facilities .
num rightofway and easement lines .
promptly upon request define the project rightofway and easement lines for adjacent property owners .
num subgrade subbase and base controls .
when placing subgrade subbase and base courses furnish a string line and grade with fixed controls having longitudinal and transverse spacing of no more than num ft .
along each form line for cement concrete pavement provide the line and grade with fixed controls not to exceed num ft. a automated machine control .
when approved b y the engineer construction equipment guided by global positioning system gps or robotic total station rts equipment may be utilized in the placement of subgrade subbase base courses and other roadway materials .
preserve the stakeout established by the engineer and set additional controls as directed .
num if utilizing gps and rts equipment develop and submit a digital terrain model dtm for review .
if using the contract documents and any administration furnished dtm data a dtm shall be developed independently .
in order to use any administration furnished dtm data the administration and its designers shall be released from all liability for the accuracy of the data and its conformance to the contract documents .
num num establish primary control points at appropriate intervals along the length of the project .
where project work is performed beyond the project limits establish control points at intervals not to exceed num ft .
determine the horizontal position of these points by static gps sessions or by traverse connection from the original base line control points .
establish the elevation of these control points using differential leveling from the project benchmarks forming closed loops where practical .
prior to construction activities provide a copy of all new control point information to the engineer .
correct all deficiencies at no additional cost to the administration .
num provide control points and conventional grade stakes at critical points such as pcs and pts super elevation points such as begin full super and halflevel plane inclined and other critical points required for construction of structures and utility relocation or coordination .
the engineer will determine whether additional stakeout and control points are necessary .
num provide adequate control points stationing and stakes for coordination activities involving environmental agencies utility companies and contractors on adjacent projects .
b realtime kinematic rtk gps .
may be utilized to control equipment where the grade tolerance is num ft or greater .
c rts positioning .
rts s hall be utilized where grade tolerances are less than num ft .
check the index error of the vertical circle of the rts and adjust as necessary prior to each days operations .
begin and end each work session by checking between adjacent control points .
d grade busts .
grade busts and all associated quantity adjustments or errors resulting from the contractors activities shall be corrected and at no additional cost to the administration .
e utilizing automated controlled equipment .
when automated controlled equipment is used furnish a gps rover instrument for administration use during the project along with num hours of formal training on gpsrts and the utilized systems .
provide a surveyor to perform verification when discrepancies arise .
f test sections .
perform test sections for gps and rts systems to demonstrate the capability knowledge equipment and experience to properly operate the systems and achieve acceptable tolerances .
num construction stakeout num num mobilization if this ability is not demonstrated conventional stakeout procedures will be required .
num demarcation .
perform all demarcation as specified or directed .
demarcate wetlands using the administrations standard num num in .
pink and white striped vinyl flagging with sha wetland printed in blue letters .
demarcate the lod and other applicable protected resources using a minimum nummil vinyl that is num inch wide with num in .
letters and locate as directed .
establish tree preservation areas as specified in section num .
when directed reflag areas where flagging has been destroyed .
if the destroyed flagging is not replaced within num hours the engineer may proceed to reflag the area .
the cost of the reflagging by the engineer will be deducted from any monies due under the contract .
remove all flagging at the completion of construction .
num measurement and payment .
construction stakeout will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
payment of the contract lump sum price will be prorated and paid in equal amounts on each monthly estimate .
the number of months used for prorating will be the number estimated to complete the work .
section num mobilization num description .
construction preparatory operations that include the movement of personnel and equipment to the project site and the establishment of the contractors offices buildings and other facilities necessary to begin work .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction .
not applicable .
num measurement and payment .
mobilization will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
the cost of all required insurance and bonds will be incidental to the mobilization item .
payment of num percent of the mobilization item will be made in the first monthly estimate after the contractor has established the necessary num num critical path method project schedule facilities .
the remaining num percent will be prorated and paid in equal amounts on each of the next five monthly estimates .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
payment of the mobilization item will not be made more than once regardless of the fact that the contractor may have for any reason shut the work down on the project or moved their equipment away from the project and then back again .
if an item for mobilization is not provided the cost of mobilization including the required insurance and bonds will be incidental to the other items specified in the contract documents .
section num critical path method project schedule num description .
plan schedule and construct the project by using a critical path method project schedule cpm .
use the cpm for coordinating and monitoring the work specified in the contract documents including all activities of subcontractors vendors suppliers utilities railroads the administration and all other parties associated with the construction of the contract .
all work including but not limited to submittals major procurement delivery and construction activities shall be included .
all activities including bid items quantified in the contract documents shall be included .
base the cpm upon the entirety of the contract documents .
utilize cpm software that generates files compatible with primavera project planner .
float .
the cpm utilizes float .
float is defined as the amount of time between when an activity can start or finish and when an activity must start or finish .
float is a shared commodity for the use of the administration and the contractor and is not for the exclusive use or benefit of either party .
both parties have the full use of the float until depleted .
scheduling representative .
designate a scheduling representative prior to submission of the initial critical path method project schedule icpm .
the scheduling representative is the person primarily responsible for development and maintenance of the cpm schedule the contractors representative in all matters regarding the schedule and the designated attendee for all schedule related meetings .
replacement of the scheduling representative will require written approval from the administration .
num num critical path method project schedule submit the qualifications of the scheduling representative to the administration for approval .
this approval is required before the icpm will be accepted .
the scheduling representative shall have at least three years of verifiable experience for preparing and maintaining cpm project schedules on contracts of similar size and complexity .
initial critical path method project schedule icpm .
the icpm shall consist of a a time scaled diagram of acceptable scale and format that is acceptable to the engineer .
clearly label and identify each activity .
show all relationships between activities .
b tabular reports with activities sorted as follows num activity id .
provide predecessors and successors for each activity with leads and lags shown .
num activity id .
provide and clearly define the resources assigned to each activity .
num early start total float .
num total float early start .
num project area if applicable .
num project phase if applicable .
num responsibility e.g .
contractor specific subcontractor specific supplier the administration etc .
provide in the header of each tabular report the project name contract number data date run date and number and report type .
provide in the body of each report the activity identification activity description original and remaining duration earlylate start and finish dates percent complete actual startfinish dates total float and calendar designation for every activity .
c written narrative wn .
comply with the requirements described hereinafter .
d printed calendars .
include a listing description and calendar form tabulation of all calendars used .
include the total number of anticipated work days required to complete the contract work .
num num critical path method project schedule delineate holidays and anticipated nonwork days or periods .
explain in the wn the basis for determining each nonwork day or period .
e a data disc containing all of the information contained in the icpm and in a format compatible with primavera project planner software .
all construction activities shall have durations not exceeding num working days unless otherwise approved .
provide a duration of at least num calendar days for activities required for review and approval of working drawings and materials by the administration .
a short list of highly critical approval activities may be submitted .
the engineer will make every effort to expedite the approval of these submittals however this will not alter the requirement to include num calendar days for all approvals .
schedule the duration for activities such as curing and preload in calendar days .
durations for procurement activities will be evaluated on a casebycase basis .
the latest calculated early finish date in the icpm shall equal the calendar date for completion specified in the contract documents .
if an earlier completion date is submitted the administration upon approval of the icpm will issue a change order to adjust the contract time to the completion date shown on the icpm .
resource load all construction activities in the schedule with the material equipment and manpower planned to be utilized in accomplishing each activity .
provide a full explanation of the resource loading in the wn .
the engineer reserves the right to specify the number of activities and to require an additional breakdown of the activities at any time .
utilize activity codes to categorize activities by at least the following project area project phase and responsibility e.g .
contractor or specific subcontractors .
provide a wn as part of the icpm .
explain the sequence of work the critical path interim completion dates project phasing nonwork days or periods maintenance of traffic and labor and equipment resources .
explain how the icpm provides for permit requirements environmental requirements coordination with other public contractors milestone dates for the contract or other related contracts coordination with other entities coordination with all utility companies special nonwork days or periods and weather .
explain the specific scope of each activity and the basis used to determine the original duration of each activity i.e .
num num critical path method project schedule production rates and anticipated quantities .
address all activities quantified in the contract documents .
explain the following in the wn .
a relationships between activities not obviously identified .
b equipment usage and limitations .
c manpower usage and limitations .
d use of additional shifts and overtime .
e activity codes abbreviations and activity identification system .
f all calendars utilized in the cpm .
g date or time constraints .
h all abbreviations .
i use of calendars .
j scheduling of weather and temperature sensitive activities .
complete and submit the proposed icpm within num calendar days after receiving the notice of award .
submit five sets of all required information for review and acceptance .
do not start any work until the icpm is accepted .
upon issuance of the notice to proceed the start date utilized in the icpm will be adjusted to comply with the notice to proceed .
the engineer will complete the review of the icpm within num calendar days after submittal .
if required a joint review conference will be convened at which time the engineer and contractor may make corrections and adjustments to the proposed icpm .
if a revision is necessary due to the engineers review or the joint review conference submit the proposed revision within seven calendar days after receiving the engineers review comments or within seven calendar days after the date of the joint review conference whichever is the latest .
make revisions in accordance with the requirements for the icpm .
the engineer will respond to the revised icpm within seven calendar days after receipt .
any delay in starting work caused by the acceptance of the icpm by the engineer will not be considered as a basis for any adjustment in the contract amount or time .
upon notification that the icpm has been accepted that document will num num critical path method project schedule become the cpm of record .
the cpm of record shall be the contractors work plan for completing the entire contract as specified in the contract documents .
failure to adhere to the cpm of record will be cause for the administration to deny requests for additional compensation or extensions of the contract duration and may result in the withholding of pay estimates .
cpm updates .
provide monthly updates of the cpm of record .
update submissions shall include the activity data as specified in a through e of the icpm .
use the update to describe the progress to date .
the wn shall include a description of the work performed during the update periods current critical path the amount of float on the critical path any delays or disruptions experienced during the period of the update any change in manpower or equipment and any potential delays or disruptions .
the scheduling representative and the engineer will meet to review mutually agree to and signoff on the information required to update the schedule actual start and finish dates remaining durations and percentages complete .
use an acceptable update form .
the data date for each update shall be seven days prior to the cutoff date of the pay estimate for that month .
submit the update within seven calendar days from the data date .
failure to submit the update on a timely basis may result in the withholding of pay estimates .
upon acceptance by the engineer the update shall become the cpm of record for the period between its data date and the data date of the next approved update or revision .
do not include any revisions to the cpm without prior approval .
revisions to the schedule of record .
revisions are defined as one or more of the following a a change in the original duration of an activity .
b a change in the logic of the schedule .
c a change in the calendars or to the calendar to which an activity is assigned .
d a change to resources .
e a change to any actual date previously established .
f the deletion or addition of an activity .
num num critical path method project schedule g a change to addition of or deletion of a date or time constraint .
h a change to addition of or deletion of an activity code .
i a change to an activity description .
j any change other than updating an activity .
discuss any proposed revision to the cpm verbally with the engineer .
if the revision is minor in nature the engineer may allow the revision to be included on the next update of the cpm .
if the engineer determines that the revision is not minor in nature submit the proposed revision for review and approval prior to deviating from the approved cpm .
when a revision to the cpm is required due to changes in the contract initiated by the engineer immediately contact the engineer to discuss the changes .
if the revision is minor in nature the engineer may allow the revision to be included on the next update of the cpm .
if the engineer determines that the revision is not minor in nature submit the proposed revision for review and approval prior to deviating from the approved cpm .
the engineer may allow a deviation from the approved cpm for specific mitigating activities .
submit the proposed revision in the same format and with the same requirements used for the icpm .
the proposed revision shall be made to the cpm of record at the time the revision is made i.e .
the revision shall include all update information and revisions previously approved and the additional progress to the date of the revision .
the wn accompanying the proposed revision shall describe the reason for the revision the resulting critical path and all particulars of the revision .
these shall include but not be limited to changes in the method or manner of the work changes in specifications changes in resources addition or deletion of work increased or decreased quantities defective work and acceleration of the work .
the engineer will review and respond to the proposed revision within num calendar days after receipt .
resubmit if required within seven calendar days after receipt of the engineers review comments .
the administration reserves the right to reject any proposed revision that adversely impacts the administration utilities or other concerned parties .
extensions of contract time or incentivedisincentive date .
make requests for extension of contract time in writing and subject to the notice and timeliness of submission provisions as provided for elsewhere in the num num critical path method project schedule contract .
requests for an extension of contract time or change in an incentivedisincentive date will be evaluated by the engineers analysis of the cpm of record and any proposed revision submitted .
the request shall include a wn of the events which would require an extension of the contract time or incentivedisincentive date .
only delays to activities that affect the contract completion date or incentivedisincentive date will be considered for an extension of contract time .
the extension of the specified contract completion date or incentivedisincentive date will be based upon the number of calendar days the contract completion date or incentivedisincentive date is impacted as determined by the engineers analysis .
when an acceptable update or revision is not submitted within the time limits prescribed above pay estimates may be withheld until an acceptable update or revision is submitted .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction .
not applicable .
num measurement and payment .
the accepted initial critical path method project schedule critical path method project schedule revisions and all accepted critical path method project schedule updates will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for the cpm project schedule item .
fifty percent of the lump sum price will be paid upon acceptance of the initial critical path method project schedule except when the price bid exceeds half of one percent of the total contract price bid .
the balance will be paid as a monthly prorated sum based upon the specified contract duration .
this monthly payment will be made on the next progress payment following the administrations acceptance of the required monthly critical path method project schedule updates .
when the price bid for the cpm project schedule exceeds half of one percent of the total contract price the total progress payments for the critical path method project schedule will be limited to half of one percent of the total contract price .
any remaining balance over half of one percent of the total contract price bid will be paid upon final contract payment .
num num activities chart project schedule section num activities chart project schedule num description .
plan schedule and construct the project using an activities chart ac .
the ac shall break down into detail the contract time required to perform the work activities for the duration of the project .
use the ac for coordinating and monitoring the work specified in the contract documents including activities of subcontractors vendors suppliers utilities railroads and other parties associated with the construction of the contract .
initial activities chart project schedule iac .
the iac shall consist of a a chronologically sequenced bar chart in which work activity durations shall be represented by working days days or completion date as specified in the invitation for bids ifb .
b a written narrative wn describing the original sequence of work number of shifts per day number of hours per shift number and composition of crews and the equipment to be utilized on each work activity .
list subcontracting activities .
expend the entire contract time specified in the ifb .
the engineer reserves the right to specify the number of activities and require additional breakdown of the activities at any time .
complete the proposed iac within num days after receiving the notice of award .
submit five sets for review and approval .
the engineer will review the iac within num days after receipt .
if required a joint review conference will be convened at which time the engineer and contractor may make corrections and adjustments to the iac .
submit revisions to the iac due to the engineers review or the joint review conference within seven days from the date of the review for another review .
submit the revisions in the format used in the iac .
the engineer will respond to the revised iac within seven days after receipt .
no construction work shall begin until the iac is accepted .
time charges shall begin no later then the on or before date of the notice to proceed .
any delay in starting work caused by the acceptance of the iac by the engineer will not be a basis for any monetary claim .
the administration may consider a noncompensable contract time extension if warranted .
num num activities chart project schedule upon notification that the iac is accepted that document will become the ac of record acr .
the acr shall be the work plan for completing the entire contract as specified in the contract documents .
failure to adhere to the latest approved acr will be cause for the administration to deny requests for additional compensation or extensions of the contract duration .
revisions to the acr .
revisions shall consist of one or a combination of the following a a change in the duration of an activity .
b a change in the logic of the schedule .
c the deletion or addition of one or more activities .
proposed revisions to the acr may be submitted at any time during the life of the contract .
submit a proposed revision whenever the activities differ from the accepted acr .
submit the revision in the same format used for the iac and within num days from the date on which activities deviated from the accepted acr .
include data from all acr updates that have been accepted by the administration .
the wn accompanying the revisions shall describe the reason for the revision the interdependence of the work activities and all duration modifications to the acr .
these shall include but not be limited to changes in the method or manner of the work changes in specifications addition or deletion of work increased or decreased quantities defective work and acceleration of the work .
the engineer will review the acr and respond to the proposed revision within num days after receipt .
the administration reserves the right to deny any proposed revision that adversely impacts the administration utilities or other interested parties .
acr updates .
submit monthly updates of the acr .
submit updates in the same format as the iac .
describe the progress of the project to date .
include a description of the current work any delays or disruptions experienced during the period of the update any change in manpower or equipment the inclusion of any schedule revisions and any potential delays or disruptions .
when a delay or disruption to the work identified in the acr update is believed to be the responsibility of the administration submit a revision to the acr within num days after the submittal of the update .
num num sampling devices and testing equipment monthly job site progress meetings .
the administration and the contractor shall hold monthly job site progress meetings to discuss the progress of the project and update the acr .
arrange to have a representative of each subcontractor currently working on the project in attendance .
submit the acr updates within num days from the date of the monthly meeting .
the engineer will review the update and advise the contractor of its acceptability prior to the next monthly meeting .
extensions of contract time .
any written request for an extension of time shall be accompanied by a revised acr documenting the actual delay to the contract completion date .
include a wn of the events necessitating the extension of the contract time .
only delays to activities that affect the contract completion date will be considered for a time extension .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction .
not applicable .
num measurement and payment .
activities chart project schedule will not be measured but the cost to develop prepare write record meetings revise update and all incidentals necessary to complete the work will be included in the other pay items specified in the contract documents .
section num sampling devices and testing equipment num description .
furnish and maintain sampling devices and testing equipment with accessories that are required to sample and test materials used on the project .
the sampling and testing equipment will be used by administration employees as directed by the engineer .
all equipment shall be as approved by the office of materials technology .
furnish the sampling devices and testing equipment to the engineer at least five days prior to commencement of work on the project .
all equipment shall remain in the engineers possession until completion of all sampling and testing on the project .
unless otherwise specified all testing equipment accessories and unused sampling devices will be returned to the contractor at the completion of the project .
num materials .
furnish all applicable sampling devices and containers required by the administrations materials manual including all inserts sample testing and frequency guide and this specification .
quantities will be designated by the engineer at the preconstruction meeting .
num num sampling devices and testing equipment num construction .
testing equipment requirements .
maintain the equipment in good working condition and submit a written certification to the administration stating when the testing equipment was last calibrated or inspected by an administration approved testing agency .
ensure that the equipment is calibrated at the frequency required for that type of equipment as specified in the test method and aashto rnum .
if any testing equipment or accessories are stolen become defective or for any other reason do not function as intended replace with an equal or better unit at no additional cost to the administration within eight hours after notification .
num sampling devices and testing equipment with accessories .
the following is a general list for sampling devices and testing equipment to be furnished by the contractor for the specified testing .
contact the office of materials technology materials management division with any questions concerning the requirements for sampling devices testing equipment and accessories .
the devices testing equipment and accessories will be randomly inspected during independent assurance audits .
a sampling devices from the administrations materials manual .
num soil bags able to hold at least num lb .
num screw top cans num qt .
num friction top cans num qt and num gal .
num plastic jar num gal .
num flow panels for joint sealer .
b testing equipment and accessories from the administrations materials manual determination of moisture content of aggregates msmt num .
num electric hot plate or a gas burner including bottle and fuel .
num scale or balance conforming to m num class gnum .
num metal container such as large frying pan or equivalent .
num pointing trowel or large spoon .
num num sampling devices and testing equipment c field determination of the amount of stabilization agent in bases and subbases msmt num .
num scale or balancing conforming to m num class g num having a capacity of at least num lbsample containers .
num bench brush .
num large spoon or scoop .
num sampling mat consisting of a sheet of plywood or canvas with a surface of at least num yd .
num tape measure .
d field determination of moisture density relations of soils msmt num .
refer to msmt num. e hot applied joint materials sealer and crack filler msmt num .
flow panels brass panel may be used in lieu of a tin panel .
f inplace density of embankment subbase base surface and shoulder material t num t num t num and msmt num .
num cylindrical compaction molds num and num ftnum .
num compaction rammers num and num lb .
num num in .
straightedge .
num scale or balance conforming to m num class g num having a capacity of at least num lb .
num two num in .
pie pans .
num num in .
frying pan .
num num in .
rocker set complete with pan .
num one each of the following sieves conforming to m num num size in .
shape size openings num square num in .
num square num in .
num square no .
num num square no .
num num round no .
num for density sand .
num sampling devices and testing equipment num field density plate with recess to accommodate sand cone apparatus .
num steel pan num x num in .
num electric plate or gas burner including bottle an fuel .
num soil density pick .
num precalibrated sand cone density apparatus .
num spatula num in .
num two water pails .
num bag of density sand .
num stencil brush bench brush sprinkling can large spoon and sample shovel .
g sampling hot mix asphalt prior to compaction msmt num performed by the paving contractor .
num a num ft measuring tape .
num random selection cards numbered from num to width of the paving lane in num ft increments .
num sample boxes .
num spatula .
num spray paint or other suitable marking material .
num gps equipment .
num masonry nails or equivalent .
num num sampling devices and testing equipment num thermometers num to numf .
num square end shovel fire shovel or grain shovel .
num scoop .
num num ft of num gauge mechanical wire or equivalent to tie through each hole of the plate template .
h concrete tests .
test method slump t num air content pressure method t num air content volumetric method t num sampling t num temperature t num num air meter pressure type for conventional concrete and rolla meter for lightweight concrete .
num air bulb .
num air pump .
num rubber mallet .
num slump cone with rod .
num steel straight edge .
num large scoop .
num trowel .
num num in .
rod for latex cylinder .
num unit weight bucket for light weight concrete .
num sprinkle can or bucket for water .
num postal scale only for lightweight concrete .
num thermometer num to num f. num num x num cylinder molds .
num num tree preservation area num num x num in .
cylinder molds for latex concrete .
num measurement and payment .
sampling devices and testing equipment will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to items of work for which they are required .
section num thru num reserved section num tree preservation area num description .
establish and maintain a tree preservation area tpa .
num materials .
temporary orange construction fence num fertilizer num num tree preservation program tpp .
the administration will develop a tpp to establish the goals and specify the procedures for tree branch pruning brush removal tree felling tree root pruning tree fertilizing and other tree preservation operations to protect trees and vegetation within the tpa .
num construction .
num maryland licensed tree expert lte .
a lte shall perform or directly supervise the operations specified in the contract documents and the tpp in conformance with the maryland roadside tree law the forest conservation act and accepted arboricultural practices .
num delineation .
delineate the perimeter of the tpa as specified in the contract documents .
num temporary orange construction fence tocf .
ensure that the delineated tpa is approved prior to installing the tocf .
perform installation and maintenance as specified in num .
complete installation of the tocf before a beginning clearing and grubbing operations .
b installing erosion and sediment controls .
c conducting the tree preservation meeting .
num num tree preservation area d performing tree preservation operations .
num tree preservation meeting .
prior to beginning work meet at the tpa with the engineer the landscape operations division and the lte to review the tpp num tree preservation operations .
maintain the tpa as specified in the tpp and the contract documents .
perform the following operations as specified in the tpp .
a tree branch pruning .
section num. b brush removal .
section num. c tree felling .
section num. d tree root pruning .
section num. e tree fertilizing .
section num .
num prohibited activities within the tpa .
prohibited activites a felling removing or harming any tree or plant designated for preservation .
b removing wood soil stones and other natural materials .
c any kind of foot or vehicular traffic .
d driving storing washing or maintaining trucks or construction equipment .
e placing backfill stacking or storing supplies .
f grading trenching draining dewatering and burning activities .
g dumping waste or storing toxic or hazardous materials .
num num tree preservation area num restricted activities .
the following activities are restricted in the area near the tpa unless authorized by the engineer .
restricted activites a felling trees .
b grading that will disrupt drainage patterns .
c draining and dewatering activities .
d storing construction equipment .
e truck washing and maintenance activities .
f dumping waste and storing toxic or hazardous materials .
g burning and trenching activities .
num cleanup and restoration .
when construction activities are complete remove the tocf construction materials and debris without damaging trees in the tpa and adjacent areas .
grade the perimeter of the tpa to blend with nearby areas .
seed as specified in section num .
num damage repair .
refer to num .
num damage compensation .
refer to num .
num measurement and payment .
work performed as specified in the tree preservation program or contract documents will be measured and paid for one or more of the items listed below .
payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num temporary orange construction fence .
refer to num .
num tree branch pruning .
refer to num .
num brush removal .
refer to num .
num tree felling .
refer to num .
num tree root pruning .
refer to num .
num tree fertilizing .
refer to num .
num the licensed tree expert services will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for the clearing and grubbing item .
num category num grading section numroadway excavation class num class numa class num num description .
excavate and grade for roadways and appurtenances to the lines and grades specified .
num classification .
class num all excavation where the width of the bottom of the cut is num ft or more .
class numa all excav ation of unsuitable material below the lowest excavation limits established .
class num all excavation where the width of the bottom of the cut is less than num ft. excavation for flumes ditches outside cut or fill slopes and stream and channel changes are included in this classification unless otherwise specified .
num excavation .
excavation includes the following a cut areas within the boundary faces of the typical cross sections specified including ditches within the cut sections entrances approach roads streets intersections gutters ditches berm ditches and flumes .
b topsoil salvaged within the specified limits of excavation or as directed .
c the removal and disposal of existing pavement sidewalks curb and combination curb and gutter when within the limits of class num or class num excavation .
perform this work as specified in section num. d the removal and disposal of below grade structures other than as specified in sections num and num .
num materials .
not applicable .
num num roadway excavation class num class numa class num num construction .
num grading units .
each unit is the surface area of erodible earth that can be exposed to construction operations without undue erosion or sedimentation .
refer to num for the size and number of units that can be opened at one time .
num use of excavated materials .
refer to tcnum and section num .
do not waste excavated material without prior approval .
do not use borrow unless provisions have been made for utilizing all available suitable excavated material in embankments .
num broken pavement material .
existing pavement sidewalks gutter curb and combination curb and gutter within the excavation may be broken and used in embankments provided that the materials conform to num .
if the engineer determines that the material is unsuitable dispose of it as excess or unsuitable material .
num rock excavation .
a boulders and rock .
boulders and rock from the excavation may be broken and used in embankment if the materials conform to num. b blasting .
refer to tcnum .
where rock encountered in cuts requires drilling and blasting finished slopes shall remain reasonably straight and clean .
c presplitting .
when presplitting of rock slopes is specified perform the presplitting operation prior to the primary blasting .
apply the knowledge gained from excavation of the presplit face to subsequent presplitting operations .
do not drill any portion of any primary blast hole closer to the proposed finished slope than half the spacing of the drilling pattern .
submit a plan for the proposed presplitting operations for approval .
include the drill size lift height explosive and detonator specifications loading pattern stemming materials stemming depth charge size and charge timing .
limit the initial presplit shot to a length of num ft .
drill num to num in .
diameter holes on the same plane along the slope line and at the slope angle specified in the contract documents .
unless otherwise directed drill holes on maximum num ft centers and to a maximum depth of num ft .
if the vertical depth of cut to be presplit is greater than the maximum permissible depth of holes as determined by the engineer perform the blasting in two or more num roadway excavation class num class numa class num num lifts .
in this case set back the first line of drill holes a sufficient distance from the slope line to allow for a num ft offset for each succeeding line of drill holes .
before proceeding excavate the initial presplit shot for inspection by the engineer .
if the results are found to be satisfactory continue the presplitting using the approved drilling and loading pattern .
whenever the presplitting is found to be unsatisfactory make adjustments in the operations and repeat the inspection procedure used for the initial presplit shot .
ensure that the presplit face is within num in .
from the front of the line of drill holes and num ft from the back of the line of drill holes except where the character of the material badly broken rock vertical seams etc .
will result in irregularities .
extend the line of presplit holes at least num ft beyond the limits of the primary blast holes or to the end of the cut .
use cartridged explosives that are manufactured for presplitting and that are no more than half the diameter of the presplit hole .
do not use bulk explosives .
the engineer may stop the presplitting operations wherever the rock is of a character that no apparent advantage is gained .
num frozen material .
do not place frozen material in embankments .
stockpile the material outside the construction limits and reserve it for future use .
replace any material that is wasted .
rehandling of excavated material and replacement of wasted material shall be at no additional cost to the administration .
num serrated slopes .
serrated cut slopes have continuously benched faces .
construct serrated slopes as specified or as directed .
construct the benches as the excavation progresses parallel to each other level and not graded to drain .
num drainage .
construct all drainage as specified in section num .
maintain the roadbed in a welldrained condition at all times .
do not place excavated material within num ft of the edge of the ditch or channel .
do not allow material to obstruct normal surface drainage into the ditch or channel .
construct ditches draining from cuts to embankments or otherwise to avoid damage to embankments by erosion .
prior to placing any surface material install all drainage necessary to provide free and uninterrupted flow of surface and underground water .
when stabilized side and outlet ditches provide the principal means for drainage cut and stabilize ditches as the first order of work in the grading operation .
num num roadway excavation class num class numa class num num excavation beyond specified limits .
except by written authorization do not widen cut or excavation sections beyond the limits of the typical cross section specified .
when authorized the procurement of additional material for embankments unless otherwise specified under borrow excavation will be as follows a finished excavation .
finish the widening of cut sections so that the completed flat and slope areas are uniform in appearance .
do not cut slopes steeper than specified or as directed .
b roadway excavation limits .
num if the engineer directs the contractor to excavate beyond the limits of the typical cross section originally proposed prior to starting roadway excavation in a cut section all material within the limits will be classified as class num excavation .
num if the contractor with approval of the engineer elects to obtain additional material by widening cuts beyond the limits of the typical cross section originally proposed and within the rightofway or easement the excavation of the materials will be classified as class num excavation .
c borrow excavation beyond specified limits .
if the engineer directs the contractor to excavate beyond the limits of the typical cross section originally proposed after the contractor has substantially completed the roadway excavation in a cut section all material removed beyond the limits of the typical cross section will be classified as borrow excavation .
num unsuitable material .
remove unstable or other unsuitable material encountered at or below the specified typical section to the extent directed by the engineer as class numa excavation .
in rock areas the limit of measurement for excavation will be the bottom of the typical section .
except when rock is encountered at subgrade backfill all voids created by the removal of unsuitable material using the material specified .
furnish material that conforms to section num .
num coal deposits .
notify the bureau of mines when coal is encountered .
send the notice to the director bureau of mines maryland department of natural resources .
dispose of any coal encountered on the project as directed by the engineer .
num widening for staged roadway construction .
limit the area to be excavated for widening to the extent that the excavated area can be backfilled within the same working day using the excavated material or common borrow to form a temporary wedge .
refer to standard no .
num roadway excavation class num class numa class num num md num for the area to be backfilled .
maintain the num or flatter fill slope .
compact the material as directed and leave it in place until placement of the graded aggregate base course .
num measurement and payment .
roadway excavation will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for the pertinent class of excavation .
the payment will be full compensation for all excavation and hauling blasting formation and compaction of embankments and backfills disposing of excess and unsuitable materials preparation and completion of subgrade and shoulders except as otherwise specified serrated slopes rounded and transition slopes and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
payment will not be made for excavation of any material used for purposes other than those designated .
when only one bid item for either class num or class num excavation is established in the contract documents all roadway excavation except class numa excavations shall be included in the unit bid price regardless of the width of the excavation .
num limits of measurement .
a roadway excavation .
the lower limit of measurement will be the surface upon which roadway materials including base course surfacing or selected capping material is to be placed in either pavement or shoulder areas .
b concrete pavements .
measurement will be taken to num ft outside of the outer edge of the pavement on each side .
where concrete curb or combination concrete curb and gutter is built contiguous to the pavement measurement for excavation will be the outer limits of the concrete curb or combination curb and gutter .
c rocks and boulders .
if ledge rock scattered rock or boulders of num cy or larger volume are removed any resulting undercutting approved by the engineer will be measured for payment .
d slides or breakages .
slides or breakages not attributable to the contractors negligence as determined by the engineer will be measured and included in the final quantities for class num excavation .
e topsoil and root mat .
measurement will be made for the removal of topsoil and root mat when it is required to be removed from fill areas .
in the case of removal of root mat class num excavation shall only apply when the strata underlying the root mat are suitable for supporting embankment .
if material is num num roadway excavation class num class numa class num unsuitable for supporting embankment then removal of root mat and unsuitable material will be measured as class numa excavation .
excavation will always be measured in its original position .
no liquids will be included in any measurement .
no measurement will be made for any additional excavation required to construct new curb curb and gutter paved ditch paved gutter paved flume or sidewalk paving .
num template method of measurement .
unless otherwise specified excavation will be computed using the template from preliminary cross sections of the original ground surface combined with templates of the typical cross sections .
if this method is used the following volumes will be excluded .
a undercutting for cushion over rock .
b entrances and intersections for which details are not specified in the contract documents and for which no quantity was allowed in the contract documents .
c salvaged topsoil from under embankments .
d removal of root mat from under embankments .
the template method will not be used a where there are approved changes in design and typical section .
b where there are approved deviations from planned slope faces in rock cuts .
c where the original ground conditions upon which preliminary cross sections were taken have been changed before the contractor begins work .
d for class numa excavation .
e when the work of the contractor does not conform to the line grade or cross section specified in the contract documents or as changed by subsequent written authorization by the engineer .
unless corrective action is required payment will be based on the changed quantities as determined by the cross section method in num .
num channel or stream change excavation class num num num cross section method of measurement .
when specified quantities for payment of excavation will be computed by average end areas from the cross sections of the original ground combined with cross sections of the completed work .
class num excavation will be allowed in median areas of cut sections only where num in .
or greater of topsoil is to be placed .
this method will also apply to class numa and class num excavation unless otherwise specified .
num presplitting will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price per cubic yard for the pertinent class of excavation in which it occurs .
num removal of existing pavement sidewalk paved ditches curb or combination curb and gutter outside the limits of construction will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num removal of existing pavement sidewalk paved ditches curb and combination curb and gutter within the limits of any class of excavation will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price per cubic yard for the pertinent class of excavation in which it occurs .
num the contractor or the administration may elect to recompute quantities in any section where it is believed the planned quantities are incorrect .
when recomputation reveals an error the corrected quantity will be used .
num the excavated material or common borrow required to fill the temporary wedge area as specified in num maintaining the num or flatter slope compaction and removal of the material will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for the pertinent class of excavation .
refer to num for measurement and payment of drums .
num backfill for unsuitable material will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for the pertinent item specified in the contract documents .
section num channel or stream change excavation class num num description .
excavate for changes in channels or streams when specified .
use all suitable material for the construction of the project .
dispose of unsuitable material as directed .
num num borrow excavation num materials .
not applicable .
num construction .
section num .
num measurement and payment .
class num excavation will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
the payment will be full compensation for all excavation and hauling formation and compaction of embankments and backfill backfilling old stream beds or otherwise disposing of excess and unsuitable materials and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
material will be measured in its original position and the volume computed by the method of average end area .
the cross sectional area measured will not include liquids .
measurement for class num excavation excludes any material removed outside the limits of payment as specified in the contract documents .
section num borrow excavation num description .
furnish excavate haul and place approved materials for embankments and backfills when sufficient quantities of suitable materials are not available from other excavations specified in the contract documents .
this includes all work prescribed for backfills embankments subgrade and earth shoulders all necessary clearing and grubbing the removal and disposal of overburden or other unsuitable spoil material and the trimming shaping dressing draining and reclamation of the pit or location from which borrow material is secured .
refer to num before securing borrow .
num contractors options .
as a duly authorized agent of the administration select one of the following three methods to obtain borrow material for use on public highway contracts option num acquire material from a licensed commercial operating supplier .
option num make application to the maryland department of the environment under the annotated code of maryland environment subtitle num entitled surface mining .
option num make application to t he administration to operate under the standard adopted in conformance with the annotated code of maryland environment subtitle num surface mining subsection num entitled num num borrow excavation exemptions .
if this option is selected submit an application to the administration fulfilling all the requirements of the cited subtitle .
provide notification of the option selected to the administration .
num notice to contractorborrow pits .
if proposed a borrow pit may be established on privately owned property .
the administration may grant an exemption for a surface mining permit normally issued by the maryland department of the environment water management administration wma .
before a permit can be granted submit written proof to the administration that all local permits or approvals have been secured for the borrow pits .
an exemption under option num will require approval of an excavation and reclamation plan along with the drainage patterns and methods of attaining satisfactory drainage and soil conservation as the work progresses .
the plan shall provide for surface restoration suitable for the proposed subsequent land use after reclamation is completed and the proposed method of accomplishment .
num borrow pits within jurisdictional resources .
borrow pits located within tidal or nontidal wetlands waterways and num year floodplains require approval by the appropriate federal and state authorities .
obtain and provide all required permits .
if the pit is in operation and the administration discovers that the work does not meet these regulations the administration will notify the contractor to make the necessary corrections and all other operations shall cease until the work is in compliance .
num materials .
section num .
num construction .
num clearing and grubbing .
section num .
num borrow pit material .
notify the engineer at least num days in advance of the opening of any borrow pit so that soil analysis elevations and measurements of the ground may be made .
after the pit is opened use the excavated material only for the project intended .
do not excavate additional material for other purposes until a final survey is made of the pit .
num borrow pit after excavation .
meet the requirements of the reclamation permit plan after the necessary quantity of materials has been removed .
avoid steep slopes and sheer faces .
seed and mulch all num num borrow excavation disturbed areas as specified in section num at no additional cost to the administration .
shaping and seeding requirements do not apply to commercial borrow pits .
num borrow excavation beyond specified limits .
refer to num .
num compaction .
refer to num .
num measurement and payment .
borrow excavation will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for the pertinent borrow item .
the payment will be full compensation for clearing and grubbing furnishing excavating and hauling sloping draining and reclamation of pits if option num or num is selected the formation and compaction of embankments backfills subgrade manipulation and additives for select borrow all work and materials for earth shoulders except as otherwise specified disposing of all unsuitable spoil material and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
when requested by the contractor in writing the engineer may approve an alternate method of measurement for the computation of borrow excavation quantities .
this alternate method will not be considered for approval unless the contractor can show that the cross section method computed by average end area is not a feasible method of measurement .
when approved in writing this alternate method will consist of measuring the borrow excavation in approved hauling vehicles .
refer to tcnum and the following a prior to the start of hauling operations provide the identification number of each vehicle to be used .
the engineer will determine the water level capacity of each vehicle .
the measured capacity will be multiplied by a factor of num to determine the pay volume .
b furnish a delivery ticket to the engineer for each load of borrow material delivered to the project with the information listed below .
only tickets signed by the engineer will be used in the computation of the borrow quantity .
num the suppliers name .
num the administrations contract number .
num the date and ticket number .
num vehicle identification number .
num num embankment and subgrade num type of material delivered .
num pay volume computed as specified in a .
section num embankment and subgrade num description .
construct embankment and subgrade using suitable material obtained from roadway structure borrow and other excavation included in the contract .
place process and compact material to the specified line and grade .
num materials .
unless otherwise specified use soils and soil aggregate mixtures that meet the common borrow requirements specified in section num .
num rock .
rock may be used in embankments if individual pieces do not exceed num in .
in any dimension .
larger size rocks may be wasted with the approval of the engineer .
num frozen material .
refer to num .
in addition do not cover any material that freezes after being placed in the embankment until it has thawed .
num embankment adjacent to structures .
the engineer may require the use of specially selected material adjacent to structures to protect the structure from damage .
do not use rock .
at locations of pile supported foundations use embankment material that will allow piles to be easily driven .
num construction .
num embankment foundation .
a foundation material .
the engineer will inspect and approve the area prior to construction of the embankment .
remove topsoil root mat and unsuitable material to the depth directed .
b embankment over existing pavement .
thoroughly break up scarify or remove the pavement as specified or as directed .
c test rolling .
when sp ecified or directed test the foundation by rolling with a num ton pneumatic tired roller or as approved .
num placing and spreading .
place the material in horizontal layers across the full width of the embankment .
maintain an adequate num num embankment and subgrade crown to provide drainage at all times .
maintain side slopes at the specified slope throughout the progress of the work .
a embankment on unstable ground .
when embankment is to be constructed on ground that will not support the weight of the construction equipment the first layer of the fill may be constructed by depositing material in a layer no thicker than that required to support the equipment .
place subsequent layers as specified in b. b earth embankment .
except when specified do not place layers exceeding num in .
compacted depth .
c rock embankment .
num determine the thickness of layers by the size of the rock or a num in .
maximum depth whichever is less .
where the embankment is less than num ft below the subgrade at the profile grade line place the material in layers not exceeding num in .
compacted depth .
solidly fill and choke these layers with spalls rock dust or earth .
fill and compact each layer before placing the next layer .
num place the rock material to a uniform top surface determined by connecting with straight lines the points on the typical cross section that are num in .
below any median ditch invert and num in .
below the bottom of the pavement structure and then sloping downward and outward under the shoulders at the rate of num in .
per ft to the outer slope of the embankment .
num unless otherwise specified construct the remaining upper portion of the embankment using suitable earth that is free from stones retained on a num in .
sieve .
num benching .
when placing and compacting embankment on hillsides or against existing embankments continuously bench the slopes where the slope is steeper than num when measured at right angles to the roadway .
perform the benching operation as the embankment is constructed in layers .
maintain a bench width of at least num ft .
begin each horizontal cut at the intersection of the original ground and the vertical sides of the previous cut .
if the material cut from the benches meets embankment requirements compact this material along with the new embankment material .
num compaction .
immediately after spreading each layer of fill compact the material with approved equipment .
perform all rolling in a longitudinal direction along the embankment .
begin at the outer edges num num embankment and subgrade and progress towards the center .
vary the travel paths of traffic and equipment over the width of the embankment to aid in obtaining uniform compaction .
compact the material that is num ft below the top of subgrade to at least num percent of the maximum dry density per t num .
compact the top num ft to at least num percent of the maximum dry density .
determine inplace density per msmt num or num .
when necessary add water or dry the layer in order to compact to the required density .
when finally compacted to the required density the resultant moisture content of embankment material shall be within two percentage points of optimum .
provide a portland cement concrete compaction block having dimensions num x num x num in .
weighing at least num lb and with one num x num in .
level and broomed working surface .
num stability of embankments .
remove and replace with acceptable material any embankment or portion thereof that has been constructed with unsuitable material .
remove and replace unstable material and remove and replace portions of the embankment that become unstable or displaced as the result of the construction operations .
num protection of structures and utilities during construction .
protect all structures and utilities from any damage in the handling processing or compacting of embankment or backfill material .
exercise caution near arches retaining walls culverts and utility trenches to prevent undue strain or movement .
in areas where rollers can not be used refer to section num .
num subgrade .
after all cuts embankment and backfilling have been substantially completed construct and shape the subgrade to the specified cross section .
test roll the subgrade as specified in numc .
num maintenance .
maintain the embankment and subgrade until final acceptance .
use acceptable material from excavation or borrow to replace embankment and subgrade material that may be lost or displaced as a result of natural causes such as storms and cloudbursts or as a result of unavoidable movement or settlement of the ground or foundation upon which the embankment and subgrade is constructed .
maintain ditches and drains at all times .
keep all traffic on the embankment and subgrade to a minimum .
remove ruts that are num in .
or more in depth by reshaping and recompacting .
num num test pit excavation num measurement and payment .
embankment subgrade and all necessary work will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price per cubic yard for the pertinent class of excavation .
the payment will be full compensation for the formation sprinkling compacting test rolling shaping scarifying breaking or removing of the existing pavement sloping trimming finishing maintaining embankments and subgrade and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
replacement of material lost as a result of natural causes will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for the pertinent class of excavation item or as directed by the engineer .
compaction by means of mechanical tampers or vibratory compactors will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the pertinent class of excavation item .
section num test pit excavation num description .
excavate and backfill test pits to determine the location of underground structures and utilities .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction .
determine the location of underground structures and utilities by test pit excavation prior to excavation operations .
excavate test pits at the location and to the size and depth authorized .
backfill test pits as specified in section num .
num measurement and payment .
test pit excavation will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for the material actually removed from within the limits specified .
the payment will be full compensation for all excavation tamped backfill and all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
any pavement to be replaced will be measured and paid for as specified in section num .
num num removal of existing pavement section num removal of existing pavement sidewalk paved ditches curb or combination curb and gutter num description .
remove to full depth and dispose of existing pavement sidewalk paved ditches curb or combination curb and gutter .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction .
num full depth saw cut .
saw cut to full depth the existing pavement sidewalk paved ditches curb or combination curb and gutter along the lines specified or as directed .
num use of removed pavement sidewalk paved ditches curb or combination curb and gutter .
when approved removed materials may be broken and used in the work .
refer to num .
num protection of retained pavement sidewalk paved ditches curb or combination curb and gutter .
protect all sections designated to remain from being damaged .
repair or replace damaged areas .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num removal of existing pavement sidewalk paved ditches curb or combination curb and gutter and full depth saw cuts within the limits of any class of excavation will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for the class of excavation in which it occurs .
num saw cuts removal of existing pavement sidewalk except as specified in num paved ditches and curb or combination curb and gutter except as specified in num outside the limits of any class of excavation will be measured in the original position and paid for as follows a saw cuts per linear foot when an item is included in the contract documents .
b removal of existing pavement sidewalk and paved ditches per cubic yard .
num num i removal of exist ng masonry c removal of existing curb or combination curb and gutter per linear foot .
when any material included in b or c is removed but not replaced backfilling and landscaping as directed by the engineer will not be included in contract unit price .
payment for this work will be made using the applicable items included in the contract documents .
section num removal of existing masonry num description .
remove all or part of existing concrete concrete block brick or stone structures headwalls toe walls etc .
including concrete piles .
refer to section num for removal of existing bridge structures box culverts .
retaining walls and noise barriers .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction .
num removal .
unless otherwise specified remove material to at least num ft below subgrade or existing ground .
except with written approval do not use blasting .
piles grillages and cribbing under removed masonry shall be cut off to the above limit .
num use of removed masonry .
masonry material may be broken and used in accordance with num .
material determined to be unsuitable shall be disposed of as excess or unsuitable material .
num protection of retained masonry .
repair or replace retained sections that are damaged due to the construction operations .
cut connecting edges and surfaces to the line and grade specified or as directed .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all excavation backfill disposal of excess or unsuitable material blasting and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num removal of existing masonry will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
num when specified in the contract documents removal of existing masonry will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
num num subgrade preparation num when a new structure is placed in the location of an existing structure the removal of the existing structure will be incidental to the new structure unless otherwise specified .
section num subgrade preparation num description .
prepare protect and maintain the subgrade prior to the construction of succeeding courses .
num materials .
section num .
num construction .
after roadway excavation and embankments are completed in conformance with section num fine grade and compact the subgrade to at least num percent of the maximum dry density per t num .
num removal and replacement of unsuitable material .
remove and dispose of all soft and unstable material and any other portions of the subgrade that will not properly compact .
replace with suitable material and compact .
num subgrade control .
bring the subgrade surface to line and grade and shape it to the specified cross section .
set grade for subgrade control both longitudinally and transversely with fixed controls not exceeding num ft spacing .
limit the finish subgrade deviation to num in .
from the established grade .
compact and smooth the subgrade over its full width by the use of an approved smooth faced steelwheeled roller approved by the engineer .
use mechanical tampers and vibratory compactors if rolling is not feasible .
num bleeder ditches .
maintain adequate open bleeder ditches along the subgrade at all times to keep it thoroughly drained .
maintain erosion and sediment control practices as specified in section num .
num subgrade maintenance .
prevent damage by heavy loads or equipment .
repair or replace any defects or damage .
num subgrade approval .
do not place subsequent cover material upon a frozen subgrade or any subgrade until it has been checked and approved .
num measurement and payment .
subgrade preparation including bleeder ditches and any mechanical tamping will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the pertinent items specified in the contract documents .
num num trimming existing ditches section num trimming existing ditches num description .
trim slope and shape existing ditches within the limits and to the lines and grades specified .
clearing and grubbing and the removal and disposal of surplus or unsuitable materials are included in the work .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction .
clear and grub as specified in section num .
trim slope and shape existing ditches to a uniform grade and cross section .
maintain a constant side slope having a maximum slope of num unless otherwise specified .
dispose of excess and unsuitable materials as specified in section num .
num measurement and payment .
trimming existing ditches will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot of trimmed ditch .
measurement will be along the center line of the ditch .
the payment will be full compensation for all clearing grubbing excavation disposal of surplus and unsuitable materials and for all labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num tamped fill num description .
compact the embankment and backfill materials by means of mechanical tampers or vibratory compactors .
use this method of compaction wherever materials can not be adequately compacted by other approved methods .
num materials .
section num .
num construction .
after approval has been given by the engineer place approved material in horizontal layers not exceeding num in .
loose depth over the entire area .
tamp and uniformly compact the material using mechanical tampers or vibratory compactors .
refer to num for moisture and compaction .
when backfilling around abutments retaining walls culverts utilities or other structures prevent any wedging action against the structure .
when placing backfill against existing slopes excavate benches or steps .
place the backfill in horizontal layers as described above and wide num num geosynthetic stabilized subgrade enough that there is a horizontal berm of thoroughly compacted material behind the structure at all times for a distance at least equal to the height of the structure remaining to be backfilled except insofar as undisturbed material protrudes into this space .
tamping may be required over additional widths when the material can not be adequately compacted by other methods .
when installing structures below subgrade in embankments place the tamped fill to a depth of num ft over the top of the structure .
in excavation sections extend the tamped fill to the surface of the finished earthwork .
num measurement and payment .
compacting embankments and backfills by mechanical tampers or vibratory compactors will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the pertinent items specified in the contract documents .
section num geosynthetic stabilized subgrade using graded aggregate base num description .
furnish and place a layer of geotextile and num in .
of graded aggregate base to bridge unstable material and minimize the use of undercutting .
use this item only when specified or directed .
in extremely unstable areas the engineer may increase the thickness of the graded aggregate base material .
num materials .
graded aggregate base num geotextile for subgrade stabilizationclass st num securing pins or staples num num construction .
num test strip .
in extremely unstable areas the engineer may direct that a test strip be constructed to determine the thickness of aggregate layer required to stabilize the area .
the engineer will determine the depth of aggregate to be used in the test strip .
construct the test strip a least num ft in length and at least one lane wide .
the results of the test strip will be used to determine the thickness of aggregate required for subsequent construction .
num grade preparation .
cut the area where the geotextile is to be placed to the depth shown or as directed .
bring the area to the specified line grade and cross section .
provide a grade that is smooth as practical and free of debris .
minimize construction traffic on the grade .
remove ruts by reshaping but do not overwork the grade .
have the grade num num geosynthetic stabilized subgrade approved prior to placement of the geotextile .
maintain adequate surface drainage as specified in num .
the engineer may waive compaction and moisture requirements for the underlying soil .
num geotextile placement .
place geotextile on the prepared surface for the full width of the area to be treated .
in areas where longitudinal underdrain is to be placed place the geotextile up to the edge of the proposed longitudinal underdrain trench but not where the trench is to be excavated .
unroll the geotextile parallel to the base line .
do not drag the geotextile across the grade .
remove wrinkles and folds by stretching and pinning .
overlap the geotextile at least num in .
at roll edges and ends .
overlap the end of the roll in the direction of aggregate placement with the roll being covered by aggregate on top of the next roll .
pin all roll ends and roll end overlaps a maximum of num ft on center .
pin roll edges and roll edge overlaps a maximum of num ft on center .
for curves fold or cut the geotextile and overlap in the direction of the turn .
pin folds in the geotextile a maximum of num ft on center .
immediately repair or replace damaged geotextile as directed .
overlap geotextile patches at least num ft into undamaged geotextile .
do not allow traffic including construction equipment on the bare geotextile .
num aggregate placement .
place the graded aggregate base as specified in section num with the following exceptions a placement and spreading .
place the graded aggregate base within three working days of geotextile placement .
use the end dumping and spreading method .
place a single lift parallel to the baseline and at the thickness required to provide the specified compacted depth .
keep the turning of construction equipment on the graded aggregate base to a minimum .
b density requirements .
i mmediately after placement compact the graded aggregate base material to the required density .
unless otherwise directed compact the top num in .
to at least num percent of maximum dry density within num percent optimum moisture .
use t num to determine the optimum moisture content and maximum dry density .
use msmt num or num to measure the inplace density .
compaction requirements will be waived for the graded aggregate base material below the top num in .
num num geosynthetic stabilized subgrade c vibration .
unless otherwise specified or directed do not vibrate graded aggregate base .
num measurement and payment .
geosynthetic stabilized subgrade using graded aggregate base will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
the payment will be full compensation for the test strip and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num category num drainage section num class num excavation for incidental construction num description .
excavate below the planned elevation as directed .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction .
excavate the area to the size depth and location as authorized .
backfill as specified in section num .
for excavated material refer to num .
num measurement and payment .
class num excavation for incidental construction will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
backfill .
backfill will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
section num selected backfill num description .
place selected backfill material as directed .
num materials .
no .
num aggregate num crusher run aggregate crnum num num construction .
replace unsuitable foundation material as directed .
refer to section num for compaction .
num measurement and payment .
selected backfill using no .
num aggregate or selected backfill using crusher run aggregate crnum will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
the payment will be full compensation for compaction and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work. . num num pipe culverts section num pipe culverts num description .
place the specified size and type of pipe on a firm bed to the specified line and grade make connections to existing pipes inlets end walls or manholes and clean the existing pipes .
num materials .
selected backfill num flowable backfill num concrete mix no .
num num brick num mortar num pipe num select borrow num num construction .
verify pipe lengths and gradients and obtain approval before installation .
when endwalls are visible from the roadway construct them parallel to the roadway with the askew pipe protruding through the end wall .
if not visible construct them normal to the center line of the pipe .
clean existing pipes and dispose of the material .
num excavation .
when a pipe is to be laid on existing ground on or under fill construct embankment to a height of at least num in .
but not more than num ft above the proposed top of the pipe .
then excavate to a width of twice the outside diameter of the pipe or the outside diameter plus num in .
on each side whichever is less .
for excavated material refer to num .
where soil does not meet the classification specified as suitable backfill remove to a depth of num inches below the bottom of the pipe elevation .
remove rock boulders or other hard lumpy or unyielding material to a depth of num inches below the bottom of the pipe elevation .
remove muck or other soft material to a depth necessary to establish a firm foundation .
where the soils permit ensure that the trench sides are vertical up to at least the midpoint of the pipe .
when rock is encountered remove and replaced it with at least num in .
of selected backfill .
when unsuitable foundation material is encountered remove and replace it with selected backfill for the full width of the trench .
num num pipe culverts num bedding .
place earth for bedding meeting the requirements of m num anum anum anum or anum .
the maximum particle size is num in .
do not use organic material stones larger than num in .
or frozen lumps .
ensure that moisture content is in the range of optimum content to permit thorough compaction .
selected backfill may be used .
place bedding for culverts num in .
or more in nominal horizontal diameter in an approved foundation shaped using a template that supports the pipe for at least num percent of its overall height .
num installation .
lay pipes with hubs upgrade .
a single lay hole through the shell of concrete pipe is permitted with an approved lifting device .
cast the lay hole in the pipe during fabrication or core it without damaging or exposing any reinforcement .
after installation permanently seal the lay hole by filling with mortar rubber plug or other approved means .
wood plugs are unacceptable .
lay holes that expose any reinforcement may not be used .
do not lay pipe in standing water or when weather conditions are deemed unsuitable by the engineer .
num joints .
seal pipe joints in a manner appropriate for the applicable pipe material .
reinforced concrete pipe .
seal joints with rubber type gaskets circular pipe or resilient type material elliptical pipe meeting m num .
mortar joints are unacceptable .
metal pipe .
use bell and spigot joints with integral rubber gaskets or butt pipes and seal using rubber gaskets with an approved coupling band meeting num .
plastic pipe .
use integral bell and spigot joints with rubber or neoprene gaskets meeting f num .
num pipe connections .
pipe connections may be either prefabricated or constructed in the field .
a field pipe connection includes cutting a hole in one pipe inserting and trimming the connecting pipe and placing a concrete collar using concrete mix no .
num at the connection .
finish the connection to provide a smooth surface .
in the case of corrugated pipes a welded connection may be substituted for the concrete collar .
coat the weld with a zincrich paint coating per m num .
for connections to drainage structures refer to num .
num pipe encasement .
when specified encase pipes using concrete mix no .
num .
num num pipe culverts num backfill .
when specified or directed use material meeting the requirements for select borrow selected backfill or flowable backfill .
large lumps clods frozen material or rocks are not acceptable .
for plastic pipe installations use backfill materials meeting the requirements of m num anum anum anum or anum .
place backfill along the side of the pipe for the full width of the trench in layers not exceeding an uncompacted depth of num in .
compact each layer simultaneously on both sides of the pipe using an approved mechanical tamper .
refer to section num .
compact thoroughly under the haunches of the pipe .
continue this method of filling and compaction until the backfill is completed to at least num in .
num in .
for plastic pipe above the top of pipe .
protect all pipes from damage due to construction equipment or other vehicular traffic .
backfill may be placed immediately after laying the pipe provided that all joints have been sealed .
place magneticallydetectable plastic tape in the trench immediately above the structural backfill .
the minimum thickness of the tape is num mils and the minimum tensile strength is num psi .
demark the tape as to its purpose i.e .
storm drain .
num removal of existing pipe culverts .
when specified remove and dispose of existing pipe culverts .
backfill as specified herein .
num relaying existing pipe .
when specified remove salvage and relay culverts according to these specifications relating to new pipe .
num abandoned pipes .
when specified plug abandoned pipes using concrete mix no .
num or brick masonry .
when specified fill pipes with flowable backfill .
refer to section num and num .
num clean existing pipes .
when specified clean existing pipes of all sediment and debris without damaging to the pipe and drainage structures .
remove and dispose of sediment and debris a specified in section num .
num inspection and acceptance .
no sooner than num days after installation visually inspect all new pipe in the presence of the engineer .
any cracks differential movement efflorence rust stains spalls exposed reinforcement slabing dents buckling holes damaged coating obstructions improperly engaged joints improper gasket placement excessive joint gaps misaligned joints excessive deflection or undue horizontal or vertical misalignment will be cause for repair or replacement at no cost to the administration .
video inspect pipe which can not be physically aceessed for inspection .
ensure that thermoplastic pipe deflection does not exceed num percent num num pipe culverts num measurement and payment .
the payment for the items specified in the contract documents will be full compensation for all applicable excavation sheeting shoring dewatering hauling invert paving storing rehandling of material removal and disposal of excess and unsuitable material tamped fill forming bed or foundation bedding backfill compaction inspection and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num new pipe culverts will be measured complete in place and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
when a new pipe is to be installed at the same location as an existing pipe the cost of removal and disposal of the existing pipe including end walls and end sections will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract price of new pipe .
num pipe connections and elbows will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
no deduction from the pipe measurement will be made for pipe connections .
connections to drainage structures containing prefabricated holes in which the pipe will be connected with grout or mortar will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the pertinent pipe item .
num excavation required below the planned elevation will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num removal of existing pipe will be measured and paid for per the total number of linear feet removed regardless of the condition .
when a multiple pipe installation is removed each pipe will be measured and paid for .
end walls end sections etc .
removed with the pipe will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract price .
num selected backfill will be measured and paid for as specified in section num .
num flowable backfill will be measured and paid for as specified in section num .
num select borrow will be measured and paid for as specified in section num .
num relaid existing pipe culvertsany size will be measured and paid for as specified in num unless otherwise specified in the contract documents .
num new end walls end sections etc .
will be measured and paid for as specified in section num .
num num structural plate pipe and arch culverts num removal of existing headwalls end sections etc .
that are not incidental to the contract price for the respective pipe items will be measured and paid for as specified in section num .
num encasement concrete and concrete or brick masonry to plug existing pipes will be measured and paid for at the contract price for the pertinent concrete mix no .
num for miscellaneous structures or brick masonry for miscellaneous structures item .
num clean existing pipe any size will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
removal of construction debris and sediment will not be measured for payment .
section num structural plate pipe and structural plate pipe arch culverts num description .
furnish and install structural plate pipe and structural plate pipe arch culverts .
num materials .
selected backfill num concrete mix no .
num num structural plate for pipe and pipe arches num num construction .
num fabrication .
submit working drawings including erection diagrams and strutting tables for approval .
include proposed lengths and lifting locations of preassembled sections in the erection diagrams .
upon approval shop fabricate the plates including required holes to the required dimensions .
ship the plates complete with proper markings and all necessary connection devices .
the plate configurations shall have radii and curvature according to aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
when bottom plates of circular pipes are specified to be thicker than top and side plates cover at least num percent of the periphery of the circle with the thicker plate .
for pipe arches the thicker plates shall include corner plates as well as bottom plates .
lay these culverts on a firm bed true to the specified line and grade .
along those edges of the plates that will form longitudinal seams in the finished structure stagger bolt holes in rows num in .
apart with one row in the valley and one in the crest of the corrugations unless otherwise num num structural plate pipe and arch culverts specified .
along those edges of the plates that will form circumferential seams in the finished structure provide a bolt spacing of not more than num in .
the diameter of the bolt holes in the longitudinal seams shall not exceed the diameter of the bolt by more than num in .
shop cut all edges to line and grade and keep them free from oxide and burrs .
stagger connections so that no more than three plates come together at any one point .
form plates to provide lap joints .
num excavation .
when a structural plate pipe or structural plate pipe arch is to be laid on existing ground on or under fill construct embankment to a height of at least num in .
but not more than num ft above the proposed top of the pipe .
then excavate the trench to a width of twice the outside diameter of the pipe or the outside diameter plus num in .
on each side whichever is less .
for excavated material refer to num .
num foundation preparation .
provide bedding as specified in num .
set rails and then screed the foundation to the exact shape of the bottom plates immediately prior to erection .
num erection .
when strutting is required it shall be uniform from end to end .
keep struts in place until backfills are completed .
tighten nuts and bolts to between num and num ftlb of torque .
when washers are specified place them under the turned element .
distribute bolts over the section being assembled .
align holes by shifting the plates .
for bottom plates place the nuts inside the structure .
do not draw the nuts tight until the section is assembled .
before backfilling tighten all nuts and test to ensure compliance with torque requirements .
num backfill .
earth for backfill shall be free from large lumps clods frozen material and rocks .
place it along the side of the pipe for the full width of the trench in layers not exceeding an uncompacted depth of num in .
compact each layer simultaneously on both sides of the pipe using an approved mechanical tamper .
refer to section num .
compact the backfill thoroughly under the haunches of the pipe .
elevate the backfill uniformly along each side of the structure to a height of at least num in .
above the top of the structure .
for structures without headwalls start backfill in the center of the structure .
if the structure includes headwalls or spandrel walls start backfilling operations at one wall and work toward the opposite side .
when batteries or multicell installations are specified elevate backfill between cells equally on each side of each cell .
num num structural plate pipe and arch culverts do not run trucks and construction equipment over any part of a structural plate pipe structure until the backfill has been completed and tamped up to a height of at least num in .
above the structure .
num concrete invert .
when specified pave the invert using concrete mix no .
num .
place and cure the concrete as specified in section num .
num end treatment .
shop fabricate the ends of structural plate pipes and structural plate pipe arches on a bevel to fit and be flush with the slope and alignment of the surface through which they protrude except that where an end wall or masonry slope protection is specified shop fabricate the ends to fit that construction .
the ends of all structural plate pipes and structural plate pipe arches that require an end treatment end wall or slope protection shall contain hook bolts for anchorage into the concrete .
headwalls for structural plate pipes and pipe arches shall meet section num .
unless otherwise specified constructed them parallel to the proposed outer edge of the roadway shoulder .
num measurement and payment .
the payment for the items specified in the contract documents will be full compensation for all applicable fabrication assembly excavation sheeting shoring strutting dewatering hauling invert paving storing rehandling of material removal and disposal of excess and unsuitable material tamped fill foundation preparation backfill compaction and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num structural plate pipe and structural plate pipe arch culverts will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
measurement will be as follows measure the top length and the bottom length and average .
the average length will be the pay length for each pipe in the structure .
for multiple pipes the length will be totaled to obtain the total pay length .
num excavation required below the planned elevation will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num selected backfill will be measured and paid for as specified in section num .
num headwalls will be measured and paid for as specified in section num .
num num miscellaneous structures section num miscellaneous structures num description .
construct miscellaneous castinplace concrete or masonry structures install precast concrete structures and clean existing inlets .
num materials .
mortar sand num curing materials num concrete mix no .
num no .
num or no .
num num grout num brick num pipe num reinforcement steel num steel num castings for frames covers gratings and steps num zinc coating a num stone m num size no .
num precast concrete end walls inlets and manholes m num num construction .
refer to section num for portland cement concrete section num for brick masonry and num for excavated material .
num construction sequence .
complete the underground drainage structures before placing the roadway surfacing .
manholes catch basins and inlets shall not be completed to final grade until the grading has been finished and all necessary arrangements have been made to ensure suitable connections and tieins at proper grade and alignment with pavements gutters and curbs .
num castings .
set frames for grates and covers for inlets and manholes in full beds of mortar and rigidly secure them in place to the specified grade and alignment .
num pipe connections .
set or cut inlet and outlet pipes flush with the inside face of the structure extend them a sufficient distance beyond the outside face of these walls to provide for making proper connections .
completely and neatly close the joint around the pipe in the structure wall with mortar or other specified materials .
num miscellaneous structures num num inverts .
when drainage structures contain two or more pipes construct channeled inverts conforming to the contract documents .
num drainage structures .
provide two blockouts each at least num in .
diameter in inlets and manholes for underdrains .
backfill with no .
num aggregate for a width of num ft outside of the structure and extended from the bottom of the structure to the subgrade .
num precast drainage structures .
for structures not detailed in the contract documents submit working drawings for approval .
certification .
certification from the manufacturer is required for each shipment of precast units .
provide a copy of the certification to the engineer the laboratory and the contractor with each shipment .
one copy shall remain at the plant .
include the name and address of the manufacturer the type of structure the identification number the date of manufacture the date of shipment a statement indicating conformance with the specifications and the signature of the quality control manager .
mark the unit with the station number and designation the identification number the name or trademark of the manufacturer the date manufactured and stamp indicating conformance with the specifications .
do not ship any untested precast unit .
place and consolidate at least num in .
of no .
num aggregate bedding under the unit .
num clean existing inlets .
clean existing inlets and dispose of the material .
reset and anchor existing grates as directed .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all excavation concrete masonry special or precast units reinforcement ladder rungs drip stones no .
num aggregate underdrain stubs frames grates and covers grade and slope adjustments backfill and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num standard inlets and manholes will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
when a structure exceeds the standard minimum depth an additional payment will be made for the excess depth at the contract unit price per linear foot for the pertinent vertical depth item .
num standard end walls headwalls end sections and special structures will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
num num underdrains subgrade drains spring control num nonstandard end walls and other miscellaneous structures such as steps spring boxes and junction boxes constructed using brick masonry or concrete will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard unless otherwise specified .
num stormwater management risers will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard of concrete mix num which includes gasket watertight seals trash racks orifice plates low flow and dewatering pipe stubs and safety rails .
num no separate or additional measurement will be made for any precast concrete units metal or castings used in the construction of any of the items noted above .
num cleaning existing inlets will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each regardless of type size or depth of the inlet .
num when an existing drainage structure is to be removed and replaced with a new drainage structure in the same location the cost to remove the existing drainage structure and a section of the existing pipe will be incidental to the cost of the new drainage structure .
section num underdrains subgrade drains and spring control num description .
construct underdrains subgrade drains underdrain for spring control underdrain pipe outlets and blind drains using pipe geotextile and granular material .
clean existing underdrain outlets .
num materials .
no num aggregate num concrete mix no.num num pipe num geotextile class as specified num securing pins or staples num flexible delineator post and rodent screens as approved by the office of materials technology num construction .
coordinate the field installation of traffic barrier signs lighting and landscaping with the engineer to avoid any damage to the underdrains subgrade drains or outlet pipes .
correct any damage to the underdrains subgrade drains or outlet pipes .
num underdrains subgrade drains spring control num num excavation .
excavate trenches to the specified dimensions and grade .
ensure that the sides and bottom of trenches are smooth and uniform to prevent tearing of the geotextile when backfilling .
for excavated material refer to num .
num geotextile .
place geotextile when specified .
place it with the machine direction parallel to the longitudinal direction of the trench .
ensure that it is of sufficient width to completely enclose the underdrain trench including specified overlaps .
place the geotextile tightly against the underdrain trench to eliminate voids beneath the geotextile .
avoid wrinkles and folds .
maintain at least a num in .
overlap at joint ends or breaks .
pin joints and overlaps to securely hold the geotextile in place until placement of the cover material .
pin longitudinal joints overlaps and edges no more than num ft on center .
replace or repair damaged geotextile .
num pipe placement .
slope the underdrain pipe to maintain positive drainage toward the outlet .
place perforated pipes with the perforations down and arranged symmetrically about the vertical axis .
plug the ends of trunk lines wyes tees or ells as directed .
make joints and connections in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num outlets .
outlet the underdrains into drainage structures whenever possible .
outlets that empty into a drainage structure shall be at least num in .
above the normal flow line in the structure and be constructed of normal underdrain outlet pipe .
maintain at least num in .
of cover over the pipe .
rodent screens are not required when an underdrain outfalls into a drainage structure .
when outfalled into a slope or ditch slope the outlet pipe at least three percent .
use type s smooth interior wall polyethylene pe or smoothwall polyvinyl chloride pvc as specified in section num .
construct a sloped concrete headwall with a removable rodent screen at the end of the outlet pipe .
place a flexible delineator post on the slope headwall .
space outlets for longitudinal underdrains at intervals no more than num ft and at the lowest elevation on all vertical curves .
when changing the direction of the longitudinal underdrain or outlet pipe all bends shall have a radius of at least num ft. num backfill .
backfill trenches to the specified dimensions and grades .
backfill underdrain and outlet trenches as the work progresses .
num num underdrains subgrade drains spring control a underdrain .
lightly tamp aggregate backfill and screed or rake to provide proper thickness and grade .
b outlets .
backfill per section num .
replace geotextile underdrain pipe and outlet pipe damaged by excessive tamping .
cover longitudinal underdrain with the next pavement layer within num hours .
cover all other underdrain within num hours .
protect underdrain including the geotextile from contamination by soil fines .
replace or repair clogged geotextile and any underdrain trench that becomes contaminated .
num video inspection and acceptance .
perform a video inspection of all new longitudinal underdrain and outlets in the presence of the engineer as part of final acceptance .
correct all damage as directed .
num cleaning existing outlets .
clean existing underdrain pipe outlets and dispose of the material .
remove and replace existing rodent screens .
where there are no screens install them as directed .
num permanent subgrade drains .
construct permanent subgrade drains when specified .
subgrade drains consist of trenches excavated through the shoulder and roadside grading from the edges of the road pavement to a side ditch embankment slope or other approved outlet and filled with aggregate .
locate subgrade drains at low points and space them at num ft intervals for a distance of num ft on each side of the low point then at intervals of num ft to within num ft of the high point .
before placing the road pavement and before completion of the shoulder paving or final roadside grading areas cut and shape trenches to a width of num in .
place no .
num aggregate to the underside of the shoulder material and to the underside of the specified topsoil thickness in the roadside grading area .
the portion of the trench within the roadside grading area shall be completely wrapped in geotextile .
the bottom of the trench at the end adjacent to the road pavement shall be at least num in .
below the subgrade .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all excavation pipe coupling bands aggregate backfill geotextile video inspection and all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num underdrains underdrain pipe outlets subgrade drains and underdrain pipe for spring control will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num num prefabricated edge drains slope headwalls rodent screens and marker posts will not be measured but will be incidental to the cost of the underdrain outlet .
num when an underdrain pipe is not used for spring control all excavation and backfill for spring control will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for class num excavation for incidental construction and aggregate backfill for underdrain .
num when directed by the engineer excavation for underdrains subgrade drains and underdrain for spring control required to lower the trench to an elevation deeper than specified in the contract documents will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for class num excavation for incidental construction and aggregate backfill for underdrain .
num when measuring the length of a manufactured connection tee elbows etc .
other than coupling bands each actual linear foot will be doubled and payment made at the contract unit price per linear foot for the appropriate underdrain pipe item specified in the contract documents .
num cleaning existing underdrain outlets will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
the payment will be full compensation for locating outlets removing and replacing the existing rodent screens removal and disposal of material removed from the pipe and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num prefabricated edge drains num description .
construct prefabricated edge drain systems and underdrain pipe outlets .
num materials .
outlet pipe num select borrow num prefabricated edge drain and fittings num num construction .
install prefabricated edge drains according to the manufacturers recommendations .
for drains with support on only one side place the support side away from the pavement edge .
for excavated material refer to num .
num num prefabricated edge drains num trenches for prefabricated edge drains .
excavate using a trencher .
make the trenches as narrow as possible but no more than num in .
ensure that the drain is in direct contact with the pavement .
perform the excavation of the trench placement of the edge drain and placement of the first lift of backfill in a single continuous operation .
num splices .
make splices prior to placement in the trench in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and as approved by the engineer .
solid central cores unconnected two sided flow .
use crossover couplings at all splices and at num ft intervals .
num connections to outlets .
use fittings recommended by the manufacturer .
space outlets at num ft intervals and at the lowest elevation on all vertical curves .
construct outlets in accordance with num .
num backfilling of trenches .
unless otherwise specified use approved material generated from the trenching operation .
use select borrow whenever additional backfill material is needed .
backfill in two layers with the first layer being placed simultaneously with the drain holding the drain flush against the side of the pavement .
use a vibratory shoe compactor .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for excavation backfill compaction and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num prefabricated edge drains and outlet pipe will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num additional backfill material authorized by the engineer will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for select borrow excavation .
num erosion and sediment control num section num erosion and sediment control num description .
apply erosion and sediment control measures to all disturbed areas throughout the life of the project to control erosion and to minimize sedimentation in rivers streams lakes reservoirs bays and coastal waters .
implement the approved erosion and sediment control plan and any approved modifications to the plan .
identify staging and stockpile areas and apply erosion and sediment control measures as approved by the engineer and the maryland department of the environment mde .
num erosion and sediment control manager .
prior to beginning any work assign an employee as erosion and sediment control manager escm .
the escm and the superintendent shall have successfully completed the mde responsible personnel training for erosion and sediment control and the administrations erosion and sediment control certification training for contractors and inspectors .
the certifications shall be current at all times .
if the certification expires or is revoked for either person immediately replace the person with an appropriately certified person acceptable to the administration .
no work may proceed without the appropriate certified personnel in place .
num standards and specifications .
construct and maintain the erosion and sediment control measures and devices in accordance with the latest maryland department of the environment mde erosion and sediment control and stormwater management regulations maryland standards and specifications for soil erosion and sediment control maryland stormwater design manual volumes i and ii sha field guide for erosion and sediment control and as specified in the contract documents .
keep a copy of the latest maryland standards and specifications for soil erosion and sediment control on the site at all times .
where details differ from the mde standards and specifications and the sha field guide use the details from then field guide .
num quality assurance ratings .
a quality assurance inspector will inspect each project every num weeks to ensure compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan .
the scores will be reported on form no .
oocnum erosion and sediment control field investigation report .
the quality assurance inspector will use the scores to determine the following ratings num score rating num a num num b num num c num num d num f num erosion and sediment control rating a .
the project is in compliance .
minor corrective action may be necessary .
rating b .
the project is in compliance however corrective action is necessary .
rating c. the project is in compliance however deficiencies noted require corrections .
shutdown conditions described elsewhere herein could arise quickly .
project will be reinspected within num hours .
rating d. the project is in noncompliance .
the administration will shut down all earthwork operations .
all work efforts shall focus on correcting erosion and sediment control deficiencies .
the project will be reinspected within num hours .
all required corrective actions shall be completed within the num hour period for the project to be upgraded to a b rating .
failure to upgrade the project from a d rating to a b or better rating will result in the project being rated an f. liquidated damages will be imposed for each day the project has a d rating .
refer to shutdown elsewhere in this specification for additional requirements .
rating f. the project is in noncompliance .
an f rating indicates a score less than num or the appropriate permits and approvals have not been obtained or that the limit of disturbance has been exceeded or that wetlands wetland buffers waters of the united states wus floodplains and tree preservation areas as specified in section num have been encroached upon or that work is not proceeding according to the approved erosion and sediment control plan and schedules .
the administration will shut down the entire project until the project receives a b or better rating .
all work efforts shall focus on correcting erosion and sediment control deficiencies .
liquidated damages will be imposed for each day the project has an f rating .
shutdowns .
if a project is rated c correct all deficiencies within num hours .
the project will be reinspected at the end of this period .
if the deficiencies have not been satisfactorily corrected the project will be rated d and all earthwork operations will be shut down until the project is rated b or better .
num erosion and sediment control num if consecutive c ratings are received the contractor will be alerted that their overall effort is marginal and a shut down of all earthwork operations is imminent if erosion and sediment control efforts do not substantially improve within the next num hours .
the project will be reinspected at the end of this period .
if the deficiencies are not satisfactorily corrected or other deficiencies are identified that result in a score of less than num and not below num on form no .
oocnum a d rating will be given and all earthwork operations will be shut down .
if disregard for correcting these deficiencies is evident an f rating will be given and the entire project will be shut down until the project receives a b or better rating .
when degradation to a resource could occur or if the contractor is unresponsive the administration may elect to have these corrective actions performed by another contractor or by administration maintenance staff .
all costs associated with this work will be billed to the original contractor in addition to liquidated damages .
incentive payments .
when specified in the contract documents the administration may include incentive payments to the contractor .
starting at the notice to proceed an incentive payment will be made for a rating quarter consisting of num months when at least four inspections were performed by the quality assurance inspector and an average score equal to or greater than num for the entire rating quarter is received .
the quarterly incentive payment will be made within num days after the end of the rating quarter .
no incentive will be paid for partial quarters or for quarters with less than four inspections .
no incentives will be paid for any quarter in which a d or f rating is received .
when a project receives no d or f ratings and the overall average score is equal to or greater than num the final incentive payment will be made at final project closeout .
if a time extension is granted additional quarterly incentive payments will be drawn from the final incentive payment .
liquidated damages .
whenever a project is rated d or f the administration will assess liquidated damages .
liquidated damages shall be paid within num days from the date of notification to the contractor .
payments will not be allowed to accrue for consideration at final project closeout .
the second time that a project is rated f the erosion and sediment control training certificate issued by the administration will be immediately revoked from the project superintendent and the erosion and sediment control manager for at least a six month period and until successful completion of the administrations erosion and sediment control certification program .
neither the project superintendent nor the erosion and sediment control manager will be allowed to oversee the installation and maintenance of erosion and sediment controls during the num num erosion and sediment control period the certification is revoked on any project of the administration .
replace the project superintendent and the erosion and sediment control manager with certified personnel .
work may not commence until the certified personnel are in place .
num incentive payments and liquidated damages .
the contract documents will specify the amounts of incentive payments and liquidated damages that apply .
num materials .
riprap num num to num in .
stone num hot mix asphalt num pipe num gabion wire num steel plate num welding material num fence fabric for super silt fence num seed mulch fertilizer soil conditioner soil stabilization matting and other materials for seeding and soil stabilization num straw bales num geotextile class as specified num num to num in .
stone m num no .
num num to num in .
stone m num no .
num no .
num stone m num no .
num soil stabilization matting replaces erosion control matting and geotextile class se replaces filter cloth and geotextile class c where they appear in the num maryland standards and specifications for soil erosion and sediment control .
num construction .
num contractor responsibilities .
prior to beginning any earth disturbing activity complete the following a demarcate all wetlands wetland buffers floodplains waters of the united states tree protection areas and the limit of disturbance lod as specified section num. b have all demarcated wetlands wetland buffers floodplains water of the united states tree protection areas and lod inspected and approved by the engineer .
num num erosion and sediment control c construct all erosion and sediment control measures in conformance with num. d have all control measures inspected and approved by the engineer .
ensure that all runoff is directed from disturbed areas to the sediment control measures .
do not remove any erosion or sediment control measure without the approval of the engineer and mde .
refer to gpnum for unforeseen conditions .
ensure that dewatering practices do not cause any visible change to stream clarity .
num erosion and sediment control plan e s plan and sequence of construction .
implement the administrations e s plan and sequence of construction as approved by mde .
minor adjustments to the sediment control locations may be made in the field with the approval of the engineer and mde .
major revisions deletions or substitutions to the e s plan require a formal review and approval by the administration and mde .
submit changes to the approved e s plan to the administration in writing at least num days prior to implementing the change .
obtain administration and mde approval for changes to the e s plan or sequence of construction prior to implementing the change .
num erosion and sediment control manager escm .
at least num days prior to beginning any work submit the name and credentials of the escm for approval .
any substitutes for the escm will be subject to approval .
time the substitution to ensure that an escm is assigned to the project at all times .
the administration reserves the right to request a reassignment of the escm duties to another individual for any reason .
ensure that the escm is thoroughly experienced in all aspects of construction and has the required certifications .
the escm is primarily responsible for and has the authority to implement the approved erosion and sediment control plans schedules and methods of operation for both onsite and offsite activities .
the escms duties include a inspect the erosion and sediment controls on a daily basis to ensure that all controls are in place at all times and to develop a list of activities and schedules to ensure compliance with the contract documents .
num num erosion and sediment control b maintain a daily log of these inspections including actions taken and submit a written report at the end of the work day .
c conduct after storm inspections with the engineer both during and beyond normal working hours and submit a written report .
d have the authority to mobilize crews to make immediate repairs to the controls during working and nonworking hours .
e when requested accompany the engineer on quality assurance inspections and inspections made by the regulating agencies .
f coordinate with the engineer to ensure that all corrections are made immediately and that the project is in compliance with the approved plan at all times .
num schedule .
within num days after the notice of award submit an erosion and sediment control schedule to implement the e s plan to the administration and the mde .
ensure that the schedule indicates the sequence of construction implementation and maintenance controls temporary and permanent stabilization and the various stages of earth disturbance .
any changes to the mde approved plan require concurrence from mde in addition to the administrations approval .
include the following a demarcation of all wetlands wetland buffers juriditional waters floodplains tree protection areas and the lod prior to any earth disturbing activity .
b clearing and grubbing of areas necessary for installation of perimeter controls specified in the contract documents .
c construction of perimeter controls specified in the contract documents .
d remaining clearing and grubbing .
e roadway grading including offsite work .
f if applicable utility installation and whether storm drains will be used or blocked after construction .
g final grading landscaping and stabilization .
h removal of perimeter controls .
num num erosion and sediment control work is prohibited onsite and offsite until the erosion and sediment control schedules and methods of operation have been accepted by the administration and mde .
num preconstruction conference .
present a general overview at the preconstruction conference of how erosion and sediment control measures will be implemented on the project .
num meetings .
at least seven working days prior to the start of work the engineer will initiate and conduct an erosion and sediment control field meeting which will include the escm the administration and mde .
in addition to the initial erosion and sediment control field meeting periodic infield erosion and sediment control meetings will be held to review and evaluate the effectiveness of measures already installed and to plan for the implementation of necessary controls proposed for succeeding areas of soil disturbance .
num initial controls .
install all perimeter controls such as silt fence earth dikesswales check dams traps and basins prior to the grubbing operation .
typically no controls are required during the clearing operation .
if the engineer determines that the clearing area has been disturbed and a potential for sediment runoff or erosion exists install the controls at that time as directed .
num stabilization requirements .
permanently or temporarily stabilize areas flatter than num and stockpile areas as soon as possible but not later than fourteen days after grubbing and grading activities have ceased in the area .
permanently or temporarily stabilize trap embankments and slopes earth dikes temporary swales perimeter dikeswales ditches and slopes num or steeper as soon as possible but not later than seven days after grubbing and grading activities have ceased in the area .
the seven and fourteen day requirements mean that the stabilization operation is complete within the applicable seven or fourteen day time frame .
when the excavation or embankment reaches the bottom of the subgrade those areas in which paving will be placed are exempt from the stabilization requirements .
areas between temporary berms except median areas need not be stabilized during incremental stabilization .
when permanently stabilized areas are disturbed by grading operations or other activities not specifically approved restabilization will be at no additional cost to the administration .
num num erosion and sediment control stabilization requirements may be reduced to less than seven days for sensitive areas .
perform maintenance as necessary to ensure continued stabilization .
track all slopes within five days of establishment with cleated type equipment operating perpendicular to the slope .
num dewatering .
dewatering is considered an elective practice .
ensure that dewatering activities do not cause any visible change to stream clarity .
if a sediment plume is visible immediately cease the dewatering activity .
num maintenance .
maintain all erosion and sediment control devices during the construction season the winter months and other times when the project is inactive .
maintain access to all erosion and sediment controls until the controls are removed .
lack of this maintenance will be considered as noncompliance with the e s plan and grounds for a shutdown of the project .
inspect controls immediately following storm events .
clean out as necessary and repair all damage as the first order of business after the storm event .
direct any pumping activity including dewatering sediment traps and basins through a dewatering device approved by mde .
num waste areas .
offsite waste areas on state or federal property require mde approval .
all other offsite waste areas shall be approved by the appropriate soil conservation district for each county or the baltimore city department of public works .
all waste areas and stockpile areas shall be protected by erosion and sediment control measures and stabilized within the seven or fourteen day stabilization requirement .
num mde inspections .
mde will conduct frequent field inspections .
if they find noncompliance with erosion and sediment control provisions their representative will immediately notify the engineer relative to corrective action .
this corrective action may require a shutdown of construction activities until the noncompliance is satisfactorily corrected .
no claims against the administration will be considered due to a shutdown of the grading operations or the entire project .
num side or berm ditches and culverts .
as a first order of work construct the side ditches in fill areas and berm ditches in cuts including lining .
protect these linings from sediment deposits .
place silt fence num num erosion and sediment control along the banks of existing streams as shown in the contract documents prior to placing any culverts .
to avoid sedimentation during construction divert the streams around the location of the culvert until the proposed culvert and channel are stabilized .
num removal of controls .
do not remove erosion and sediment control measures until all previously disturbed areas are vegetated with at least a num in .
growth of grass and the removal has been approved by the engineer and mde .
backfill grade and stabilized the sediment controls .
remove all control devices except as directed .
num erosion and sediment control original excavation .
excavate construct embankments grade and backfill for sediment traps sediment basins and other sediment controls .
ensure that excavation and embankments meet the dimensions for each sediment control as specified .
stockpile excavated material and use for backfill when the sediment controls are removed .
num erosion and sediment control cleanout excavation .
remove accumulated sediment from sediment controls or other areas during routine maintenance of sediment controls or as directed .
clean out sediment traps as necessary to ensure that at least num percent of the wet storage capacity is available at all times .
ensure that riprap outlet sediment traps have at least num percent of the wet storage capacity available at all times .
remove sediment from silt fence super silt fence stone outlet structures stone check dams and straw bales when it reaches num percent of the height of the device .
place removed sediment in an approved waste site either on or off the project .
material stored onsite may be reused once it is dried and it meets embankment requirements .
num earth dike .
do not use sod as stabilization unless specifically approved .
num temporary swale .
do not use sod as stabilization .
unless specifically approved .
num perimeter dike swale .
do not use sod as stabilization unless specifically approved .
num pipe slope drain .
when slope drains are placed on grade construct interceptor berms to direct flow into the flared end section .
num num erosion and sediment control num riprap inflow protection .
gabions shall not be used .
num gabion inflow protection .
construct as specified in section num .
num stone check dam .
space as specified .
num sediment traps .
locate and excavate sediment traps to the specified length width and depth .
in areas of limited rightofway cut side slopes as steep as soil conditions will allow .
at sites where infiltration devices are used for the control of storm water prevent runoff from unstabilized areas from entering the infiltration devices .
ensure that bottom elevations of sediment control devices placed in infiltration areas are at least num ft higher than the finish grade bottom elevation of the infiltration device .
when converting a sediment trap to an infiltration device remove and dispose of all accumulated sediment prior to final grading of the device .
when grading and paving operations have been completed and vegetation has been established on the slopes and channels to the satisfaction of the engineer refill the sediment traps with suitable materials and shape and treat them as specified .
num stone outlet structure .
stabilize the area immediately after removal of the structure .
num removable pumping station .
furnish the standpipe pump hoses and connections required to perform dewatering activities .
excavate a pit to the dimensions required .
num sump pit .
furnish the standpipe pump hoses and connections required to perform dewatering activities .
excavate a pit to the dimensions required .
num portable sediment tank .
furnish the standpipe pump hoses and connections required to perform dewatering activities .
determine the dimensions necessary to provide the required storage volume .
num silt fence .
trench the geotextile at least num in .
vertically into the ground and extend to at least num in .
above ground .
drive fence posts at least num in .
into the ground and extend at least num in .
above the ground .
remove and reset silt fence when and as directed per the requirements for the original placement .
num num erosion and sediment control num inlet protection .
install standard inlet protection at grade inlet protection curb inlet protection or median inlet protection .
num stabilized construction entrance .
construct stabilized construction entrances at the specified locations .
rehabilitate stabilized construction entrance consists of periodic top dressing with additional aggregate replacement of pipe or other repairs to the entrance and sediment trapping devices .
num super silt fence .
construct the chain link fence as specified in section num with the following exceptions a use drive anchors when and as directed .
b do not use the lower tension wire brace and truss rods post caps num in .
ground clearance and concrete footings .
c use line posts only .
d run a num gage top tension wire continuously between posts .
e embed at least num in .
into the ground and extend at least num in .
above ground .
remove and reset super silt fence when and as directed per the requirements for the original placement .
num temporary asphalt berm .
when a storm drain system outfall is directed to a sediment trap or sediment basin and the system is to be used for temporarily conveying sediment laden water construct temporary asphalt berms at all storm drain inlets in nonsump areas as directed by the engineer at the time of base paving to direct gutter flow into the inlets to avoid surcharging and overflow of inlets in sump areas .
num straw bales for sediment control .
use straw bales for temporary control of erosion and sedimentation in side ditches and where the placement of a stone outlet structure is not practical .
do not use straw bales in median ditches .
use straw bales consisting of undecayed firmly packed straw approximate size num x num x num in .
as prepared by a standard baling machine and firmly bound by at least two separate circuits of rope or band material that will withstand weathering for the length of time the bale is functioning as a sediment control device .
ensure that the binding tension on the baling machine is sufficient to produce a bale with voids no greater than the nominal thickness of the straw .
embed the bales to a num num erosion and sediment control depth of at least num in .
and anchor in place with two no .
num reinforcement bars steel pickets or num x num in .
wood stakes num in .
length .
locate the anchoring devices at approximate third points along the longitudinal center line of each bale driven through the bale and into the ground to a depth of num to num in .
num stone for sediment control .
place no .
num stone num to num in .
stone num to num in .
stone num to num in .
stone and riprap for sediment control as specified .
num maintenance of stream flow .
maintain the continuous flow of waterways during all operations for the locations indicated .
upon completion of construction and after temporary drainage devices have served their purpose remove and dispose of the devices in an acceptable manner .
when included in the contract documents stream diversions details will show a system and a location that is approved by the maryland department of the environment .
the stream diversion system as shown may not be capable of blocking the flow of water through the soil beneath the system .
design and provide an effective means of diverting the water away from the designated areas even though a more elaborate system may be required .
ensure that all excavation performed within the diverted stream is performed in a dewatered condition which may require additional pumps sheeting shoring cofferdams etc .
if the proposed system does not perform satisfactorily or additional material and equipment are required to dewater the site and excavated areas adjust the stream diversion system and obtain approvals at no additional cost to the administration .
securely anchor the stream diversion system in place to prevent movement during high water events .
submit the proposed method of anchoring to the engineer and the mde field inspector for approval .
anchors shall not go beyond the limits of disturbance shown on the plans or infringe on the channel area available for stream flow .
do not install the diversion system in the stream without the approval of both the engineer and the mde inspector .
all costs associated with the anchoring of the stream diversion system are incidental to the maintenance of stream flow item .
when the contract documents include details for the continuous maintenance of stream flow during construction a temporary stream crossing permit is not required if the details in the contract documents are used and there is no other work in the waterways .
a different plan for maintenance of stream flow may be submitted but approval from the num num erosion and sediment control engineer and a temporary stream crossing permit will be required .
temporary stream crossing permits may be obtained from the maryland department of the environment water management administration permits services center .
num diversion fence .
trench double num mil polyethylene sheeting at least num in .
into the ground cover at least num ft. from the trench line to the fence posts extend at least num in .
above the ground and wrap over the fence posts to grade .
num temporary gabion outlet structure .
as specified in section num .
grade and stabilize the area beneath the structure immediately upon removal .
num dewatering bag .
furnish the required bags straw bales stone pump hoses and connections to perform dewatering activities .
determine the dimensions necessary to provide the required storage volume .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the maintenance repair resetting and final removal of all erosion and sediment control devices will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract price to construct the device unless otherwise specified in the contract documents .
num erosion and sediment control manager will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to erosion and sediment control items specified in the contract documents .
num implementation of the erosion and sediment control plan by the contractor will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the erosion and sediment control items specified in the contract documents .
num erosion and sediment control original excavation will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
the payment will also include excavation backfill and grading .
num erosion and sediment control cleanout excavation will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
the payment will also include excavation and disposal .
num earth dikes will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
when num to num in .
stone temporary seeding and soil stabilization matting are required they will be measured and paid for as specified in num num and num respectively .
num num erosion and sediment control num temporary swales will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
when num to num in .
stone temporary seeding and soil stabilization matting are required they will be measured and paid for as specified in num num and num respectively .
num perimeter dikeswales will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
when temporary seeding and soil stabilization matting are required they will be measured and paid for as specified in num and num respectively .
num pipe slope drain will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
the payment will also include excavation backfill flared end section geotextile anchors coupling bands and pipe elbows .
outlet protection will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num riprap inflow protection will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num gabion inflow protection will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num stone check dam will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num sediment traps will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for one or more of the items listed below a erosion and sediment control original excavation as specified in num. b pipe per linear foot .
c stone as specified in num. d inflow protection as specified in num and num. e baffle board and stakes will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the other items .
num stone outlet structure will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
the baffle board and stakes will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract price .
num num erosion and sediment control num removable pumping station will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
the payment will also include excavation pipe geotextile wire mesh steel plate hose pump and connections .
no .
num stone will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num sump pit will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
the payment will also include excavation pipe geotextile wire mesh steel plate hose pump and connections .
no .
num stone will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num portable sediment tank will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
the payment will also include pipe geotextile wire mesh steel plate hose pump and connections .
no adjustments will be made for resizing or relocating portable sediment tanks to meet stream clarity discharge requirements .
num silt fence will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num remove and reset silt fence will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num inlet protection will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
num stabilized construction entrance and rehabilitate stabilized construction entrance will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
when pipe is required it will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract price .
num super silt fence will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num remove and reset super silt fence will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num temporary asphalt berm will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per ton of hot mix asphalt .
the removal of the temporary asphalt berm will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract price .
num straw bales will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot measured along the approximate center line of num num erosion and sediment control the row of bales .
excavation and anchoring the straw bales will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract price .
num stone for sediment control will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per ton for the pertinent stone for sediment control item .
geotextile excavation and backfill will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract price .
num maintenance of stream flow will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
the payment will also include designing and providing diversion structures regardless of the type required to satisfactorily divert the stream flow excavation backfill dewater the site and excavated areas within the stream diversion area maintenance of the diversion system sandbags polyethylene sheeting diversion pipes pumps hoses connections and portable sediment tanks .
this price will not be adjusted when consideration is given to an alternative stream diversion system regardless of any changes in quantities from that shown in the contract documents .
the provisions of gpnum will not apply to this work .
num temporary mulch will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num temporary seed will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num temporary wood cellulose fiber will be incidental to temporary seed .
num soil stabilization matting will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num turfgrass sod will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num temporary earth berms and interceptor berms for incremental stabilization will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the excavation items specified in the contract documents .
num diversion fence will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num temporary gabion outlet structures will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
num dewatering bags will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each and will include pump hose connections num num concrete ditches straw bales locating relocating disposal and any other incidentals necessary .
no adjustments will be made for resizing or relocating bags to meet stream clarity discharge requirements .
section num concrete ditches num description .
construct concrete ditches and incidental toe walls .
num materials .
crusher run aggregate crnum num no .
num aggregate num curing materials num form release compounds num concrete mix no .
num num joint sealer num preformed joint filler num borrow num soil stabilization matting num num construction .
num excavation .
excavate and prepare the subgrade per section num .
for excavated material refer to num .
num forms .
use steel or wooden forms meeting section num .
num concrete .
mix and place according to section num .
num joints .
place joints no more than num ft apart .
use either bulkhead or weakened plane construction joints .
either tool or saw weakened plane joints to a depth of at least num in .
place expansion joints no more than num ft apart and seal .
num cold weather construction and curing .
refer to num for cold weather construction and to num for concrete curing .
num backfill .
after the forms have been removed place and compact the backfill .
num when the existing concrete ditch is removed but not replaced regrade and stabilize the area as directed .
num num concrete slope and channel protection num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all concrete excavation forms backfill curing disposal of excess or unsuitable material toe walls and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num concrete ditches will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
num the removal and disposal of unsuitable material below the subgrade will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for class num excavation .
num when borrow or selected backfill using no .
num aggregate or selected backfill using crusher run aggregate crnum is approved by the engineer as replacement material for the class num excavation it will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for the pertinent items as specified in the contract documents .
num concrete ditches removed but not replaced will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
the payment will include the cost to dispose of the material regrading topsoil and soil stabilization matting .
section num concrete slope and channel protection num description .
protect slopes and channels with castinplace concrete and cutoff walls .
num materials .
crusher run aggregate crnum num no .
num aggregate num curing materials num form release compound num concrete mix no .
num num welded steel wire fabric num joint sealer num preformed joint fillers num roofing paper num borrow num num num concrete slope and channel protection num construction .
num excavation .
excavate including excavation for cutoff walls according to section num .
refer to num for excavated material .
num castinplace concrete .
construct castinplace concrete slope protection in alternate strips so that construction joints are all in one direction and that tooled joints run perpendicular to the construction joints .
the result shall be a checkerboard pattern having squares of at least num ft but not more than num ft .
the engineer will determine the size of the squares and the size of squares around curved surfaces .
construct joints and cutoff walls as specified .
num forms .
as specified in section num .
num concreting .
mix concrete as specified in num .
volumetric batching and continuous mixing will be permitted .
prior to placing the concrete use acceptable methods to dewater areas that are subject to the infiltration of water .
spread and tamp or otherwise consolidate the concrete .
strike it off with an approved screed and give the surface a broomed finish .
do not plaster the surface .
use a num in .
edging tool on all edges and joints .
num cold weather construction and curing .
refer to num and .num respectively .
num backfill .
after removing the forms place and compact the backfill .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all concrete forms excavation curing joint sealer and filler backfill compaction disposal of excess or unsuitable material and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num concrete slope and channel protection and concrete slope protection for streams will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard of finished surface .
num cutoff walls will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num the removal and disposal of unsuitable material below the subgrade will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for class num excavation .
num num riprap ditches num when borrow or selected backfill using no .
num aggregate or selected backfill using crusher run aggregate crnum is approved by the engineer as replacement material for the class num excavation it will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for the pertinent item specified in the contract documents .
section num riprap ditches num description .
construct riprap ditches and riprap ditches with capping .
num materials .
riprap num and .num geotextile class as specified num num to num in .
stone mnum no.num num construction .
num excavation .
excavate to the specified line and grade .
ensure that ditch sides and bottom are smooth and firm free from protruding objects that would damage the geotextile and constructed in an acceptable manner .
for excavated material refer to num .
num geotextile placement .
place the geotextile on the prepared subgrade with the adjacent edges overlapped at least num ft .
replace or repair damaged geotextile as directed .
num riprap placement .
place stones by mechanical or other acceptable methods to produce a reasonably graded mass of stone .
methods that cause extensive segregation are unacceptable .
place the riprap to the specified depth .
num backfill .
backfill any excavation voids existing along the edges and ends of the placed riprap .
use suitable material to blend in with contiguous slopes ditch lines and existing ground .
cap riprap placed in the clear recovery area with a layer of num to num in .
stone .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all excavation geotextile stone backfill disposal of excess material and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num num riprap slope and channel protection num riprap ditches and riprap ditches with capping will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard of finished surface .
num bottom cutoff walls and side cutoff walls will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
section num riprap slope and channel protection num description .
protect slopes and channels with a covering of geotextile and stone or an aggregate filter blanket .
num materials .
aggregate filter blanket crusher run aggregate crnum num stone num geotextile class as specified num num construction .
num excavation .
excavate for riprap and cutoff walls to the specified lines and grades .
ensure that the subgrade is smooth and firm free from protruding objects that would damage the geotextile and constructed in an acceptable manner .
for excavated material refer to num .
num geotextile .
place the geotextile on the prepared subgrade with the adjacent edges overlapping at least num ft .
replace or repair damaged geotextile as directed .
num aggregate filter blanket .
when an aggregate filter blanket is specified construct it to the specified lines and grades and compact it in an acceptable manner .
num riprap placement .
ensure that the underlying surface is free of brush trees and stumps and is acceptable to the engineer .
place the first section of riprap consisting of at least num tons which will be inspected by the engineer for conformance to gradation and placement requirements .
if approved this section will be used to evaluate quality control for the remainder of the project .
if the material is rejected remove it from the project and place additional sections each at least num tons .
num num riprap slope and channel protection begin the placement of the riprap with the bottom cutoff walls or toe sections .
place the larger stones in the cutoff walls and along the outside edges of the limits of slope and channel protection .
place the riprap with equipment that produces a uniformly graded mass of stones .
ensure that the surface elevation of completed riprap installations is flush with adjacent channel bed or bank slope elevations and does not create an obstacle to the flow .
ensure that the outer riprap surfaces are even and present a generally neat appearance .
the plus or minus tolerance of the surface of the finished riprap installation is num in .
for class i riprap and num in .
for class ii and iii riprap from the lines and grades shown on the contract documents when measured perpendicular to the exterior surface of the stonework .
place and distribute the stone so the resulting layer will contain a minimum of voids and there will be no pockets of same size material .
place the stone to its full course thickness in one operation in a manner that the underlying material is not be displaced or worked into the course of riprap being placed .
when an aggregate filter blanket is used proceed with the placement of the riprap in a controlled manner to avoid disruption or damage to the layer of bedding material .
num backfill .
backfill any excavation voids existing along the edges of the completed slope and channel protection and compact it in an acceptable manner .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all excavation geotextile stone backfill compaction disposal of excess material prewashing when required preparation of quality control section and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num riprap slope and channel protection will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
area measurements will be actual surface measurements .
num cutoff walls will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num riprap for scour protection will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per ton for the item class ii riprap for scour protection .
num aggregate filter blanket will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard for the depth specified .
num gabions num section num gabions num description .
protect slopes and channels by placing stone filled wire baskets .
num materials .
stone num wire for gabions num geotextile class as specified num num construction .
num excavation .
excavate including excavation for cutoff walls to the specified lines and grades .
ensure that the subgrade is smooth firm and free from protruding objects or voids that would affect the proper placement of the wire baskets or damage the geotextile .
for excavated material refer to num .
num geotextile .
place geotextile on the prepared subgrade .
overlap adjacent strips at least num ft .
replace or repair geotextile damaged during placement of the wire baskets .
num wire baskets .
begin placement with the cutoff walls .
set the empty units on the geotextile and bind the vertical ends together with wire ties or interlocking fasteners spaced to permit stretching of the units to remove kinks .
use stretching methods that do not damage the baskets .
use stakes pins or other approved methods to ensure proper alignment .
num stone .
carefully fill the basket units with stone placed by hand or machine to ensure good alignment with a minimum of voids between stones .
avoid bulging of the mesh .
do not drop the stone from a height greater than num in .
place the stone to provide a minimum of two courses .
place the top layer of stone to a uniform surface .
avoid any bulging of the lid mesh .
after a basket unit is filled bend the lid over until it meets the ends of the unit .
secure the lid to the sides and ends with wire ties or interlocking fasteners .
when a complete basket unit can not be installed because of space limitations cut the basket unit to fit as directed .
num backfill .
backfill any excavation voids existing along the edges of the completed gabions and compact in an acceptable manner .
num num flowable backfill num measurement and payment .
gabions including cutoff walls will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard of stone filled wire baskets complete in place .
the payment will be full compensation for all excavation geotextile stone ties or fasteners backfill compaction disposal of excess material and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num flowable backfill num description .
furnish haul and place flowable cement stabilized backfill material .
when specified use for utility cut backfill pipe backfill or for filling abandoned pipes .
num materials .
flowable backfill consists of a mixture of fly ash cement and water .
certification by the manufacturer is required .
cement num fly ash num water num num fillers .
when required fillers shall be natural aggregates with a maximum size of num in .
and may include sands .
bottom ash shall not be used as filler .
num components .
toxic and deleterious components shall not be used in the backfill mixture .
the mixture shall have a num day unconfined compressive strength of at least num psi based on the manufacturers certification .
certification shall include the actual test data for each mixture to be used .
num analysis .
chemical analysis of the fly ash used in the mixture shall conform to u.s. epa ep toxicity standards .
whenever the coal source is changed or replenished and when fly ash from a different source is used conduct an analysis of the fly ash from each stockpile .
submit the results of the analysis to the engineer for approval prior to using the mixture .
num construction .
place the material according to the manufacturers recommendations or as directed by the engineer .
backfill utility trenches full depth to the top of the subgrade .
fill all voids during the backfill operation .
protect the backfilled utility cut from freezing and traffic for num hours .
wait at least num hours after backfilling is complete and approved by the engineer before beginning the paving operations .
num infiltration trenches num fill abandoned pipes with backfill after each end of the pipe has been properly plugged .
refer to num .
cut two holes into the plug at the upstream end and pump backfill into the pipe through one of the holes until the pipe is completely filled .
keep and submit detailed records of all flowable backfill placed .
include the source of the fly ash the date placed the location depth and the quantity used .
num measurement and payment .
flowable backfill will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num infiltration trenches num description .
install infiltration trenches as specified .
num materials .
class i riprap num geotextile class as specified num pvc pipe schedule num d num stone m num no .
num num construction .
do not place infiltration trenches in service until all of the contributing drainage area has been stabilized and approved .
restrict heavy equipment and traffic from the proposed infiltration trench location .
num excavation .
remove excavated material from the trench site .
ensure that trench walls and bottom are free of protruding objects that could damage the geotextile .
when necessary slope the trench walls .
ensure that the bottom dimensions and stone depth are as specified .
roughen the side walls of the trench .
grade the bottom of the trench flat .
for excavated material refer to num .
num installation .
place geotextile on the sides of the trench and the top of the no .
num stone .
do not cover the bottom of the trench .
the geotextile for the sides of the trench shall overlap the top geotextile by num to num in .
extend the top geotextile the full width and length of the trench .
all longitudinal joints in the top geotextile shall overlap at least num in .
the upstream roll shall overlap the downstream roll by at least num ft for a shingled effect .
num num infiltration trenches place an observation well vertically in the longitudinal center of each infiltration trench .
use num in .
diameter perforated pvc pipe schedule num .
place the pipe on a base plate at the bottom of the trench .
cap the well using a threaded pvc fitting and a vandal proof sewer cap .
set the cap num in .
above ground and mark the depth of the trench on the cap .
provide a plastic collar with ribs to prevent rotation of the well when removing the cap .
when soil capping is used construct the observation well using perforated pvc pipe within the no .
num stone and nonperforated pipe through the soil capping .
all stone shall be clean and free of all soil and fines .
place the no .
num stone in num in .
lifts with no compaction .
avoid any intermixing of the soil and fines with the stone aggregate .
remove and replace contaminated aggregate .
cap the trench with at least num in .
of stone or soil as specified .
num measurement and payment .
infiltration trenches will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
the payment will be full compensation for all excavation stone capping riprap geotextile pvc pipe fittings cap and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num category num structures section num maintaining existing bridge deck during life of contract num description .
patch the existing bridge deck as required for maintenance of traffic .
num materials .
rapid hardening cementitious material for concrete pavement repairs num select patching material from the prequalified list of rapid hardening cementitious materials maintained by the office of materials technology .
num construction .
periodically evaluate the existing deck with the engineer to determine if any patching is necessary .
patch all holes over num in .
deep having an area greater than num ftnum .
locations and limits of all patch areas shall be as approved .
the traffic manager shall confer with the engineer before patching begins to decide on a plan for diverting or detouring traffic .
meet all traffic safety and traffic control requirements .
areas requiring patching shall be clean and free of loose material and conform to the manufacturers recommendations .
protect waterways and roadways under the structure from falling debris .
do not dispose of removed material in waterways .
place patching material to the top of the existing bridge deck surfaces .
furnish and install new reinforcement when directed .
when opening to traffic prior to the patch achieving sufficient strength cover the patch with steel plates as specified in num .
build up areas around the plates with asphalt material .
num num structure excavation class num num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num patching for maintaining existing bridge deck will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square foot .
the payment will also be full compensation for the removal and disposal of material required to prepare the patch area including chipping and hand cleaning as well as furnishing and placing reinforcing steel forming providing protective structures floodlighting and furnishing placing and removing any steel plates .
patches performed day or night will be paid for at the contract unit price .
num all work materials sequence of operations equipment protection vehicle and channelization devices required to maintain traffic during each occurrence of patching including removal after patching is complete will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for the pertinent maintenance of traffic for bridge patching operation item .
when more than one patch is made under one movement of traffic for patching the item will be paid for only once regardless of the number of patches made or the length of time traffic is rerouted .
if traffic is maintained more than once for a particular patching operation the work will be measured and paid for only once .
section num structure excavation class num num description .
excavate and backfill for construction of bridges box culverts and other major structures .
num materials .
crusher run aggregate crnum num subfoundation concrete num mix no .
num num construction .
sheet shore brace and support all excavation contiguous to existing pavements and structures to prevent settlement movement or damage to the pavement or structure .
place excavated material in a manner to prevent damage to adjacent structures and incursion into waterways .
num backfill and embankment material .
use all suitable excavated material for backfill or store for future use .
do not waste excavated material without approval .
prior to using excavated material as num num structure excavation class num backfill remove boulders logs and other unsuitable material .
dispose of unsuitable material in an approved disposal area .
num footing elevations .
the elevations for the bottom of the footings specified in the contract documents are approximate only the engineer may direct changes in dimensions or elevations of footings to secure a satisfactory foundation during the period of construction .
num footing foundations .
place footings on suitable foundations .
do not drive piles or place concrete until the foundations are approved .
clean all rock and other hard foundation material of loose material and cut to a firm surface either level or stepped as directed .
clean out and grout all seams and crevices .
remove all loose and disintegrated rock and thin strata .
when concrete will rest on an excavated surface other than rock do not disturb the bottom of the excavation .
perform final removal of the foundation material to grade just prior to placement of reinforcement steel and concrete .
when an item is included for subfoundation investigation section num use the item as directed to verify the character of the foundation .
place faces of footings plumb against undisturbed material rock sheeting shoring or forms .
faces of footings in rock shall bear against a minimum num ft depth of rock .
if the excavation will not stand plumb install sheeting shoring or forms as required .
when specified sheeting used to construct spread footings shall be left in place and cut off as specified in num .
when not specified or when sheeting is used to construct pilesupported foundations the sheeting may be removed .
design all required sheeting and shoring .
when the material retained by the sheeting and shoring is greater than num ft high submit the details procedures and computations the same as specified for falsework details in tcnum and section num .
the experience specified under tcnum will be waived .
after removing the forms backfill the void between the footing and the embankment with subfoundation concrete or tamped fill utilizing crusher run aggregate crnum .
compact the material to a density of num percent of the maximum density as tested per t num method c. use subfoundation concrete for backfill when footings are submerged .
if the footings are below the water table adjacent to railroad tracks or more than num ft thick submit footing form working drawings for approval .
where foundation piles are used excavate each pit to the as planned bottom of footing elevation before driving the piles .
after driving is complete remove loose and displaced material without damaging the piling .
leave a suitable bed to receive the footing concrete .
for tremie num num structure excavation class num seal the displaced material may remain provided the minimum thickness of footing concrete pile embedment and the required sealing of the foundation seal is maintained .
where foundation piles are not used on substructure units other than box culverts and excavation is required below the as planned bottom of the foundation backfill the additional excavation with subfoundation concrete or lower the footing elevation and deepen the footing as directed .
provide a rough finish to rock foundations that are to receive footing concrete .
for box culverts backfill additional excavated spaces under the barrels with selected backfill .
num cofferdams and foundation seals .
when cofferdams or foundation seals are required submit working drawings and a complete description of the process as specified in section num .
timber or bracing left in the cofferdams or cribs shall not extend into the substructure concrete .
construct cofferdams in a manner that protects the concrete from damage .
a foundation seal .
refer to num .
num .
when the foundation can not be dewatered the engineer may require the construction of a concrete foundation seal .
if a mud wave is created during the placement of the tremie seal remove the displaced material to preserve the full foundation cross section specified .
then pump out the foundation and place the footing in the dry .
when weighted cribs are employed and the cribs weight is utilized to overcome a part of the hydrostatic pressure acting against the bottom of the foundation seal provide special anchorage such as dowels or keys to transfer the entire weight of the crib into the foundation seal .
when a foundation seal is placed under water vent or port the cofferdam at low water level as directed .
b pumping .
do not pump from the interior of the enclosure during the placing of concrete .
do not begin pumping from a sealed cofferdam until the seal has set sufficiently to withstand the hydrostatic pressure .
c removal of cofferdams or cribs .
remove cofferdams or cribs after the completion of and without damage to the substructure .
d stability of foundation .
stabilize the foundation area so that the concrete footing can be constructed in the dry .
num num structure excavation class num num backfilling .
use suitable material for backfill .
continue backfilling to the surface of the surrounding ground or specified grade .
do not use borrow until available project excavation is exhausted .
neatly grade the top surface of the backfilled areas .
compact as specified in section num or num .
backfilling against structures .
backfill against various structures as follows a brick masonry .
backfill no earlier than seven da ys after completion of the section .
b concrete structures .
backfill when curing is completed and the concrete has achieved num percent of the specified compressive strength .
c footings culverts and piers .
deposit fill on both sides to approximately the same elevation at the same time .
d abutments retaining walls culverts or other structures .
place backfill in horizontal layers so that at all times there is a horizontal berm of uniformly compacted material behind the structure for a distance at least equal to the height of the abutment or wall remaining to be backfilled except where undisturbed material protrudes into this area .
compact the berm as specified in num .
jetting of fills or other hydraulic methods involving liquid or semiliquid pressure within the berm area are prohibited .
num measurement and payment .
class num excavation will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for the volume of material actually removed from within the limits specified .
excavation for pipe culverts culvert end walls inlets and manholes is excluded from class num excavation .
payment will be full compensation for all excavation backfill filling void around footings due to removing forms blasting grout dewatering removal and disposal of excess or unsuitable material and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
when a class num excavation item is not included in the contract documents the excavation will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items .
num num removal of existing structures no measurement or payment will be made for removing any liquids .
class num excavation will extend a maximum of num inches to vertical planes outside of the structure .
where blasting is required a maximum of num inches will be allowed below the planned elevation .
the upper limits on existing ground or embankments will be the existing groundline or the lower limit of roadway excavation .
the lower limit of the two will control .
the upper limits on preliminary embankments will be the bottom of the as planned footing elevation .
for stepped footings the upper limits will be the bottom of the as planned footing elevation of the highest portion of the footing .
if the preliminary embankment has a surcharge the upper limits will be the lower limit of roadway excavation .
num additional excavation required below the elevation specified in the contract documents and necessitated by the lowering or deepening of footings or the placing of subfoundations or underpinning will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for class num excavation .
num sheeting bracing and shoring either removed or left in place will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items unless otherwise specified .
num excavation necessary to expose or remove piles grillages sheeting cribbing masonry or other obstructions will not be measured nor paid for if the excavation occurs outside the limits of excavation .
removal and disposal of obstructions within the limits of excavation will not be measured separately but the cost will be included in the contract unit price for class num excavation .
sections num num reserved section num removal of existing structures num description .
remove and dispose of wholly or in part designated structures .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction .
before removal operations begin submit a list of the proposed equipment and the removal methods for approval .
num num removal of existing structures sheeting and shoring required for the removal of existing structures or portions thereof shall meet num .
unless otherwise specified the limits of removal shall be num ft below the proposed groundline or to the limits necessary to avoid conflict with the proposed construction .
when remaining portions of an existing structure will be exposed to view in the final structure make a neat num in .
deep saw cut to separate the removal operations from the remaining concrete .
protect existing reinforcing steel as specified in num .
regardless of whether or not a hot mix asphalt hma overlay is depicted in the contract documents or if it is depicted but the actual thickness varies from what is shown no additional compensation or credit will be made .
the provisions of gpnum will not apply .
num removal of bridge deck slabs and parapets .
protect the public against injury and damage from demolition operations .
erect temporary protective shields to prevent any material or debris from entering roadways railroads or waterways .
provide the underclearance specified in tcnum .
refer to num and .num for additional requirements .
submit protective shield working drawings per tcnumb .
ensure that flooring and siding have no cracks or openings through which material particles may pass .
ensure that the shields are able to support over their entire area num lbftnum in addition to their own dead weight .
the preceding weight requirement will be waived when the span to be removed is not over any of the following or within range of rolling debris reaching any of the following a roadway pedestrian walkway bikeway equestrian trail parking area navigable water railroads and railroad property or other traveled way .
b exposed utilities that are either aerial utilities crossing under the span or utilities located between stringers .
c environmental features such as historic ruins endangered species habitat etc .
when the weight requirement is waived but the deck slab is to be sawn into sections and removed by lifting from above provide protection to prevent any loose particles from reaching restricted areas .
in addition num num removal of existing structures place a temporary construction fence under the area of demolition to prohibit accidental access by employees and pedestrians .
after the engineer determines that the protective shields have served their purpose remove and properly dispose of them .
num removal of bridge deck slabs to be replaced .
refer to the contract documents for deck removal restrictions including sequence of locating and delineating structural elements that will remain in the completed structure obtaining elevations saw cutting and equipment restrictions .
num removal of existing bridge .
refer to num .
remove existing bridges including piles as specified and from any area that will interfere with proposed construction as specified in num .
num measurement and payment .
the removal of existing bridges and structures or portion thereof will be measured and paid for as specified .
the payment will be full compensation for all excavation backfill saw cuts professional engineer services removal of existing shields and debris temporary protective shields temporary sheeting and shoring hauling disposal and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
on deck replacement projects payment also includes obtaining all deck elevations specified to determine rebound computations necessary to place new deck at required elevation and submitting all data for review .
construction fence used to restrict access under demolition areas will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the pertinent removal of existing structure item .
when an item for construction fence is included in the contract documents that portion of the construction fence used to protect demolition areas will be excluded from the measurement and payment for that item .
num removal of existing structures will not be measured but will be paid for at the pertinent contract lump sum price .
num removal of existing traffic barriers parapets railings etc .
from bridges including end posts wing walls and retaining walls will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for the pertinent removal of existing traffic barrier item .
num removal of existing structures for which no specific pay item is included in the contract documents will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items specified .
num num drilled holes in existing masonry section num drilled holes in existing masonry num description .
drill holes for grouting of bars bolts or anchorages .
num materials .
grout numc num construction .
drill holes only in the solid portion of masonry .
do not drill at points where cracks exist .
drill holes at least num in .
larger than the insert and at least num in .
from the face of any masonry surface .
use at least no .
num dowel bars .
clean the holes and fill two thirds full of grout .
place the insert and allow to set at least num hours .
num measurement and payment .
drilled holes in existing masonry will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot of drilled hole .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
inserts will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items .
drilled holes for which no specific pay item is included in the contract documents will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the other pertinent items .
sections num num reserved section num piling num description .
furnish and install piling .
when drilled shafts caissons are specified refer to section num .
num materials .
sand num concrete for steel pipe piles num mix no .
num slump num in .
num num piling tremie concrete for steel pipe piles num mix no .
num timber piles num timber sheet piles num resin and fiberglass caps num steel pipe piles num steel h piles num steel sheet piles num reinforcing for steel pipe piles num hardware num water num timber preservatives num num construction .
ensure that piling ordered and delivered to the site is of the correct type and length .
num storage and handling .
store and handle piling to avoid damage .
repair or replace damaged piling as directed .
num preparation for driving .
do not drive piling until completing embankments and excavation .
provide templates or other approved means to ensure that the piles are properly aligned and positioned .
provide a cap or cushion so that hammer energy is transmitted to the pile evenly without damaging the top or butt .
ensure that the top of the pile irrespective of type is normal to the axis of the moving parts of the hammer .
num pile tips .
a provide pointed timber piles where driving conditions require .
the point shall be symmetrical and at least num in .
diameter .
shod timber pile tips or bottoms with a metal shoe or point when specified .
b drift sharpen or bevel the bottom of timber sheet piling to wedge contiguous piles in tight contact .
c drive steel h piles without any special tip reinforcement unless otherwise specified .
d drive steel pipe piles open ended .
num splicing .
do not splice timber piles .
if an isolated timber pile penetrates below planned tip elevation thereby resulting in the top being below planned elevation the engineer will determine when replacement num piling num is required whether to supplement it with an additional pile or when the structure can be changed without detriment .
when splicing of steel h piles and steel pipe piles is necessary splice them as specified using electric arc welding conforming to aws structural welding code for the full periphery .
the number of splices permitted shall be compatible with driving conditions at the site and the standard lengths of piling produced by manufacturers however only one section of each pile shall be less than num ft .
when welding is required above a specified maximum elevation weld as specified in num excluding the submerged arc welding requirement .
welders shall be qualified to meet numa or b for steel pipe piles num in .
in diameter or greater and to meet numb for pipe piles less than num in .
in diameter .
all welding above these limits shall receive num percent magnetic particle inspection mt on the root pass and completed weld and num percent radiographic inspection rt in accordance with aws dnum .
inspectors shall be approved by the office of materials technology omt as specified for certification testing in accordance with aws dnum .
inspectors certified by an accreditedcertified american society for nondestructive testing asnt level iii in the inspection discipline may submit certifications to omt for review .
where a manufactured pile type is designed to be spliced by screwing two pieces together or by the use of couplings or collars and the details for the splice are not specified submit the device for approval .
drive piles in a continuous operation and make splices prior to approaching the estimated tip elevation .
num test piling .
drive test piles to determine the depth of penetration and the length of piling for structures .
the contract documents will specify the test pile locations minimum penetrations bearing values and estimated tip elevations .
order and drive the test piling from this information .
determine the actual safe bearing value of the test piling as specified in num .
from the test pile data and observed behavior order the permanent piling .
num pile driving .
submit a plan of the pile driving method including type of hammer prior to driving any piling .
num num piling drive the permanent piles with the same hammer used to drive the test piles .
if the hammer is changed even if the energy ratings of the hammers are identical drive additional test piles at no additional cost to the administration .
operate hammers at speeds recommended by the manufacturer for the bearing value specified .
the manufacturers manual for the hammer employed shall be available to the engineer at the project site .
hammer energy for the purpose of these specifications is defined as the approved rated energy per blow of the power hammer .
tests to determine the acceptability and energy rating of power hammers will be directed by the engineer .
pay all costs including the administrations expenses for determining approval and energy rating .
when considering the hammer for approval the ratio of the weight of the pile to the weight of the striking unit will be evaluated to determine the adequacy of the hammer .
construct leads or spuds to afford freedom of movement of the hammer during the driving phases .
drive the piles within the tolerance as specified without damaging the piles .
remove any leads that do not produce satisfactory results from the project .
do not drive with the hammer out of the leads .
on all special marine or water projects and pile bents use leads of sufficient length that a follower will not be necessary .
provide guides and additional support to prevent excessive bending or buckling under the hammer blow when driving long piles and batter piles .
hold piles in place and alignment by templates or other approved means .
do not perform external jetting of any pile .
if it is necessary to remove material from within a pile shell to advance the pile tip or merely to obtain room for concreting leave at least a num ft soil plug undisturbed at the tip of the pile .
install turbidity curtains around piles being cleaned when appropriate .
auger or drill holes through strata that resists driving .
use an approved auger or drill that is no larger than the nominal diameter of a round pile or the minimum diameter of a circle in which an h pile will fit .
after the hole is completed insert the pile and fill voids between the pile and the walls of the hole with dry sand .
complete the driving and then fill remaining voids with dry sand .
num num pile driving tolerances .
a general .
do not use foundation piles out of the specified position by more than num in .
in any direction after driving regardless of the length of piles .
variation from the vertical or from the batter shall not be more than num in.ft .
b h piles .
limit rotation of the pile to num degrees from the as planned axis .
c bents .
drive piles so that the cap may be placed as specified .
num unacceptable piles .
take one or more of the following actions or propose other actions for approval a withdraw and replace the pile with a new pile .
b drive a second pile adjacent to the unacceptable pile .
c splice or build up the pile except timber piles .
d extend a sufficient portion of the footing to properly embed the pile .
num bearing value .
observe and report the behavior of the test pile from the time it is placed in the leads until it attains practical refusal or reaches a specified stratum .
to provide a guide as to the probable supporting value at each position the engineer will compute the safe bearing value from the following formula p numwh for single acting power hammers s num nume p for double acting power hammers s num where p safe bearing value in pounds .
h height of fall in feet .
w weight in pounds of striking parts of hammer .
e approved hammer energy per blow in footpounds for double acting differential acting and diesel hammers .
s the average penetration in inches per blow for the last several inches of penetration .
piling num num num piling the above formula is applicable only when a the hammer is operating properly and at the manufacturers recommended speed in the case of a power hammer .
b the head of the pile is not broomed or crushed .
c the penetration is reasonably quick and uniform .
d there is no discernable bounce after the blow .
e a follower is not used .
if the contract does not provide for test loading use the results of this formula as applied to the test piles to designate the proposed penetration or lengths of piles .
however evaluate the driving record of each pile to ensure its ability to carry the intended load .
drive test piles in permanent vertical pile locations .
test piles found to be satisfactory shall be utilized as permanent piles .
num pile cutoff and removal .
cut off the tops of piles and pile casings except timber piles that support timber caps at the elevations specified .
make cuts on a true plane perpendicular to the axis of the pile unless otherwise specified .
cut off timber piles that support timber caps to ensure that the plane of the bottom of the cap will bear fully on the pile head .
shims shall not be placed between the timber cap and pile head .
cut off piles used for sheeting and shoring to at least num ft below existing grade channel bottom or mud line as applicable .
when specified these piles may be removed .
dispose of all removed material .
num steel pipe piles .
after driving remove soil plugs to the specified elevation .
prior to placing filling when specified or reinforcement use a suitable light to inspect the interior for the entire unplugged length .
do not fill or place reinforcement until the pile is approved .
provide all required equipment for inspection including oxygen light boatswains chair and lift .
comply with federal state and local safety regulations .
num concreting steel pipe piles .
perform concreting as specified in section num .
perform reinforcement work as specified in section num .
securely fasten the reinforcement together to form a cage positioned and held at a uniform distance from the shell .
num piling num except as specified herein use tie wire to secure tie bars and bands of cage reinforcement .
for foundation footing piles tack welding may be used provided it is performed by an administration certified welder .
for bents and column piles tie bars bands and spacer lugs shall not be welded to the main reinforcing bars except that a band may be placed at the top and bottom of the pile cage and all main bars welded to the band .
use tie wires to fasten the remainder of the intersections of ties and main bars .
clean the areas in the top portion of the pile that are to be filled with reinforced concrete and tremie concrete .
place and cure tremie concrete prior to dewatering the top of the pile shell .
place the reinforcing unit in the top portion of the pile prior to filling with mix no .
num concrete .
do not place concrete in any pile until completing driving within a radius of num ft or until all the piles for any unit of the structure pier bent or abutment have been driven to their final penetration and accepted .
if this procedure is not feasible discontinue driving within the above limits until the concrete in the last pile placed has set at least num hours .
immediately prior to concreting remove water and other foreign substances .
deposit the concrete in one continuous operation .
the restriction in section num for dropping concrete more than num ft does not apply .
set and fasten reinforcing steel cages in proper position in the pile before filling with concrete except when the reinforcing steel cage extends num ft or less below the top of the pile the concrete filling may be placed before installing the reinforcement .
thoroughly consolidate using mechanical vibrators from the bottom of the reinforcing steel cages to the pile top .
do not disturb or apply loads to concreted piles until all concrete has been in place and cured at least num hours .
num treatment for timber pile heads .
use an approved asphalt treatment to paint timber pile heads that are not to be embedded in concrete .
after the asphalt has sufficiently cured cover it with a glass resin composite shield .
apply the first coat of resin to the top and down the side at least num in .
beyond the limits of the woven glass .
apply precut woven glass cloth using a num in .
grooved aluminum roller to achieve wet out .
neatly wrap woven glass cloth over the top of the pile drape it down the side at least num in .
and secure using copper nails .
when the first coat of resin has taken a tack free set apply a second coat of resin to seal the entire application .
num num piling num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num piling permanent and test will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the pertinent piling item .
the measured length of all piling will be from its tip up to final cutoff unless otherwise specified .
for test piles not utilized as permanent piles the measurement for cutoff will be at the same elevation as the nearest proposed permanent pile or to actual top of test pile whichever is lower .
where piling designated as test piles is accepted for use in the permanent structure measurement will be made as test piles and no additional allowance will be made in other piling items .
num furnishing and setup of pile driving equipment required for driving permanent and test piles will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for the pertinent pile item .
when an item for setup for driving pile is included in the contract documents the furnishing and setup of pile driving equipment will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for the pertinent setup for driving pile item .
the unit price per each for the setup required for driving each pile for the proposed structure will be used regardless of the distance that the equipment is moved for each pile setup .
a maximum of one setup will be paid per pile location .
no additional compensation will be paid for any setup required for redriving or any additional driving of any pile no matter what reason the particular pile may require redriving or additional driving .
num pile points for steel h piles will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for the pertinent pile point for steel h pile item .
num timber sheet piling will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per num board foot mbm for the pertinent timber sheet piling item .
computation of quantities will be based on nominal thickness of lumber the length of the sheet piling and the average depth of the sheet piling from cutoff at the top to the tip of the sheet piling in the completed structure .
no allowance will be made for waste .
num steel sheet piling will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square foot as measured along the plane of surface for the pertinent steel sheet piling item .
num the following will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items num num pile load test a when specified tips for steel pipe piles .
b test pieces of sheet piling timber or steel .
c dewatering clean out filler reinforcement and concrete used in steel pipe piles .
d pile splices .
e auguring including sleeve and backfill when required .
f cleaning painting or coating of piling .
g piling or sheet piling for temporary structures piles or sheet piling driven for the contractors convenience or for any piles or sheet piling not specified .
h piling not approved by the engineer such as piles not properly driven piles with questionable safe bearing values piles damaged during driving or piles driven below planned cutoff or the removal of any pile rejected by the engineer as unsatisfactory .
i glass resin composite shield used on timber piles .
section num pile load test num description .
when a load test item is included in the contract documents conduct and record load tests .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction .
ensure that the load test setup the measuring system the loading device the loading procedure the frequency of measuring the movement of piles and the record keeping meet d num unless otherwise specified .
at each load test location the engineer will provide driving criteria for the test pile .
then drive and load test the pile to the test load specified .
if the pile fails to achieve this capacity perform an additional load test on a second test pile .
locate this pile adjacent to the initial test pile and drive it in accordance with the revised driving criteria provided by the engineer .
when directed redrive piles not meeting the required penetration resistance .
num num pile load test use the same equipment and methodology for driving the load test piles that will be used for driving the permanent piles .
at each load test location construct a test enclosure to protect all of the equipment including dial gauges load cells loading apparatus and the personnel taking readings .
when necessary maintain a temperature of at least num f within the enclosure .
illuminate the test enclosure to allow taking readings at all times of the day .
ventilate the enclosure to prevent fogging or frosting of gauges .
at least seven days prior to the start of the first pile load test submit drawings showing all details of the proposed load test setup .
include the method of applying the load the reaction frame and reaction pile configuration if used and the placement and support of measuring devices .
revise the load test setup if directed .
obtain the services of a professional engineer experienced in structural design and registered in the state of maryland to design the reaction frame .
ensure that the load test setup is capable of supporting the test load for the duration of the test .
maintain a clear distance from reaction piles to the test pile of at least num times the distance from the midpoint of web to end of flange for h piles and at least num times the pile top radius for pipe piles and timber piles .
where necessary or if directed brace the unsupported length of load test piles to prevent buckling and without influencing the test results .
use dial gauges having an accuracy of num in .
and a minimum travel of num in .
as the primary instrument for measuring movement .
place three dial gauges spaced num degrees apart as the primary system to measure movement of the top of the pile .
use a scale mirror and piano wire as a secondary system .
ensure that the load apparatus has a capacity of num percent of the test load and meets d num .
ensure that no jack is loaded in excess of num percent of the total capacity of the jack .
if more than one hydraulic jack is used provide jacks that are of the same piston diameter connected to a common manifold and pressure gauge and operated by a single hydraulic pump .
apply loads uniformly without impact .
if hydraulic jacks are used equip them with automatic regulators so that constant pressure can be num num pile load test maintained for the duration of the test without frequent manual adjustment .
unless weights of known magnitude are used to load the test piles use a load cell having an accuracy tolerance within plus or minus num percent of the applied load as the primary method of measuring the test load .
calibrate the load cell prior to the test and submit a copy of the calibration report .
provide a pressure gauge as a secondary system .
calibrate the pressure gauge hydraulic ram and hydraulic pump as a unit to an accuracy within num percent of the applied load a single high capacity jack is preferred over multiple jacks .
when a multiple jacking system is used fit each jack with a pressure gauge in addition to the master gauge in order to detect malfunctions .
recalibrate load measuring devices if required by observed performance .
cut off the load test pile perpendicular to the longitudinal axis to allow for full bearing .
place a steel plate at least num in .
thick over the cutoff surface in a manner that facilitates axial loading and even bearing on the test pile .
for all test piles driven to the embedded depths specified use the standard loading procedure per d num or as directed .
continue loading to the specified test load or to failure whichever occurs first .
provide a scale attached to the reaction piles that can be monitored with a transit to determine if the piles are moving .
if at any stage during the test the engineer detects malfunctioning of any furnished apparatus or the load is being eccentrically applied or the anchor piles are yielding abandon the test and replace it with another test at no additional cost to the administration .
ensure that all necessary personnel are present at the site at all times during the performance of the test to maintain the required load .
after the pile test program is complete remove or cut off reaction piles as specified in num .
perform load tests on steel pipe piles prior to filling .
num measurement and payment .
load tests will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for the pertinent load test item .
the payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing all equipment drawings monitoring recording removal of all devices at the completion of the tests and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
in the num num drilled shafts caissons event that a properly conducted load test fails to achieve the designated capacity the additional tests will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each under the load test item .
section num drilled shafts caissons num description .
construct drilled shafts caissons as specified .
num materials .
refer to num except as modified herein .
concrete mix no .
num num reinforcing steel num steel casings a num grade num or a num num construction .
refer to num num and num except as modified herein .
num subfoundation investigation .
when the contract documents include an item for subfoundation investigation conduct a subfoundation investigation program prior to ordering or fabricating reinforcement for drilled shafts .
use this program to determine the elevation of suitable bearing stratum and the required depth of the drilled shafts .
select approximately a third of the drilled shaft locations spread over the total number of locations and drill test holes at least num ft below the estimated drilled shaft length .
after drilling the test holes the engineer will evaluate the data to determine the uniformity of the foundation materials .
if the evaluation determines that more test holes are required drill additional test holes at approved locations .
num shaft installer .
obtain the services of a shaft installer having a proven record of experience and having successfully completed at least three projects with similar subsurface conditions shaft sizes depths and minimum volumes of work as contained in the project .
submit evidence of pertinent experience for approval before proceeding with drilling shafts .
furnish a certified drilled shaft report containing the following information for each drilled shaft a top and bottom elevations .
b final center line location at top .
c variation of shaft from plumb .
num num drilled shafts caissons d results of tests performed .
e levelness of bottom .
f seepage of water .
g top and bottom elevation of any casings left in place .
h any unusual conditions .
i variation of dimensions from planned .
j dates of start and completion of excavation .
k inspection testing and placement of concrete including any delays in concreting and location of construction joints in shafts .
l reinforcing steel .
m any additional information relevant to the asbuilt drilled installation .
record and maintain information pertinent to each drilled shaft and provide required data to other testing and inspection personnel .
provide all facilities required for the safe and convenient conduct of the engineers inspection and testing procedures .
num geotechnical engineer .
when specified employ the services of a qualified geotechnical engineer for inspection and testing for installation of drilled shafts .
ensure that the geotechnical engineer is a professional engineer registered in the state of maryland has a demonstrated record of experience with similar drilled installations and is approved prior to beginning auguring for the drilled shafts .
the geotechnical engineer shall submit a plan containing the proposed methods to be used to inspect the drilled shafts as specified herein .
the geotechnical engineer shall visually inspect the bottom of each drilled shaft and perform tests as necessary to verify the bearing capacity .
drilled shafts shall be founded in material having the specified minimum design bearing capacity .
the geotechnical engineer shall provide certification that the drilled shafts were properly drilled to a satisfactory depth and bearing .
num shaft requirements .
excavate shafts by auguring drilling or hand excavation as necessary to reach the required bearing strata .
when num num drilled shafts caissons earth walls can not be maintained without spilling into the shaft install casings or slurry as excavation proceeds .
ensure that the casings are full length and watertight .
the casings shall be of sufficient thickness to withstand compressive displacement and withdrawal stresses and to maintain the shaft walls .
withdraw casings as concrete is placed unless otherwise specified .
the geotechnical engineer shall determine the final bottom elevation of drilled shafts when the services are required .
all holes shall be inspected and approved .
do not excavate holes for successive drilled shafts until adjacent holes are filled with concrete and allowed to set .
drilled shaft tolerances a maximum permissible variation of center line locations is not more than numth of the shaft diameter or num in .
whichever is less .
b maximum out of plumb is num percent of the depth num percent of the shaft diameter or num in .
whichever is less .
c the top of the shaft or concrete cutoff elevation shall be within num in .
of the design elevation .
if the specified tolerances are exceeded provide corrective construction to compensate for excessive eccentricity at no additional cost to the administration .
submit proposed methods of corrective construction for approval .
excavate the bottom of drilled shafts to an undisturbed level plane .
remove all loose material prior to placing concrete .
dewater drilled shafts as required to facilitate excavation inspection and concreting .
ensure that the each drilled shaft has been inspected before placing concrete .
reinforcing steel .
fabricate and place reinforcing steel cages for each drilled shaft as one continuous unit .
place reinforcement accurately and symmetrically about the axis of the hole and keep securely in position during concrete placement .
protect exposed ends of extended reinforcement from damage .
num num driilled shafts caissons concrete .
fill drilled shafts with concrete immediately after inspection and approval by the geotechnical engineer and the engineer .
place concrete in one continuous operation in a smooth flow without segregating .
use mechanical vibration for consolidation of at least the top num ft of each shaft .
concrete may be free dropped up to num ft provided that the procedures ensure that the concrete falls vertically without hitting the inside walls of the hole or falling directly on the reinforcing steel .
when the engineer determines that the concrete placement procedures are unsatisfactory place concrete by means of bottom discharge bucket flexible drop chute elephant trunk hopper tremie or pumping .
use chutes tremies or pumping where a drop of more than num ft is required .
place concrete in the dry insofar as practicable .
if excessive water occurs and it is not feasible to dewater the drilled pier shaft for concreting place concrete by the tremie method as specified in num .
control tremie placement operations to ensure that tremie is not broken during continuous placing from bottom to top .
if approved other methods of depositing concrete underwater may be used .
maintain a sufficient head of concrete to prevent any reduction in the diameter of the drilled shaft by earth pressure and to prevent extraneous material from mixing with the concrete .
coordinate the withdrawal of temporary casings with concrete placement operations to maintain a head of concrete approximately num ft above the casing bottom .
stop concrete placement at the top cutoff elevations shown on the contract documents .
screed the tops of drilled shafts level and give them a roughened surface finish .
where the cutoff elevation is above ground elevation form the top section to extend the shaft to the required elevation .
construction joints are permitted in drilled shafts if concrete placement operations must be interrupted as accepted by the engineer .
screed the surface of the construction joint level and give it a roughened surface .
apply an approved bonding compound prior to placing additional concrete .
the engineer may require fulldepth continuous coring of drilled concrete shafts where observations of temporary casing removal and concrete placement operations indicate cause for suspicion of quality of concrete presence of voids segregation or other defects .
perform this work at no additional cost to the administration .
defective drilled shafts .
repair or replace defective drilled shafts as directed .
num num protective jackets for piles num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num drilled shafts including furnishing and setup of auguring equipment auguring drilling excavating dewatering inspection testing services of the shaft installer and geotechnical engineer sleeves reinforcement concrete and disposal of excess and unsuitable material will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the pertinent drilled shaft item .
num when subfoundation investigation is specified it will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
sections num num reserved section num protective jackets for piles num description .
install protective jacket for piles .
num materials .
fine aggregate num portland cement num type ii concrete admixture num water num welded wire fabric num fiberglass protective pile jackets num and num anchorstandoff devices a num stainless steel screws a num type num num jackets .
fabricate jackets for new piles in one solid piece with no longitudinal joint .
closure joints on jackets for existing piles need not be selflocking provided the joint can be field formed with fiberglass and is approved .
ensure that the field formed closure joint meets the tensile strength of the jacket .
all jackets shall be at least num in .
thick .
ensure that the surfaces of the fiberglass are free of bond inhibiting agents .
for steel and concrete piles provide noncorrosive standoffs on the inside face of jackets to maintain the jackets in the required position .
num num protective jackets for piles num closure joint warranty .
when closure joints are used for existing piles furnish the administration a written num year warranty against installation defects and ensure that the manufacturer submits a similar warranty against manufacturing defects .
submit both prior to starting the installations .
num grout .
submit the proposed grout mix design and method of installation for approval .
steel and concrete piles .
use grout consisting of at least num lbydnum of cement num num percent of air entrainment by volume and proportioned with fine aggregate and water to provide a pumpable mixture .
the minimum num day compressive strength shall be num psi .
ready mixed grout will be permitted by written permission of the engineer and shall be from a manufacturer approved by the office of materials technology .
timber piles .
submit grout consisting of water insensitive epoxy and fine aggregate mixed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num construction .
prepare and submit working drawings for approval showing equipment installation procedure including location of tremie pipes injection port method of sealing the bottom of the jacket and method of support during grout placement .
refer to section num .
num cleaning piles .
clean the piles of all surface contamination such as grease oil tar loose rust loose coatings and marine organisms .
water blast steel and concrete piles with a nozzle pressure of num to num num psi and timber piles with a nozzle pressure of num to num psi .
clean the piles within num hours prior to placing the grout .
do not place jackets until the cleaning is approved .
num preparation of protective jackets .
clean and abrasive blast the inside faces of the jackets to remove any agents that will inhibit attachment of anchor devices and bonding of the grout .
the engineer may require these procedures to be repeated if they are not acceptable at the time of placement .
the engineer will inspect the protective jackets prior to placement .
repair loose or damaged anchor devices and replace protective jackets deemed unsatisfactory .
num num protective jackets for piles seal the space between the pile and the jacket at the bottom .
use only external temporary support devices to position the protective jackets during installation .
remove supports before final acceptance .
num filling void .
fill the void between the pile and the protective jacket with grout placed by the tremie method using two tremie pipes or by pumping using an injection port located at the bottom of the protective jacket .
equip tremie pipes with hopper tops .
do not use bottom dump buckets .
use approved mixing equipment in preparation and handling of the grout .
remove oil and other rust inhibitors from the mixing drums stirring mechanisms and other portions of the equipment in contact with the grout before the mixers are used .
accurately measure all materials by volume or weight as they are fed into the mixer .
mix for at least one minute .
the continuously agitated grout may be held in the mixer or agitator no more than one hour or for num hours when the temperature falls below num f. place grout as one continuous operation for each pile .
take care in the placement of grout to obtain a sufficient flow to ensure proper distribution and bonding to the pile .
if emergency interruptions of continuous grout pumping become necessary stop the operation and remove the jacket and the grout .
thoroughly clean the pile as specified in num prior to continuing the operation .
do not reuse the pile jacket unless it is removed prior to initial setting of the grout and is approved .
finish the top of grout sloped to drain away from the pile .
remove all excess grout from the outside of the piles and jackets after filling .
num protective jacket inspection .
the installation operations will be observed during all phases of construction .
in the presence of the engineer remove the first two protective jackets installed to provide visual evidence that the desired results are being obtained .
do not begin removal until the grout has set sufficiently to maintain its shape .
the engineer will examine the grout for cavities honeycombing and other defects .
a if the grout is satisfactory the installation operations will be approved .
remove all grout as directed and clean and reinstall a new jacket in conformance with these specifications .
do not reuse the original protective jacket .
b if the grout on only one of the installations is unsatisfactory remove the third protective jacket installed and inspect .
if this num num subfoundation investigation inspection is satisfactory the installation operations will be approved .
reinstall the protective jackets as specified in a. c if the grout is unsatisfactory upon removal of the protective jacket on both of the first two piles inspected or on two out of the three piles inspected as specified in b submit modifications to the operations for approval before continuing .
continue these procedures until the installation operations are satisfactory .
d additional inspections will be performed whenever required .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for fabricating furnishing and installing protective jackets including welded steel wire fabric grout excavation and all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num protective jackets will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for the pertinent protective jacket for pile item .
num protective jackets will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot depth for the pertinent protective jacket for pile item .
num protective jacket inspections that are satisfactory and accepted will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for the pertinent protective jacket inspection item .
payment will also be full compensation for removal of the jacket removal of the grout cleaning and reinstalling a protective jacket welded steel wire fabric and grout .
num protective jacket inspections that are unsatisfactory and rejected will not be measured or paid for .
the contractor shall remove the protective jacket grout and welded steel wire fabric and clean the existing structure .
section num subfoundation investigation num description .
conduct an investigation to verify the character and suitability of the subfoundation material for foundation purposes .
num num portland cement concrete structures num materials .
not applicable .
num construction .
drill test holes in accordance with t num and t num at least num working days prior to excavation or pile driving in that area .
notify the engineer at least num working days prior to drilling .
drill holes at the locations and to the depths specified .
record all information on the administrations boring log form no .
sha num available from the office of materials technology .
provide an approved geologist or a geotechnical engineer that is a professional engineer registered in the state of maryland to ensure that the test holes conform to these specifications .
submit the drilling results within two working days after drilling any given hole .
within five working days after receipt the engineer will evaluate the subfoundation investigation to determine if any change in the asplanned excavation is necessary .
do not begin excavation until the engineers evaluation is received for that particular foundation .
num measurement and payment .
subfoundation investigation will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the actual total length of holes drilled .
the payment will be full compensation for the geologist or geotechnical engineer services and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num portland cement concrete structures num description .
furnish place finish and cure concrete bridges culverts and miscellaneous structures including cofferdams forms and falsework .
num materials .
curing materials num form release compound num concrete mixes num and num grout num linseed oil num drains downspouts weep holes and pipes num reinforcement num cast iron scuppers num anchor bolts num num num portland cement concrete structures steel forms which remain in place num joint sealer num preformed joint fillers num preformed elastomeric joint seals num water stops and flashing num and num production plants num fusion bonded epoxy num water num epoxy bonding compound num num admixtures .
do not use calcium chloride or other admixtures containing chloride salts in concrete placed on steel bridge deck forms .
num requirements for accessories .
ensure that accessories such as inserts and ties that will remain in completed superstructures within the top num in .
of final deck slab concrete are either epoxy coated or made of material other than aluminum that will not rust .
these same requirements pertain to accessories that will remain in parapets sidewalks or other portions of the structure designated to have epoxy coated reinforcing steel .
do not use inserts in the top half of slabs exposed to vehicular traffic unless specified .
num precast reinforced concrete box sections .
meet m num or m num including concrete design strength .
all details shall be as specified .
construction joints between the walls and the bottom and top slabs are optional .
certify as specified in num .
num composition of concrete mixes for slip form .
for construction of parapets and median barriers on bridges use mix no .
num with a num in .
maximum slump .
measure the slump at the placement point as the concrete is charged into the slip form machine .
use crushed stone meeting m num size number num for the coarse aggregate proportioned to be num percent of the total aggregate in the mix .
other size coarse aggregate may be used provided the slip form results are acceptable .
num construction .
produce concrete at the work site or away from the work site by an approved central mixing plant or by approved truck mixing as specified in section num .
when specified remove portions of existing parapets or end posts as specified in num .
num equipment .
use equipment of sufficient capacity to complete any unit or section of concrete between construction joints in one continuous operation consistent with approved placement operations .
num num portland cement concrete structures with written approval hand mixing may be permitted for small volumes of concrete used in isolated portions of the structure where structural integrity is not critical and the volume does not exceed num ydnum .
num forms .
a design criteria .
num design loads .
per aashto lrfd bridge construction specifications temporary works .
assume the lumber in the forms to weigh num lbftnum .
num design stresses .
timber design .
per aci standard recommended practice for concrete formwork aci num .
deflections for form members shall not exceed num of the span or num in .
unit stresses stipulated in aashto for treated timber may be increased by num percent but shall not exceed the values listed below .
compression perpendicular to grain num psi compression parallel to grain num psi flexural stress num psi horizontal shear beams up to num in .
deep num psi beams over num in .
deep num psi axial tension num psi plywood .
for plywood without backing calculate the strength of plywood based on the grain of the face plies running parallel to its span .
install the plywood in this manner .
steel members for forms .
per aashto lrfd design specifications and asshto lrfd bridge construction specifications .
for design where no dynamic loading is involved the aisc standard manual of steel construction allowable stress design may be used as the accepted design code .
steel forms which remain in place .
the maximum deflection shall not exceed num of the span and not in excess of num in .
do not use camber to compensate for deflection in excess of these limits .
the design spans of the form sheets shall be the clear distance between beam or girder flanges less num in .
num num portland cement concrete structures the unit working stress in the steel sheet and supporting members shall not be more than num of the specified minimum yield strength of the material furnished but not to exceed num num psi .
compute physical design properties in accordance with the american iron and steel institute specification for design of cold formed steel structural members .
b working drawing approval .
su bmit detail form falsework and centering plans and design loads for approval as specified in section num .
working drawings for forms shall include all members proposed for use as well as form ties and bracing .
do not submit details for form ties separately incorporate them in the general working drawings submittal .
the rate of placing concrete shall be noted on the working drawings .
approval of the working drawings does not relieve the contractor of responsibility as specified in tcnum .
the provisions of num also apply when working drawings are submitted for falsework and centering .
c forms at construction joints and corners .
provide ties or bolts num to num in .
from each side of construction joints for tightening the forms against the hardened adjacent concrete prior to placing fresh concrete .
at joints where forms have been removed and reconstructed extend the form over the concrete already in place and draw tightly against the previously placed concrete .
provide fillets at all sharp corners except when otherwise specified and provide a bevel or draft in the case of all projections .
chamfer all exposed corners of concrete with num x num in .
milled chamfer strips except on unexposed footings or where specified .
d form scaffolds and platforms .
build form scaffolds and platforms along the outside of bridge deck fascias during construction of forms for bridge decks .
design and construct them as integral parts of the form supports .
furnish separate design calculations with the working drawing submission .
assume the responsibility of tcnum even after approval of the working drawings .
e forms for unexposed surfaces .
ensure that sheathing studs and bracing are of sound material and that studs and wales are straight true and surfaced on two edges to a uniform width .
ensure that the inside faces of the forms are constructed sufficiently smooth so that the resulting concrete surfaces are accurately formed .
num num portland cement concrete structures f forms for exposed surfaces .
unless otherwise specified in the contract documents support the bridge deck concrete between stringers with steel forms which remain in place except in panels where a longitudinal deck construction joint is located between stringers .
ensure that forms used for widening and rehabilitation provide exposed finished concrete surfaces that match the existing structure .
num lined forms for exposed surfaces .
use approved composition board sanded plywood or metal for contact surfaces of lined forms for surfaces exposed to weather or view .
ensure that all studs are surfaced two edges to a uniform width .
the studs and backing shall be solid straight and free of detrimental defects .
however the backing need not be of the quality used for contact forms for unexposed surfaces .
sheathing for form backing shall be surfaced two sides to a uniform thickness of at least the dimension approved on the working drawings .
ensure that form sheathing is built solidly securely nailed to studs and placed to prevent any bulging of the lining .
num unlined forms for exposed surfaces .
use five ply sanded plywood of the specified thickness for surfaces exposed to weather or view .
use plywood manufactured especially for concrete formwork using waterproof glue .
all studs and wales shall be surfaced two edges to a uniform width .
use full size sheets of plywood except where smaller pieces cover an entire area .
solidly back joints to prevent leakage and nail the edges of abutting sheets to the same stud or blocking with sixpenny nails not more than num in .
apart .
where rustication occurs construct horizontal plywood joints behind a rustication strip .
otherwise place horizontal joints at the same respective elevations in all portions of the structure .
where vertical rustication occurs construct vertical joints in the lining behind a rustication strip .
otherwise keep vertical joints to a minimum butted tightly together and sealed with crack filler as the plywood is nailed in place .
g steel forms which remain in place .
num installation .
the surface in contact with concrete shall be smooth and free of surface irregularities .
ensure that working drawings specify the grade of steel the physical and sectional num num portland cement concrete structures properties and a clear indication of where the forms are supported by steel beam flanges subject to tensile stresses .
do not weld form supports to flanges of steel that are not considered weldable or to portions of flanges that are subject to tensile stresses .
welding and welds per aws bridge welding code pertaining to fillet welds .
unless otherwise specified use steel forms between stringers to support bridge deck concrete except where a longitudinal deck construction joint is located between stringers .
num procedure check and inspection .
remove at least one section of the forms at a location and time selected by the engineer from each span of each bridge in the contract .
if the bridge has a longitudinal joint remove a form on each side of the joint from each span .
do this as soon after placing the concrete as practical to provide visual evidence that the concrete mix and the placement procedures are obtaining the desired results .
remove an additional section if the engineer determines that there have been any changes in the concrete mix or in the placement procedures that warrant additional inspection .
at locations where sections of the forms are removed replacement of the forms will not be required but the adjacent metal forms and supports shall be repaired to present a neat appearance and ensure their satisfactory retention .
as soon as the form is removed the concrete surfaces will be examined for cavities honeycombing and other defects .
if the engineer finds irregularities but determines that the irregularities do not justify rejection of the work repair the concrete as directed .
give the concrete an ordinary surface finish as specified in numa .
if the concrete where the form is removed is unsatisfactory remove additional forms as necessary to inspect and repair the slab .
modify the method of construction as required to obtain satisfactory concrete .
remove all unsatisfactory concrete and replace or repair as directed .
provide facilities required for the safe and convenient conduct of the engineers inspection procedures .
num num portland cement concrete structures h steel forms which do not remain in place .
surface shall be smooth and free of bolts bolt heads nuts rivet heads welding seams and surface irregularities .
forms that produce unacceptable results will be rejected and shall not be reused .
num for round columns and piers .
use steel forms that are at least num gauge have a minimum number of horizontal joints and are column height .
num for pier caps and crash walls .
prefabricated girder type steel forms may be used for forming pier caps or crash walls .
use one piece where practical for each element of these forms including side bottom and end .
arrange splices to provide a symmetrical pattern .
num for reinforced concrete box culverts and rigid frames .
use steel forms or forms constructed of wood or composition wood panel sheathing set in metal frames .
steel forms for box culverts and rigid frames shall be at least num gauge .
i fiber column forms .
fiber column forms shall only be used for round columns .
the forms shall produce columns truly round and straight .
protect forms from dampness before concrete is placed .
do not splice fiber forms .
j release agents .
apply form release compound immediately before placing concrete .
k temporary supports .
build temporary supports used for centering and falsework on good firm foundations .
unless otherwise provided ensure that they bear upon strata at or below the frost line unless rock is available .
where required drive piling for support .
ensure that the strength and bracing of the temporary supports will provide a completed structure having the shape specified .
use jacks or hardwood wedges in connection with the temporary supports to take up settlement either before or during placing of concrete .
set temporary supports to give the structural camber specified and allowance for shrinkage and settlement .
if during construction any weakness settlement or distortion develops stop the work and remove any masonry affected .
strengthen the temporary structures before resuming .
construct centering to permit gradual and uniform lowering .
l defective forms .
use an approved device for removing or modifying steel forms which remain in place .
burning is prohibited .
the contact num num portland cement concrete structures m form ties .
use approved form ties .
ensure that ties leave no metal closer than num in .
from the surface .
they shall not be fitted with lugs cones washers or other devices that act as spreaders within the form or for any purpose that leaves a hole larger than num in .
diameter .
when prefabricated steel girder forms are used use tapered ties no greater than num in .
diameter .
ensure that ties are clean and free of rust .
when ties are removed pressure grout the holes with a nonshrink mortar mixed to match the color and texture of the concrete .
coat the removable portions of ties with a clear lubricant or other approved material .
during removal of form ties avoid spalling the concrete on the exposed surface .
do not cut the ties back from the surface .
n form support brackets or devices .
devices attached to previously placed concrete may be used provided all parts are acceptable .
no metal part of an insert threader or anchor that remains in the concrete shall be within num in .
of the surface .
do not attach brackets or other devices until the concrete is cured and it has attained a compressive strength of at least num psi .
all voids left in the concrete after removal of brackets and other devices shall be no greater than num in .
diameter .
fill them with mortar and finish the surface as specified in numa .
o form removal .
for determining the time when falsework and forms may be removed backfill placed and when loads may be applied to structures make an adequate number of concrete test specimens in addition to those required to check the quality of the concrete being produced .
after meeting all formwork requirements remove and dispose of all forms except those specified to remain in place .
do not use methods of form removal likely to cause overstressing of the concrete .
do not remove forms and their support without approval .
remove supports in a manner that permits the concrete to uniformly and gradually take the stresses due to its own weight .
p year built marking .
suppl y the correctly sized forms and molds and cast the year of completion into each structure as determined by the engineer .
num anchor bolt placement .
place anchor bolts as specified in num .
num num portland cement concrete structures num concreting .
clean forms before placing concrete .
ensure that temporary struts stays and braces holding the forms in correct shape and alignment are not buried in the concrete .
if faces of completed or proposed excavated footing areas are disturbed prior to concreting extend the footings to bear on acceptable undisturbed faces at no additional cost to the administration .
place all concrete except tremie concrete in the dry .
a foundations .
assume responsibility for any reinforcement fabricated prior to approval of foundations .
if bearing material varies more than assumed in design the engineer may direct the footing be lowered raised or deepened subfoundation placed piles used or a combination of these methods used to best obtain bearing .
if planned footings are changed vertically revise reinforcing steel as required .
use plain nonreinforced concrete mix no .
num to construct subfoundation concrete for bridges retaining walls and wing walls of box culverts or rigid frames .
this concrete need not be vibrated and the usual curing and cold weather requirements may be reduced to three days .
selected backfill using number num aggregate may be used for subfoundation for box culvert barrels headwalls and miscellaneous structures .
b concrete placement .
avoid segregation of the material and the displacement of the reinforcement .
the use of troughs chutes and pipes for conveying concrete more than num ft from the mixer to the forms will be permitted only when approved .
open troughs and chutes shall be metal or metal lined .
where segregation occurs due to steep slopes equip chutes with baffles .
where placing operations involve dropping the concrete more than num ft deposit it through a tube made of sheet metal canvas or other approved material .
do not use aluminum hoppers or tubes .
keep lower ends as close as possible to the newly placed concrete but not more than num ft above the concrete .
all tubes shall be at least num in .
diameter unless otherwise directed .
do not disturb the forms after initial set of the concrete and do not place any strain on the projecting ends of the reinforcement .
place concrete in horizontal layers not more than num in .
high except as provided herein .
when less than the complete area of a layer is placed in one operation terminate it in a vertical bulkhead .
place and vibrate each layer before the preceding layer has taken initial set .
num num portland cement concrete structures place concrete in columns and walls in one continuous operation unless otherwise directed .
allow concrete to set at least num hours before placing the caps .
where walls piers columns struts and posts have horizontal construction joints do not place succeeding lifts until the lower placement has set for num hours .
prior to subsequent placement clean all accumulations of mortar splashed upon the reinforcement .
avoid damaging the concrete seal bond near and at the surface of the concrete while cleaning the reinforcing steel .
c superstructure placement .
num grade controls for bridge deck slabs .
place bridge deck slabs supported by new stringers to the specified line and grade .
take all necessary precautions including a check on all new bridge seat elevations as the last order of work before setting stringers .
complete any adjustments resulting from this check before starting additional work .
after the structural steel is set make a final check of elevations of all the steel stringers at points corresponding to those for dead load deflection and finished roadway elevations .
make computations and have them approved set controls at proper elevations to produce finished tops of concrete bridge decks that will be true to the planned line and grade of the roadway .
perform grade control for bridge deck slab replacements as specified in num .
num superstructure placement restrictions .
do not erect the superstructure until the substructure forms have been sufficiently stripped to determine the character of the concrete in the entire substructure .
in all spans use plywood forms to cast the concrete bridge deck slabs outside of the stringers .
unless otherwise specified pump concrete for deck slabs whenever the volume of concrete in the pour exceeds num ydnum .
num num portland cement concrete structures place all superstructure concrete according to the following schedule superstructure concrete placement schedule dates begin concrete placement after finish burlap placement before may num june num num pm num am june num aug. num num pm num am aug. num sept. num num pm num am sept. num may num no time restrictions do not place or work superstructure concrete in any manner when the temperature in an unshaded location at the placement site is above num f. use floodlighting when existing light is less than num average horizontal ftc over the construction area .
submit a situation plan showing the locations and aiming of floodlights .
after reviewing this plan the engineer will witness a test of the floodlighting system at the proposed construction area .
the floodlighting system shall be capable of maintaining num ftc without producing a glare on traffic .
floodlighting systems shall be as approved when portable generators are used have an emergency backup system available at all times on the job site .
num rate of concreting for bridge deck slabs .
make provisions to ensure that the placement rate of concrete is at least num ydnumhour per crew .
under special circumstances the engineer may give written approval to lower this requirement .
submit evidence of an adequate source of concrete and placing and finishing equipment capable of meeting the minimum rate of placement while providing the intended quality finish .
submit this evidence at least one week prior to the proposed placement of the bridge deck slab .
place concrete in slab spans in one continuous operation and in one layer for each span .
do not mound concrete on forms supported by beams stringers or girders .
distribute the concrete to a depth not exceeding the planned slab thickness plus num in .
before spreading consolidating and finishing .
num num portland cement concrete structures follow the placing sequence in the numerical order specified without modification .
allow at least num hours between the completion of one placement and the start of the next numbered placement .
d box culverts .
if the top slab is the roadway riding surface place as specified in numc .
construct box culverts by casting in place or use precast reinforced concrete box culvert sections .
whichever method is indicated in the contract documents the alternate method may be used unless otherwise specified .
however all time constraints such as maintenance of traffic curing and completion date shall be met .
if precast sections are used at least num ft of all box culvert ends and all footings wing walls headwalls and toe walls shall be cast in place .
additionally terminate the precast sections at least num ft from footings and toe walls .
show lifting devices on the working drawings .
fill lifting holes with nonshrink grout after the precast units are in place .
set the precast reinforced concrete box sections tightly together and seal the joints per the manufacturers recommendations .
place the bottom slabs of cast in place concrete box culverts for their full depth in one mass or layer and allow to set at least num hours before performing any additional work .
do not place the top slab on single cell box culverts spanning in excess of num ft and on multiple cell box culverts until the concrete in the sidewalls has set for at least num hours .
construction joints at the top of sidewalls may be omitted in some cases provided the top slabs are placed as follows num for single cell box culverts spanning num ft or less the sidewall construction joint may be omitted and the top slab placed on the sidewalls provided the concrete in the sidewalls is allowed to set for approximately two hours before starting to place the top slab .
num regardless of size or number of cells a written request may be made to place the top slab on the walls of box culverts per num above .
submit the proposed plan including rate and method of placement and type and size of equipment .
with initial approval the first section of the structure will serve as a demonstration to confirm that there is no excessive cracking or any other detriment and that satisfactory results will be obtained .
after receiving final approval continue placing the num num portland cement concrete structures remainder of the box culvert .
if at any time the engineer determines that the results are no longer satisfactory revert to placing the concrete with the num hour delay as specified above .
e forming concrete parapets and median barriers on bridges .
either the slip form method or conventional fixed form method may be used .
however do not use the slip form method on bridges maintaining traffic or on parapets when railing is specified .
if the slip form method is proposed demonstrate ability to produce acceptable results .
if the demonstration is unacceptable or acceptable results are not maintained during production stop the slip form operation remove the unacceptable work and modify the construction methods .
if construction modifications do not produce acceptable results use the fixed form method .
no additional compensation will be made and no increase will be made in any contract price .
nor will any revisions be made to the amount of time to complete the contract as a result of any required removals modifications or changes in the method of placing parapets or barriers .
notify the engineer in writing of the proposed method of constructing the parapets and median barriers prior to beginning superstructure work .
the following shall apply to the consideration of slip forming num submit evidence of being capable of producing high quality slip formwork .
prior to beginning any slip form construction submit a detailed work plan .
include the type of equipment materials and procedures to be used subcontractors involved in the construction key personnel who will be performing the work names training experience etc .
as well as detailed information on the proposed process to satisfactorily complete the work .
num when possible include reference in the work plan to at least three other similar projects completed in the state of maryland or surrounding states .
as far as practical these projects shall have been built using the same equipment personnel material and procedures proposed for the project .
the engineer may visit these completed projects to evaluate the acceptability of the finished product .
num num portland cement concrete structures if the engineer determines that satisfactorily slip formed parapets or median barriers have been demonstrated at the locations submitted in the work plan the requirements of the off bridge test site specified below may be waived and the first num ft of slip forming on the bridge will be considered the test section for the structure .
this test section shall be completed and approved prior to placing the remaining portions of parapet or bridge median barrier .
num do not begin any slip forming operation without written approval of the work plan .
any proposed revisions or deviations to the approved work plan shall be submitted and approved prior to making the change .
if num above is not met complete an acceptable off bridge test section prior to placing any portion of the parapet or bridge median barrier .
place the appropriate test section of parapet or median barrier using the same equipment sensor line support spacing material personnel and procedures described in the work plan .
this test section shall match the structures horizontal curve as much as practical be at least num ft long and be placed at a location selected by the contractor near the bridge site .
place the off bridge test section with vertical irregularities varying upward and downward at least num in .
demonstrate that the method of slip forming can compensate for this deviation and provide a top of parapet or median barrier that is true to the proposed line and grade and not necessarily parallel to top of bridge deck .
this necessitates that the equipment provide for variations in height of vertical face of parapet where it intersects the top of deck slab .
position support and space the sensor line in the same manner that will be used on the bridge decks with no stakes holes etc .
used to support it .
use the sensor support spacing recommended by the slip form machine manufacturer and as necessary to maintain the planned line and grade .
use the same rate of slip forming proposed for the bridge .
saw cut joints in the test section at the same approximate spacing and in the same manner as proposed for the finished bridge .
the engineer will evaluate the procedure material equipment and appearance of the test section .
num num portland cement concrete structures take three test cores from the test section at directed locations to determine the concrete quality .
honeycombing sags tears or other evidence of poor quality concrete will be cause for rejection of the test section .
if the test section is rejected either place additional test sections until approved or use the fixed form method .
do not remove the accepted test section until all parapets or median barriers on the bridges are complete .
the slip forming on the bridges will be compared to the approved test section to ensure that similar acceptable structures are being achieved .
following completion and acceptance of all bridge parapets and median barriers remove and dispose of the off bridge test section .
the entire testing procedure including removing and disposing of test units regardless of whether the procedure is approved or rejected shall be at no additional cost to the administration .
when dual bridges are separated by a joint construct the two parapets that make up the median barrier in separate operations not simultaneously .
allow the first median parapet section to cure for at least num hours prior to constructing the second section of median parapet .
place additional reinforcing steel to brace the parapet against displacement during the extrusion process .
a detail will be included in the contract documents .
the alignment and rigidity of the reinforcing steel will be strictly enforced to ensure that the minimum clearances specified for concrete cover are maintained .
ensure that an uninterrupted flow of concrete is provided to the slip form machine .
once the slip form machine is set in motion keep it advancing until it reaches the proposed stopping point .
organize and schedule the operations in a manner that the next concrete truck will be able to move into position at the slip form machine as soon as the previous truck pulls away without interrupting the machines uniform advancement .
under no circumstances may the slip forming be operated in a manner that requires removal of a concrete truck from the bridge before moving another truck into place .
except for the slip form machine and its concrete supply trucks do not allow vehicular traffic on the bridge while slip forming operations are in progress .
num num portland cement concrete structures after setting up the slip form machine and placing the sensor wire perform a dry run of the equipment in the presence of the engineer .
demonstrate that the parapet or median barrier will envelop preset embedded obstacles and will meet with flush surfaces such as pull boxes expansion joint plates etc .
use concrete of a consistency that the shape of the structure is maintained without support after extrusion .
the surface shall be free of surface pits larger than num in .
diameter .
finish the concrete with a light brushing with water only .
finishing with brush applications of grout is prohibited .
if a tear occurs at the top of the parapet or median barrier during the slip forming operation remove it immediately .
make the repair using acceptable concrete practices .
blend the repair into the barrier to the extent that there is no distinguishable difference in the wall face or top .
the rate at which the slip form machine is advanced shall be the same as used on the approved test section .
the shape of the finished parapet or median barrier shall conform to the dimensions specified .
the vertical face at the bottom of the concrete safety shaped parapets and median barriers shall not exceed num in .
ensure that the finished parapet or median barrier does not deviate from the proposed grade and alignment in excess of num in.num ft. use a diamond blade to saw cut joints in the finished parapet or median barrier .
make cuts and space joints as specified .
the trapezoidal shaped control joints on the outside of parapets will not be required if slip forming is used .
terminate slip form placements only at a parapet control joint .
saw cut the joints as soon as possible after initial concrete set and after the concrete has set sufficiently to preclude raveling during the sawing .
complete the sawing the same day the concrete is extruded and before any shrinkage cracking occurs .
do not leave concrete overnight without saw cutting the joints .
when portions of the bridge are superelevated produce the configuration specified i.e .
level top surface wall normal to deck surface etc .
f temperature controls .
ensure concrete temperatures meet num .
heat concrete below these temperatures by one of the following methods num num portland cement concrete structures num when the method of heated mixing water is used do not introduce water above num f into the mix .
num when the method of heated aggregates is used heat aggregates containing frozen lumps separately .
do not allow materials containing frozen lumps ice or snow to enter the mixer .
heat aggregates by steam coils or other dry heat but do not discharge live steam or hot water into them .
do not use a flamethrower or any direct flame .
when the ambient air temperature is below num f raise the temperature of the air in contact with the reinforcement to num f prior to placing concrete .
when the ambient air temperature is above num f and the reinforcement or steel forms are exposed to the direct rays of the sun cool the reinforcement and forms to num f or less by means of a water spray prior to placing concrete .
when abnormal wind or storms are forecast locally by the national weather service do not place superstructure concrete during the period covered by the forecast .
g pumping .
provide approved equipment that is suitable and adequate in capacity for the work .
arrange the equipment so that no vibrations result that might damage freshly placed concrete .
do not use pumps or discharge lines containing parts made of aluminum .
h use of conveyors .
concrete may be moved from the mixer to its final position by conveyors .
use conveyors in sections by which concrete is disposited from one conveyor belt onto the next through a hopper .
limit the maximum rise on any individual section of the conveyor to num degrees from the horizontal .
for concrete slumps less than num in .
limit the belt travel speed to num ftminute .
decrease this speed for slumps exceeding num in .
conveyers used for placement of decks shall be supported by main load carrying members .
place polyethylene or other acceptable material under the conveyor line to contain any spillage .
num depositing concrete under water .
refer to num .
do not deposit concrete in water or expose it to the action of water before setting unless specified or approved .
use a tremie pipe that is at least num in .
diameter and equipped with a watertight plug .
equip the bottom of the pipe with a baffle or deflector plate .
the number and location of pipes will be dependent on the size of the pour .
do not disturb the tremie concrete after placement nor place successive num num portland cement concrete structures layers on top until the previously placed concrete has developed the necessary strength as determined by the engineer .
do not deposit concrete in water that is less than num f. when concrete is deposited in water num to num f heat the concrete and place it at a temperature of num to num f. do not pump water during concrete placement .
regulate the consistency of the concrete to prevent segregation .
cut down portions of tremie concrete that project more than num in .
above the top of the as planned elevation .
a cofferdams .
where cofferdams are used construct separate forms within the cofferdams except where footing concrete is to be placed against a base of undisturbed material and where the cofferdam is to remain in place and act as the concrete form .
in the space between form and cofferdam keep the water level below the bottom elevation of concrete for at least num hours .
b concrete seals .
when feasible concrete seals for parts of structures under water shall be placed continuously from start to finish to avoid horizontal construction joints .
keep the surface of the concrete as nearly horizontal as practicable at all times to ensure thorough bonding .
in these cases place each succeeding layer of the seal before the preceding layer has taken its initial set .
maintain the slump of tremie concrete between num and num in .
but as close to num in .
as possible .
after dewatering and prior to placing any succeeding layers of concrete thoroughly clean the top of the foundation seal tremie concrete .
c concrete exposed to saline water .
do not allow saline water to come in direct contact with the concrete until it conforms to the following table concrete in saline water saline content of water by weight in parts per thousand saline water shall not contact concrete until following minimum time in days has elapsed after initial set num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num over num num the engineer may approve a waiver in writing .
num num portland cement concrete structures unless otherwise specified wet cure the concrete for at least seven days while being maintained at num f or above .
num consolidation .
except for concrete deposited under water consolidate concrete by means of internal vibrators .
these provisions also apply to precast members or units .
apply vibration at points uniformly spaced and not further apart than twice the radius over which the vibration is visibly effective .
a internal vibration .
internal vibrators shall be of an approved type and design .
the intensity of application shall visibly affect a mass of concrete of num in .
slump over a radius of at least num in .
and have a frequency of vibration of at least num impulses per minute .
b external vibration .
external vibrators shall be of an approved type and design .
use external vibration as directed for the following sections very thin very heavily reinforced numerous inserts or where form surfaces are sharply inclined or battered .
for steel grid floors consolidate filler concrete by applying external vibration to the steel grid .
num finishing concrete surfaces .
concrete surfaces shall be finished using one of the following types .
however use an ordinary surface finish as described in a below unless otherwise specified .
a ordinary surface .
immediately following the removal of forms remove all fins and irregular projections from all surfaces except those that are not to be exposed or not to be waterproofed .
on all surfaces thoroughly clean broken corners or edges and cavities .
after having kept them thoroughly moist point and true them with a mortar of cement and fine aggregate mixed in the proportions used in the grade of the concrete being finished .
remove any excess mortar and cure the mortar patches as specified in num .
carefully tool and clean construction and expansion joints .
ensure that joint filler is exposed for its full length with clean and true edges .
resulting surfaces shall be true and uniform .
if the surface can not be repaired in an acceptable manner apply a special surface finish as described in b below .
b special surface .
remove fins and projections .
then saturate the surface with water and keep it wet for at least two hours .
thoroughly rub a grout mix of the same proportions as the concrete onto the surface by section using burlap pads or cork floats completely filling all voids pits and irregularities .
after this grout has dried sufficiently wipe off the excess using dry clean burlap .
cure the surface as specified in numf except num num portland cement concrete structures use a colorless liquid curing compound .
apply this finish to the exterior faces of castinplace superstructures and end posts for bridges over highways and all interior faces of castinplace parapets bridge median barriers and end posts .
do not apply this finish to members constructed by the slip form method .
c horizontal surfaces .
finish all upper horizontal surfaces such as the tops of parapets copings and bridge seats by placing an excess of concrete material in the forms and striking off even with a wood template .
apply a steel trowel finish to the tops of handrail posts and caps headwalls parapets wing walls and barriers .
finish the bridge seat bearing areas of the substructure masonry to the elevations specified .
check the elevation of each bearing area prior to finishing to ensure conformance .
ensure that each area is level in all directions and make adjustments prior to the setting of the concrete .
steel trowel the area .
grind bearing areas that are not flat after final finishing to achieve an acceptable surface .
bearing areas will be rejected whenever the elevation is below that of the surrounding masonry .
d bridge deck slabs .
use an approved power operated cylinder or roller finishing machine .
set the finishing machine and transverse construction joints parallel to the nearest support lines abutment or pier .
if the skew angle changes at supports adjust the angle of the screed accordingly as the finishing machine progresses across the deck slab .
place the concrete so that the front edge of the newly placed concrete is as nearly as possible parallel to the skew of the finishing machine .
place the concrete uniformly but not more than num ft ahead of the finishing machine and not more than num in .
above the top elevation of the finished deck slab .
do not span the finishing machine greater than the length recommended by the manufacturer .
combine machines or use two machines in which both use a common rail .
the proposed method and the location and anchorage of accessories that will remain in the completed superstructures as a result of this requirement are subject to the approval of the engineer and shall meet num .
after the concrete has been struck off check the surface with a long handled num ft straightedge operated in a position parallel to the center line of the structure .
the straightedge shall be as light weight as possible to avoid distortion of the slab surface and have a working face no more than num in .
wide .
num num portland cement concrete structures progress longitudinally in overlapping num ft increments and transversely in num ft increments to locate any irregularities in the surface .
finish the concrete surface with a full width strip of burlap mechanically or manually dragged across the surface .
num slab grooving .
groove all bridge decks including slab bridges and box culverts built to grade .
start the grooving operation after the bridge deck slab has been cured as specified in num and attained a minimum compressive strength as specified in num .
groove the bridge deck perpendicular to the center line .
use a mechanical saw device to cut grooves that are num in .
wide num num in .
deep and variably spaced from num to num in .
apart .
extend the grooves across the slab to within num ft of the gutter lines .
do not cut across armored joints or any joint in which an existing joint seal may be damaged stay clear by num num in .
on each side .
on joints skewed num degrees or less make one pass parallel to the armored joint unless otherwise directed .
remove the residue resulting from grooving operations from all surfaces in an acceptable manner .
leave all surfaces in a washed clean condition .
num deck slab tolerances .
any slabs found to have deficient thickness may be rejected .
limit surface deviation in a transverse or longitudinal direction to num in.num ft from a straight line .
for vertical curves limit deviation from the curve specified to num in.num ft in a longitudinal direction .
do corrective work prior to grooving .
e sidewalks and safety curbs .
use an approved screed to strike off the concrete to the elevation and slope specified .
wood float the concrete to give a gritty surface free from depressions or high spots .
then edge the joints with the appropriate edging tool .
strip curbs and finish as soon as possible .
f culvert slabs .
when the tops of culvert slabs are the roadway riding surface finish them according to d above .
if invert slabs and the tops of culvert slabs are not part of the roadway or when they are to be overlaid with hot mix asphalt screed them by hand or machine and apply a float finish .
maintain the surface within num in .
of the grade specified .
inverts of culverts having a span less than num ft need not be straightedged .
num num portland cement concrete structures num curing .
these requirements apply to curing of all concrete surfaces except bridge deck slabs or top surfaces of culverts with integral wearing surfaces which shall be cured as specified in num .
start curing as soon as the concrete has set sufficiently .
keep the surfaces wet even in areas where there is no ready water supply .
a cure culvert invert slabs and all footings for five days using the method specified in numabc or d. b cure vertical surfaces in the forms for seven days .
however the forms may be removed after num hours for structural elements num ft or less in height or after num hours for structural elements greater than num ft high with the provisions specified herein .
cure the surface as specified in numd for the remainder of the seven day curing period .
do not remove the forms when cold weather protection is required .
forms carrying loads shall remain in place for at least seven days and until the concrete has attained a compressive strength of num psi .
internal bulkheads may be removed after the concrete has been in place for num hours if it is necessary to do so to continue the work without interruption .
when a higher strength concrete than specified is used forms carrying loads shall remain in place for at least three and a half days and until the concrete has attained a compressive strength of num psi .
fiber column forms may be removed at times specified above but no later than num days after placing concrete .
when parapets or median barriers on structures are formed by the slip form method begin curing as specified in numf using a fugitive dye liquid membraneforming compound immediately after the concrete is finished .
immediately after each joint is saw cut cure the concrete surfaces for the remainder of the seven days of cure as specified in numd .
c cure tops of end walls end support walls headwalls etc .
for three days with burlap or cotton mats as specified in numb or d respectively .
d cure horizontal surfaces for seven days as specified in num bcd or e. num num portland cement concrete structures num curing methods .
a flooding .
structure units that will be below water in the completed structure may be gradually flooded when approved after the concrete is num hours old provided the curing water meets num .
maintain the water at num f or above for the specified curing duration .
b burlap .
use two layers .
overlap successive strips at least num in .
place the second layer at least num degrees to the first layer or in lieu of this the num in .
overlap of the second layer may be placed midway between the first layer .
thoroughly saturate by immersion in curing water for at least num hours prior to placement and keep it saturated throughout the specified curing duration .
c white opaque polyethylene backed nonwoven fabric .
use one layer .
overlap successive strips at least num in .
thoroughly saturate by immersion in curing water for at least num hours prior to placement and keep it saturated throughout the specified curing duration .
d cotton mats .
use one lay er thoroughly saturated with curing water prior to placement and kept saturated throughout the specified curing duration .
keep the material in tight contact with the concrete .
e white opaque burlap polyethylene or white opaque polyethylene film .
place white opaque burlap polyethylene sheeting with the burlap side of the sheeting facing down on at least one layer of wet burlap .
when white opaque polyethylene film is used place it on at least two layers of wet burlap .
only one layer of cotton mats is required in any usage .
these materials may only be used atop the wet burlap or cotton mats on unobstructed flat and reasonably level surfaces .
lap adjacent mats or sheets at least num ft. bring the ends down around the sides of the concrete being cured and securely fasten to make an airtight seal .
leave both of these materials in place for the same length of time as required for burlap or cotton mats .
these protective coverings need not be wetted down however keep the covered burlap or cotton mats wet for the specified duration .
f liquid membrane .
appl y this material according to the manufacturers recommendation or as directed .
apply by sprayers and keep it thoroughly agitated before and during use .
num num portland cement concrete structures num bridge deck slabs .
cure bridge deck slabs and culvert top slabs with integral wearing surfaces including sidewalks as specified herein .
have misting equipment available .
prior to placing concrete operate the misting equipment for the engineer to verify that the equipment and procedure are capable of misting the entire placement area without damaging the fresh concrete .
do this at the location of proposed use each day that a deck placement is to be made .
keep ample spare parts water fuel etc .
readily available .
keep an approved unit available for backup .
cover the finished concrete with wet burlap as specified in numb .
progress by covering the concrete immediately after the concrete has been finished but do not leave any portion of the concrete uncovered for more than num minutes after placement .
use mist spraying when directed and when the concrete is not covered with wet burlap within num minutes after placement .
misting does not relieve the requirement for covering the concrete within the num minutes after placement .
once misting is started continue until wet burlap is complete in place .
after the concrete is covered with wet burlap cure it as specified in numb for the remainder of the seven day period .
keep the two layers of burlap continuously and uniformly saturated throughout the curing period .
white opaque burlap polyethylene sheeting and white opaque polyethylene film or clear polyethylene film shall not be used over wet burlap except when approved for cold weather protection .
use a sufficient quantity of soaker hoses to meet these requirements .
take immediate action to remedy improper saturation of any area throughout the entire curing period .
provide a sufficient number of experienced personnel and necessary equipment to ensure proper placement protection and curing of the concrete according to these specifications .
provide temporary troughs dams etc .
necessary to keep runoff water from reaching any traveled roadway shoulder or sidewalk .
submit the proposed methods of controlling runoff water in these areas .
include locations of all troughs and dams as well as the proposed methods of attaching them to any portions of the structure .
do not weld or drill holes in any portion of a permanent member of the structure .
the approved procedure will be evaluated after it is underway .
if any areas are not functioning in an acceptable manner modify them to satisfy the requirements for retaining and directing the flow of water .
num num portland cement concrete structures in rehabilitation construction where the full use of temporary troughs dams etc .
is not practical make approved modifications to the provisions for controlling the runoff water .
num construction joints .
construction joints are permitted only where specified or authorized in writing .
clean the surface of the hardened concrete and keep it moist until the additional concrete is placed .
use a grade strip to level the top surface of concrete .
at chamfers steel trowel the top surface of the concrete adjacent to the chamfer .
where a featheredge might be produced at a construction joint as in the sloped top surface of a wing wall use an inset form to produce a blocked in addition to the preceding placement .
ensure that the inset form will produce at least a num in .
edge thickness of concrete in the succeeding placement .
place epoxy bonding compound on the surface areas of concrete that existed prior to the beginning of the contract that will be in contact with new concrete .
apply epoxy bonding compound to the entire face of all deck slab construction joints .
ensure that the surfaces to be coated are clean sound and dry .
mix and apply the bonding compound in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num linseed oil protective coating .
apply to the integral concrete bridge deck slabs box culvert wearing surfaces and sidewalks on bridges and box culverts when the pertinent linseed oil protective coating item appears in the contract documents .
prior to the application of the linseed oil protective coating ensure that the concrete surfaces to be treated are cured dried and thoroughly cleaned of all dust dirt and deleterious material and that required permanent paint or tape lane markings have been applied on the structures .
if the concrete is wet allow it to dry for one to two days at a temperature of at least num f. if the concrete surfaces are extremely dry take the following actions as directed and at no additional cost to the administration a wet the concrete thoroughly and allow it to dry for one or two days .
b apply a third protective coating at the same rate per gallon as the second coat .
num num portland cement concrete structures ensure that the ambient temperature at the time of application is at least num f. ensure that the ambient air temperature following the second application is at least num f. apply two coats on all top surfaces that are not grooved .
apply the first coat at a rate of num ydnumgal .
apply the second coat at a rate of num ydnumgal .
on bridge decks and top slabs of box culverts that are grooved apply the first coat at a rate of num ydnumgal .
apply the second coat at a rate of num ydnumgal .
do not apply the second coat until the first coat is dry .
if additional coats are required allow at least num hours between them .
the drying time may be increased as the ambient temperature falls below num f. num cold weather protection .
protect and heat concrete after it has been placed when the air temperature in the shade and away from artificial heat drops to num f or lower at the time of placing or at any time within the number of days specified herein .
provide protection and heating as follows a protect ordinary concrete and maintain a temperature of at least num f for at least seven days following placement .
b do not heat concrete to more than num f. at the end of the heating period cool the concrete surfaces to the temperature of the outside air by slowly reducing the artificial heat at a uniform rate until the temperature of the outside air is reached within a num hour period .
have tarpaulins insulating devices and other suitable materials at the site to enclose or protect portions of the concrete requiring protection .
have materials as close as possible before placing the concrete and install them as rapidly as possible to keep exposure to cold weather to a minimum .
where heating is required completely enclose the spaces to be heated and use approved heaters to keep the temperature at required levels .
provide a sufficient number of maximumminimum thermometers to record temperatures in each concrete placement undergoing cold weather protection .
the curing period for all structure concrete requiring cold weather protection shall meet the cold weather protection period except when the normal curing period is longer .
num underpinning old foundations .
if underpinning is required perform the work as directed .
restore or lower the old foundations with mix no .
num concrete having a maximum slump of num in .
perform excavation and underpinning operations in part section so as not to remove more than num percent of the supporting area under the old foundation at one time .
when directed install underpinning by hand num num portland cement concrete structures pneumatic or pumping processes .
the usual curing and cold weather requirements will be deleted for the underpinning with other provisions for curing and protection improvised on the job as may be directed .
num loads on concrete structures .
refer to gpnum tcnum and .num .
do not erect structural steel or concrete superstructures on concrete substructures until curing is complete all forms are removed and substructure concrete has reached a compressive strength of num psi .
do not apply loads to any new portion of bridge deck or box culvert built to grade until the final section of that unit of the deck has completed its specified curing period .
no vehicles including heavy construction equipment will be permitted on any new portion of bridge deck or box culvert built to grade until the concrete cylinder breaks for the final section of that unit of the deck has attained a compressive strength of num psi .
however loads such as stored materials lightweight equipment concrete safety parapets sidewalks and median curbs may be placed upon the concrete slab via crane or other lifting device when the concrete in the final section of that unit of the deck has attained a compressive strength of num psi .
do not place backfill on any new portion of box culverts not built to grade until the final section of that unit of the slab has completed its specified curing period and the concrete in that section has attained a compressive strength of num psi .
num prevention and removal of stains on concrete .
prevent rust from structural steel and staining by asphalt materials or any other substance from discoloring any portion of the concrete .
use construction procedures that prevent staining of any of the concrete .
where unpainted structural steel is specified protect the pier caps columns and abutments with a wrapping of reinforced polyethylene or similar material and leave it in place to prevent staining until after the structure is completed .
if any portion of the concrete is stained remove the stain and restore the original color without damaging the concrete .
do the work as directed and at no additional cost to the administration .
do not use chemical solvents without approval .
num safety hazards .
perform gas detection in and ventilation of confined spaces as specified in tcnum .
num defective work .
within num hours of removing the forms remove and repair defective work as directed .
a at the edges of material remaining in place make a cut perpendicular to the finished surface to the full depth of the material removed but not less than num in .
if the removal of num defective concrete affects the structural requirements remove and replace the member as directed .
b clean defective areas .
c coat defective areas with an epoxy bonding compound .
d patch defective areas with concrete mortar or epoxy matching the color contour and texture of surrounding concrete as close as possible .
num measurement and payment .
portland cement concrete structures will be measured and paid for as specified .
the payment will be full compensation for all forms and form removal reinforcement steel curing and misting scuppers grooving mechanical and electrical work all cost incidental to the conducting of tests for oxygen content and presence of gases and applying mechanical ventilation to confined spaces year built markings and all material labor equipment including safety equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the construction of drainage and weep holes any pipe necessary expansion material flashing dampproofing membrane waterproofing epoxy bonding compound joints and their placement will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the concrete item .
no deduction in concrete quantities will be made for pipes or conduits having diameters less than num in .
reinforcement steel anchors or any other appurtenances .
num portland cement concrete for footing concrete subfoundation concrete and tremie concrete will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
num portland cement concrete for substructure concrete for bridge superstructure concrete for bridge and reinforced concrete box culverts will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
when an epoxy coated reinforcing steel bars item for the pertinent structure is included in the contract documents the cost for epoxy protective coated reinforcement steel will be excluded from the contract lump sum price for superstructure concrete for bridge .
when a bridge deck rehabilitation project other than bridge widenings requires modification to the backwalls and wing walls and there is no substructure concrete item the concrete will be incidental to the superstructure concrete item .
num portland cement concrete structures num num reinforcing steel num wing walls and footings for reinforced concrete box culverts will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the reinforced concrete box culvert item .
num parapets including end posts on bridges wing walls reinforced concrete box culverts and retaining walls or concrete median barriers on bridges and top slabs of reinforced concrete box culverts will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for the pertinent concrete parapet or concrete median barrier items .
num parapet and end post modifications on bridges wing walls reinforced concrete box culverts and retaining walls or concrete median barriers on bridges and top slabs of reinforced concrete box culverts will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for the pertinent parapet modification item .
the payment will also include saw cutting removal of portions of the existing parapet or end post drilling and grouting .
num floodlighting for placement of superstructure concrete will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per night used for the pertinent floodlighting item .
the payment will also include fuel backup generator setup relocation and removal .
num linseed oil protective coating will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard for the pertinent linseed oil protective coating item .
the payment will be full compensation for all coats including time and cost when a third coat or the application of water is required on dry surfaces .
num cofferdams temporary supports or piling will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the formwork .
num retaining walls will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
section num reinforcing steel num description .
furnish and place uncoated and epoxy coated reinforcing steel .
num materials .
grout numc deformed steel bars num num num reinforcing steel plain round steel bars for column spirals num wire mesh num and .num fusion bonded epoxy powder coating for steel and touch up system section num and num galvanizing a num num supports .
use approved coated metal plastic plastic tipped or galvanized material .
aluminum is unacceptable .
all materials are subject to approval .
for epoxy coated steel use wire supports completely covered with num to num mils of adherent epoxy coating except for minimum necessary contact marks .
hold the reinforcing steel in place with plastic coated tie wires fabricated for this purpose .
steel bars used as supports for epoxy coated steel shall be coated in the same manner as reinforcing steel .
num construction .
num working drawings .
submit working drawings for approval prior to the start of any fabrication unless otherwise specified .
refer to section num .
num plan dimensions .
all dimensions related to reinforcing steel are out to out measurement except the spacing is measured center to center .
num cutting and bending .
cut and bend reinforcing bars at the mill or shop to the shapes specified before shipment to the job site .
bending shall not be performed in the field except to correct errors damage by handling and shipping or minor omissions in shop bending .
saw or shear epoxy coated reinforcing bars on skewed bridges and in other locations that are specified to be cut in the field flame cutting is prohibited .
ensure that all bending conforms to the tolerances specified in the contract documents .
num shipping handling and protection of material .
ship reinforcing steel bars in standard bundles tagged and marked in accordance with the provisions of the code of standard practice of the concrete reinforcing steel institute .
keep bundles intact undamaged and properly identified until ready for use .
num num reinforcing steel bundle coated steel together for shipment using excelsior or other approved materials and banded using plastic or padded metal bands .
perform all lifting with a lifting beam and multiple supports consisting of a sufficient quantity of straps or slings to prevent abrasion within the bundle from excessive bending or distortion .
store bundles at the site on suitable blocking or platforms at least num in .
above any type of surface and vegetation .
keep free from vegetation growth accumulations of dirt oil or other foreign material .
keep blocking sufficiently close to avoid bending and distortion of the bars .
correct any distortion of the bars or damage to epoxy coating as directed .
touch up any damage to the epoxy coating as specified in num .
adequately cover epoxy coated bars for protection from ultraviolet rays from the time of delivery when they are to be stored outside for more than num days .
num placing and fastening .
accurately place all reinforcing steel including dowel bars in the position specified in the contract documents or working drawings and hold firmly during the depositing and setting of the concrete .
do not insert into the plastic concrete .
tie all intersections except alternate intersections need not be tied where spacing is less than num ft in each direction .
on bridge decks and the top slabs of box culverts tie all intersections in the top mat of reinforcing .
do not bend reinforcing steel bars after embedment in concrete .
before placing concrete clean all mortar from the reinforcing .
do not place concrete until the reinforcing bars are inspected and approved .
approval shall not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for correcting problems caused by any shifting of the bars during the placement of concrete .
support reinforcing bars and maintain their distances from faces of forms by using approved templates blocks ties hangers or other supports .
support bars in the bottom of footings on approved precast concrete blocks with embedded tie wires or suspend in place .
support bars in the tops of footings by using approved supports .
do not use metal metal with plastic tipped legs or plastic chairs against formed surfaces that will be exposed in the finished structure .
the engineer will perform a final visual inspection of epoxy coated steel at the construction site after the steel is in place and immediately prior to placing the concrete .
patch designated repair areas using epoxy as specified in num .
do not place concrete on a patched area until the num patching material has cured for one hour .
allow four hours of normal working time after the reinforcing and forms are in place for the inspection .
num splicing .
furnish bars in the lengths and spliced as specified in the contract documents and approved working drawings .
do not perform additional splicing without approval .
make lap splices with the bars in contact and wired together .
do not weld reinforcing steel or attachments thereto without authorization .
num tying new concrete into existing concrete .
on all projects where portions of existing structures are to be used in the finished structure and existing concrete is to be removed straighten clean and protect the existing reinforcing steel to be incorporated in the final structure .
for exposed existing reinforcing steel that is to be incorporated into the final structure a cut out any that has lost num percent or more of its original cross sectional area as determined by the engineer .
provide and place a new bar of the same diameter so as to have the minimum required lap at each end of the new bar or modified as per c. b where the required bar lap length is available use it as a dowel .
c where the required bar lap is not available or limits of concrete removal to achieve bar lap are too great make a welded or approved mechanical splice .
when existing reinforcing steel extends into an area in which epoxy coated reinforcing steel is required abrasive blast clean and epoxy coat using the touch up system .
refer to section num .
if expected reinforcing steel is missing or a pattern differing from that shown on the existing contract documents is uncovered contact the office of bridge development for evaluation .
where dowel bars are required to tie new concrete into an existing structure install as specified in num .
num substitution .
substitute different size bars only when approved by the engineer .
there will be no additional compensation for substituting larger size bars in lieu of the bars specified .
num reinforcing steel num num dampproofing and membrane waterproofing num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for cleaning coating and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num reinforcing steel bars or epoxy coated reinforcing steel bars will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items specified unless a reinforcing steel bars or epoxy coated reinforcing steel bars item appears in the contract documents .
num reinforcing steel bars or epoxy coated reinforcing steel bars will not be measured but will be paid for at the pertinent contract lump sum price .
num reinforcing steel bars or epoxy coated reinforcing steel bars will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per pound based on the original approved overall lengths of bars computed on the basis of the nominal unit weight per linear foot .
num incorporating existing reinforcing steel in the final structure including straightening bending splicing and removal and replacement will not be measured but the cost will be included in the pertinent concrete item .
section num dampproofing and membrane waterproofing num description .
furnish and apply dampproofing and waterproofing to concrete surfaces .
num materials .
asphaltic materials num asphalt primer num fabric for use with asphalt num membrane waterproofing and dampproofing num num construction .
apply dampproofing and waterproofing using asphaltic materials primers and fabric or by the roll or sheet method as specified in num .
num storage .
store waterproofing fabrics and membranes in a dry protected place .
keep containers of asphalt materials closed when not in use .
num dampproofing and membrane waterproofing num num surface preparation .
do not apply dampproofing or membrane waterproofing until curing is complete and surfaces are protected from the cold .
ensure that all surfaces are dry smooth and free from projections and holes .
when dampproofing and membrane waterproofing are both specified for application apply the membrane waterproofing first .
do not apply dampproofing or membrane waterproofing when the temperature is less than num f. num dampproofing .
if asphaltic coatings are used for dampproofing use two prime coats and one seal coat .
apply dampproofing to the following concrete surfaces that will be in contact with backfill a rear face of abutments and abutment wing wall stems .
b rear faces of headwalls and wing walls for pipes num in .
in diameter or larger and for culverts .
c rear face of retaining wall stems .
d the following areas pertain to reinforced concrete box culverts numtop of top slabs when not built to grade .
num entire outside surfaces of side walls .
num additionally bottom of bottom slabs of precast units .
num waterproofing .
if asphaltic coatings are used use a prime coat three mop coats and two layers of fabric .
apply waterproofing to construction joints that are next to backfill above normal water surface when backfill is on one side and atmosphere on the other side .
apply a width of at least num in .
centered on the joint .
num application of dampproofing .
confine coatings to the areas to be covered .
prevent coating of parts of the structure exposed to view in the completed structure .
apply dampproofing to the full face of all contraction joints .
apply the dampproofing according to the manufacturers recommendations .
when no recommendations are provided apply the dampproofing material to the cured cleaned and dry surfaces as follows num num dampproofing and membrane waterproofing a paint with two coats of primer for absorptive treatment at a rate of num galydnum per coat .
do not apply the second coat until the first coat has thoroughly dried .
do not heat this material .
b after the second prime coat has thoroughly dried apply one seal coat by brush or roller at a rate of num galydnum .
when necessary this material may be heated but not in excess of num f. num application of membrane waterproofing .
coat the cured cleaned and dry surfaces with a prime coat .
cover with mop coats and layers of fabric .
coating procedure .
coat with a primer at a rate of num galydnum .
apply the prime coat num hours in advance of applying any mop coats and ensure that it is dry before applying the first mopping .
do not heat the primer .
heat asphalt for mop coats to a temperature between num and num f. stir frequently to avoid local overheating .
provide heating kettles equipped with thermometers .
begin the waterproofing at the low point so that water will run over and not against or along the laps .
make the first strip of fabric half width .
make the second full width lapping the full width of the first sheet .
make the third and each succeeding strip thereafter full width and lapped so that there will be two layers of fabric at all points and three layers with laps not less than num in .
wide at edges of strips .
make all laps at ends of strips at least num in .
wide .
thoroughly seal down the cloth at all laps .
beginning at the low point mop a section num in .
wide for the full length of the surface with the hot asphalt .
immediately after the mopping press the first strip of fabric into place eliminating all air bubbles .
mop this strip and an adjacent section of the surface to a width equal to slightly more than half the width of the fabric and press a full strip and a full width of the fabric into place as before .
then mop the forward or upper half of this second strip and mop an adjacent section of the concrete surface with hot asphalt .
apply the third strip of fabric shingled on so as to lap the first strip at least num in .
continue this process until the entire surface is covered .
then give the entire surface a final mopping of hot asphalt .
ensure that there is a complete coating of asphalt between all layers of fabric .
in all cases ensure that the mopping on concrete covers the surface so that no gray spots are visible and on cloth is sufficiently heavy to conceal the weave .
apply asphalt at the rates of num galydnum on horizontal surfaces num num pneumatically applied mortar and num galydnum on vertical surfaces .
regulate the work so that at the close of a days work all cloth in place has received the coatings required for that stage of completion .
num roll or sheet waterproofing membrane .
an alternate system of waterproofing or dampproofing consisting of rolls or sheets of membrane material may be used in lieu of the above coatings .
apply the rolls or sheets according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num membrane care .
at the edges of the membrane and at points punctured by appurtenances such as drains or pipes flash it in an acceptable manner to prevent water from getting between the waterproofing and the waterproofed surface .
repair any damage to the membrane .
extend repairs beyond the outermost damaged portion and extend the second ply at least num in .
beyond the first .
num measurement and payment .
dampproofing and membrane waterproofing will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items specified .
section num pneumatically applied mortar num description .
remove deteriorated concrete and furnish and place pneumatically applied mortar .
num materials .
curing materials num reinforcing steel num num and num anchor bolts num water num use type ii cement meeting num and furnish in the original num lb paper sacks supplied from the cement manufacturer .
use fine aggregate meeting the fine aggregateportland cement concrete requirements of num .
ensure that the maximum moisture content does not exceed num percent by weight .
pneumatically applied mortar shall have a num day compressive strength of num to num psi .
ensure that all mixes are approved prior to starting work .
num num pneumatically applied mortar num test panels .
when specified prepare and cure test panels of various mix combinations admixtures and materials .
prepare one test panel for every num ftnum of mortar in place .
prepare additional test panels as directed .
panels shall be num in .
square and num in .
deep .
include the same reinforcing as the structure in at least half of each panel .
a separate panel shall be fabricated by each application crew using the equipment for each mix design and in each shooting position encountered .
core each test panel and deliver the cores to the laboratory for testing .
cores shall have a diameter of at least num in .
and be at least num in .
long .
cores will be tested in compression at num num and num days .
core strength correction will be per t num .
the engineer will examine the cut surface of each specimen .
expose additional surfaces by sawing or breaking the panel when necessary to check soundness and uniformity of the material .
all cut or broken surfaces that are not dense and free from lamination and sand pockets will be rejected .
num construction .
submit the proposed methods of protecting the public against injury and damage from demolition operations .
when required protective shields shall meet num .
provide safe access to all areas of the existing structure to be repaired .
prior to the start of any repair work conduct a thorough inspection in the presence of the engineer .
the purpose of this inspection will be to identify the location and extent of concrete deterioration and repair .
the engineer will establish the extent of removal and determine when sound concrete is encountered .
restrictions .
wait at least num hours after completing repairs to a section of a stringer or pier before chipping on any section that has a common side or point .
if at any time an area is identified as having deteriorated concrete beyond the following limits immediately stop work in these areas .
the engineer will notify the office of bridge development .
do not resume work until after obtaining approval from the office of bridge development a more than num in .
beyond the original finish surface .
b more than num in .
beyond the reinforcing steel .
c more than num in .
beneath the bearing .
num num pneumatically applied mortar num equipment .
ensure that all equipment is calibrated and capable of thoroughly mixing all material .
use a selfcleaning mixer capable of discharging all mixed material without any carry over from one batch to the next .
clean the mixing equipment at least once a day .
ensure that the air compressor has ample capacity to maintain a supply of clean dry air adequate to provide the required nozzle velocity for all parts of the work while simultaneously operating a blowpipe for cleaning away rebound .
ensure that the air and water pressure are constant and do not pulsate .
num storage .
store and handle cement as specified in num .
store sand to prevent segregation or contamination of the material .
store all reinforcing bundles at the site on suitable blocking or platforms at least num in .
above all type of surfaces and vegetation .
keep the reinforcing free of dirt oil grease paint and other foreign matter .
num surface preparation .
remove deteriorated areas of concrete to sound concrete with no more than a num lb chipping hammer .
continue chipping to at least num in .
behind the reinforcing steel and until there is no sudden change in the depth of the cavity .
provide a perimeter having a shoulder perpendicular to the surface of the structure for a depth of at least num in .
after the engineer has determined that it is sound abrasive blast the cavity surface .
just prior to applying the mortar thoroughly clean all surfaces followed by wetting and damp drying .
contain all blast waste and loose concrete and promptly remove it to an approved disposal site .
keep blast waste and loose concrete out of waterways .
num reinforcement .
if sound concrete is encountered before the reinforcing steel is exposed remove sound concrete to a depth of num in .
behind the reinforcing steel .
if sound concrete is found within num in .
of the proposed finished surface stop the removal and dowel additional no .
num reinforcing bars installed at num in .
center to center horizontally and vertically num in .
clear of proposed finished surface .
dowel per section num except use any type grout specified in num .
abrasive blast all exposed existing reinforcing steel that will be incorporated in the new work to a near white finish to remove all rust dirt scale and loose concrete .
cut out reinforcing bars that have lost num num pneumatically applied mortar num percent or more of their original dimension .
weld new bars in their place .
dual bars of equivalent or greater section may be used .
weld new reinforcing steel to existing reinforcing steel as specified .
the engineer will establish if reinforcing steel is to be reused or replaced .
in addition to the reinforcing steel reinforce repaired areas with wire mesh .
for anchoring reinforcing to masonry surfaces set at least num in .
diameter expansion bolts in drilled holes or set plain round no .
num bars in approved dry packed mortar tightly driven in drilled holes .
ensure that drilled holes are at least num in .
deep .
all bolts and bars shall be set in solid masonry not in mortar joints or cracks and have heads or hooks on their outer ends .
where approved mesh may be wired to existing reinforcing without the use of expansion bolts .
cut mesh in sheets of proper size .
bend the separate sheets over templates to follow the outlines of the member or surface to be covered .
securely hold in a uniform position by tying to the bolts or bars with num gauge black annealed wire .
space ties at no more than num in .
overlap adjacent sheets of mesh at least two squares .
tie them together with a num gauge black annealed wire at intervals not exceeding num in .
num guides .
use sufficient guides to obtain the full thickness of mortar specified and to ensure uniform and straight lines .
num mixing and screening .
uniformly dry mix the cement and sand in a batch mixing machine .
discard mixed materials not applied within one hour .
after the materials are dry mixed and before being charged into the placing machine pass the mixture through a num in .
screen .
num application .
build up each layer by several passes of the nozzle over the working area .
ensure that the mixture emerges in a steady uninterrupted flow .
should the flow become intermittent for any cause direct it away from the work until it becomes constant .
hold the nozzle perpendicular to the application surface and at a distance from the work as required to obtain best results for the conditions .
when shooting through reinforcement hold the nozzle at a slight angle from perpendicular to permit better encasement .
for vertical surfaces begin application at the bottom .
ensure that the first layer completely embeds the reinforcement .
num num lightweight superstructure concrete do not work rebound back into the construction nor salvage it to be included in later batches .
do not permit rebound and overspray to fall into waterways .
dispose of this material in an approved disposal site at no additional cost to the administration .
when a layer of pneumatically applied mortar is to be covered by a succeeding layer ensure that it has taken its initial set prior to proceeding .
then remove all laitance loose material and rebound by brooming .
use abrasive blasting to remove any laitance that has taken final set and clean the surface with an air water jet .
in addition the engineer will sound the surface with a hammer for hollow sounding areas that indicate rebound pockets or lack of bond .
num curing and cold weather protection .
section num .
keep mortar continuously wet for at least seven days after application .
liquid membrane forming compound will be permitted with prior approval .
num finishing .
finish the area of repair to match the existing structure .
num measurement and payment .
pneumatically applied mortar will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic foot of mortar in place .
the payment will be full compensation for inspections removal of existing concrete abrasive blasting and furnishing all cement sand water test panels drilled holes reinforcing bars and wire mesh mortar expansion bolts cores storage and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num reserved section num lightweight superstructure concrete num description .
furnish and install lightweight concrete .
num materials .
lightweight concrete num mix num num num lightweight superstructure concrete num construction .
conform to num and as specified herein .
handle lightweight aggregates in a manner that provides a thorough sprinkling of the aggregates during the stockpiling to produce damp aggregate .
sprinkle to obtain uniform distribution of moisture .
then permit the aggregates to drain as long as necessary to produce a uniform moisture content .
maintain the moisture content as much as practical until the aggregate is used .
add the admixtures to the mix according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num existing structures .
remove existing bridge decks according to num .
note that the deck replacement material may be lighter than the existing deck and the deflection caused by the lighter material will be less than the material removed .
therefore compute modified rebound figures to be used in lieu of dead load deflections to establish grade controls to produce finished tops of concrete bridge decks that will be true to as planned line and grade .
num measurement and payment .
lightweight concrete structures will be measured and paid for as specified .
the payment will be full compensation for all forms and form removal reinforcing steel curing and misting scuppers mechanical and electrical work all cost incidental to the conducting of tests for oxygen content and presence of gases and applying mechanical ventilation to confined spaces year built markings and for all material labor equipment including safety equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the construction of drainage and weep holes any pipe necessary expansion material flashing dampproofing membrane waterproofing epoxy bonding compound joints and their placement will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the lightweight concrete item .
no deduction in lightweight concrete quantities will be made for pipes or conduits having diameters less than num in .
reinforcing steel anchors or any other appurtenances .
num lightweight superstructure concrete will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price unless otherwise specified .
num lightweight concrete parapets and median barriers will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for the pertinent lightweight concrete parapet or lightweight concrete median barrier items .
num floodlighting will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num num lmc overlay for bridge deck num linseed oil protective coating will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
section num latex modified concrete overlay for bridge decks num description .
remove the specified amount of the existing bridge deck mechanically or through hydromilling remove additional areas of deteriorated concrete clean surface areas to be overlaid replace deteriorated reinforcing steel and place latex modified concrete lmc .
restrictions .
do not place lmc in allegany garrett and washington counties between october num and may num .
in all other counties do not place lmc between december num and april num .
do not remove any portion of existing bridge deck that will not be overlaid and cured in accordance with these restrictions .
num materials .
fine aggregate num coarse aggregate num size no .
num portland cement type i num concrete for patching num latex modified concrete num reinforcement num water num num construction .
dispose of removed material at an approved spoil area .
num equipment .
ensure that all proposed equipment meets the requirements specified herein and is approved .
deck removal equipment .
a existing wearing surface removal .
this equipment is only required when the existing bridge contains a hot mix asphalt wearing surface .
provide equipment that is capable of removing the wearing surface without damaging armored joints that are to remain or the existing concrete surfaces beyond the specified num num lmc overlay for bridge deck minimum removal depth .
when pavement breakers are proposed use broad faced chisel blades operated at a slight angle with the horizontal to peel the wearing surface off .
b deck surface removal .
power operated mechanical type and high pressure water jet type equipment shall be capable of uniformly removing the specified minimum depth from the existing concrete surface .
num mechanical type .
this equipment is limited to depths not closer than num in .
from the top of the existing reinforcement .
when additional removal is required use high pressure water jet power driven hand tools or hand tools .
num high pressure water jet .
this equipment may be used to any depth above and below the reinforcing steel .
control the runoff water to keep it from reaching any traveled roadway waterway or any other designated area .
insufficient means of controlling runoff water or the concrete removal depth may be cause for rejection of this equipment .
when this is the case revert to the mechanical type power driven hand tools or handchipping at no additional cost to the administration .
however only revert to the mechanical type equipment for removal of the specified minimum depth when the specified minimum depth is at least num in .
above the existing reinforcement .
c power driven hand tools .
use this equipment for removal of unsound concrete and for removal deeper than num in .
above the top of existing reinforcement .
this equipment is permitted with the following restrictions num do not use pavement breakers heavier than nominal num lb class .
num do not operate pavement breakers or mechanical chipping tools at an angle greater than num degrees measured from the surface of the deck .
num do not use chipping hammers heavier than a nominal num lb class for concrete removal beneath any reinforcing bars .
d hand tools .
use hand tools such as hammers and chisels for removal of remaining particles of unsound concrete from beneath any reinforcing bar or to achieve the required depth .
num num lmc overlay for bridge deck e abrasive blasting .
provide equipment capable of removing rust scale and old concrete from reinforcing bars and of removing small chips of concrete partially loosened by the removal operation .
lmc proportioning and mixing equipment .
equipment used for mixing shall be selfcontained mobile continuous mixing and shall be a selfpropelled and be capable of carrying sufficient unmixed dry bulk cement sand coarse aggregate latex modifier and water to produce at least num ydnum of concrete .
do not store aggregate in the mixing equipment overnight .
b capable of positive measurement of cement being introduced into the mix have a recording meter visible at all times and be equipped with a ticket printout that indicates the quantities being mixed .
c calibrated to accurately proportion the mix .
certification of the calibration by an approved testing authority will be accepted as evidence of the accuracy if the yield is shown to be true within a tolerance of num percent in conformance with msmt num. d capable of providing positive control of the flow of water and latex emulsion into the mixing chamber .
water flow shall be indicated by flow meter and be readily adjustable to provide for minor variations in aggregate moisture .
e capable of being calibrated to automatically proportion and blend all components of indicated composition on a continuous or intermittent basis as required by the finishing operation .
it shall discharge mixed material through a conventional chute directly in front of the finishing machine .
f capable of spraying water over the entire placement width as it moves ahead to ensure that the surface is wetted to receive the lmc .
placing and finishing equipment .
the combination of labor and equipment for proportioning mixing placing and finishing lmc shall meet the following minimum requirements except when otherwise specified num num lmc overlay for bridge deck total overlay area per bridge ydnum minimum overlay rate per hr ydnum num num num num num num over num num a placing and finishing equipment includes hand tools for placement and brushing in freshly mixed lmc mortar and for distributing it to approximately the correct level for striking off with the screed .
b use an approved finishing machine for finishing all areas of work .
the finishing machine shall be selfpropelled and capable of forward and reverse movement under positive control .
provisions shall be made for raising all screeds to clear the screeded surface for traveling in reverse .
use a rotating cylinder type finishing machine .
it shall span the placement transversely and be equipped with one or more rotating steel cylinders augers and vibratory pans .
c the finishing machine shall be designed so that when lmc is being mixed and placed under normal operating conditions at the minimum rate the elapsed time between depositing the lmc on the concrete deck and final screeding does not exceed num minutes .
d ensure that construction is supervised by the lmc mixtures representative or as directed by the engineer .
num deck removal and repairs .
remove material to the specified limits .
the engineer will inspect the entire exposed portion of the deck and determine if any repairs are required including the type and extent of the repair .
use power driven hand tools hand tools or high pressure water jet to remove deteriorated areas of deck down to sound concrete .
after removing all deteriorated concrete remove all rust oil or other foreign materials detrimental to achieving bond followed by abrasive blasting and air blast or vacuum as determined by the engineer .
repair any extraneous damage to the existing bridge that the engineer deems to have been caused by the removal operations at no additional cost to the administration .
num num lmc overlay for bridge deck if the engineer determines that the remaining concrete is deteriorated beyond the specified depth of scarification or determines that extraneous material has been removed beyond the specified depth during the scarification process that is not due to contractor error make revisions to achieve the new required depth of removal .
this additional work will be measured and paid for according to num .
regardless of the depth of removal of existing concrete place the lmc to the specified elevation and grade .
existing reinforcing steel utilized in the finished deck shall meet num except thoroughly clean these bars by abrasive blasting .
where the bond between existing concrete and reinforcing steel has been destroyed or where more than half the diameter of the steel is exposed remove the concrete adjacent to the bar to a depth that will permit concrete bond to the entire periphery of the exposed bar .
ensure that this clearance is at least num in .
unless lower bar mats make it impractical .
take measures to prevent cutting stretching or damaging exposed reinforcing steel .
keep all areas from which unsound concrete has been removed free of slurry produced by hydromilling of concrete in adjacent areas .
plan the work so that this slurry will drain away from open areas .
remove slurry from prepared areas before proceeding with the surface preparation .
repair spalled concrete voids and other defects that are located within the proposed lmc overlay area according to the methods specified herein .
each repair includes the removal of the additional deck material all handchipping and filling the repair area voids with lmc overlay while applying the overlay .
a for cavities less than num in .
deep no additional work required .
b for cavities num to num in .
deep place wire fabric as specified in num .
wire fabric is not required for repair areas less than num ftnum .
c for cavities over num in .
deep but not full depth meet the following num if the repair crosses a proposed construction joint provide a num x num in .
keyway at the vertical joint .
num furnish and install temporary protective shields as specified in num when the depth of removal reaches half the original concrete deck thickness and deeper removal is anticipated .
num num lmc overlay for bridge deck d for areas where the depth of removal is full depth meet the following in addition to the requirements of c num in large areas supply forms to enable placement of the lmc overlay and support them by blocking from the stringers .
num in small areas supply forms to enable placement of the lmc overlay .
forms may be suspended from existing reinforcing bars by wire ties .
num surface preparation .
thoroughly clean the entire surface and abrasive blast before placing the overlay .
use abrasive blasting to clean all reinforcing bars of visible rust and clinging concrete detached from the deck and all areas of concrete against which the overlay is to be placed .
abrasive blasting may be required on the day the overlay is to be placed so that reinforcing bars are free of visible rust as determined by the engineer .
abrasive blast within num hours of placing the lmc overlay .
further clean the surface by air blast followed by flushing with water .
prior to placing the lmc overlay wet the surface and keep it wet for at least one hour .
remove puddles of free water .
num proportioning and mixing lmc materials .
mixers shall be clean and the ingredients accurately proportioned .
mix lmc materials at the site according to the specified requirements for the equipment used .
ensure that the lmc discharged from the mixer is uniform in composition and consistency .
mixing shall enable finishing operations to proceed at a steady pace with final finishing completed before the formation of the plastic surface film .
num placing and finishing lmc overlay .
the lmc overlay will be the riding surface of the bridge .
place the top of the lmc overlay to the true as planned line and grade of the roadways .
take all necessary precautions to produce a finished top of lmc overlay that is smooth riding by placing the lmc overlay in a manner that meets the grade of the proposed adjoining portions of the new bridge decks and adjoining roadways .
place and fasten screed rails in position to ensure finishing the new surface to the required profile .
anchorage for supporting rails shall provide horizontal and vertical stability .
do not treat screed rails with any compound to facilitate their removal .
the location of longitudinal joints if not shown on the contract documents will be determined by the engineer based on avoiding joints in the vehicular wheel path as much as practical .
num num lmc overlay for bridge deck take every reasonable precaution to secure a smooth riding bridge deck meeting numd .
prior to placement operations review the equipment procedures personnel and previous results with the engineer .
inspection procedures will be reviewed to ensure coordination .
include the following precautions a completely clean all surfaces for approval prior to placing the lmc overlay .
b brush the lmc mixture onto the wetted prepared surface .
ensure that all vertical and horizontal surfaces receive a thorough even coating .
limit the rate of progress so that the brushed material does not become dry before it is covered with additional materials required for the final grade .
remove brushed material that has dried prior to lmc placement and replace it in an acceptable manner .
dispose of coarse aggregate that accumulates from the brushing operations .
c place the lmc mixture to approximately num in .
above grade and then screed with an approved power operated finishing machine to the specified line and grade .
use a suitable portable lightweight or wheeled work bridge behind the finishing operation .
hand finishing may be required along the edge .
joints shall be edge tooled except when next to metal expansion dams curbs and previously placed lanes .
d separate the screed rails and construction bulkheads from the newly placed material by passing a pointing trowel along their inside face .
make the trowel cut for the entire depth and length of screed rails and bulkheads after the mixture has stiffened sufficiently .
do not separate metal expansion dams from the overlay .
num curing .
cover the surface of the lmc overlay with a single layer of clean wet burlap or wet cotton mat as soon as the surface will support it without deformation .
follow immediately with a layer of num mil polyethylene film and cure the surface for num hours .
after num hours remove the curing material and air cure for an additional num hours .
with approval white opaque burlap polyethylene sheeting may be substituted for the polyethylene film but this material does not replace the wet burlap or wet cotton mat .
num grooving .
groove per the applicable portions of numdnum but start after the lmc has been cured per num .
num limitation of operations .
lmc placement includes the applicable deck placement restrictions specified in num .
num num lmc overlay for bridge decks no traffic will be permitted on the lmc overlay until the curing of the material is completed and the compressive strength test has reached num psi .
do not place lmc and concrete adjacent to an lmc surface course less than num hours old .
this restriction does not apply to a continuation of placement in a lane or strip beyond a joint in the same lane or strip .
do not grind or chip existing concrete pavement within num ft of lmc until the lmc has cured for at least num hours .
do not place lmc at temperatures below num f. the lmc may be placed at num f if rising temperature is predicted and anticipated for at least num hours .
at temperatures below num f the engineer will require a longer curing period and conformance with applicable portions of num .
remove and replace unsatisfactory lmc at no additional cost to the administration .
any day during which the curing temperature falls below num f will not be counted as a curing day .
when during the curing period the curing temperature falls below num f the work may be considered as being unsatisfactory and rejected .
during delays up to one hour several layers of wet burlap may be used to protect the end of the placement from drying .
if the delay exceeds one hour construct a dam or install a bulkhead and wait num hours before resuming placement operations .
however placement may continue provided a gap of sufficient length for the finishing machine to clear the previously placed lmc overlay is left in the lane or strip .
protect freshly placed lmc overlays from sudden or unexpected rain .
stop all placing operations when it starts to rain .
remove and replace material damaged by rainfall as determined by the engineer at no additional cost to the administration .
do not place linseed oil on lmc finished deck surfaces .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all removing and cleaning abrasive blasting air blasting flushing with water forming curing disposal of material removed and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num removal and disposal of existing wearing surface from bridge will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard for the actual surface area removed from the bridge deck .
num num metal structures num removal to the depth specified in the contract documents will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the pertinent latex modified concrete overlay item .
num deck repairs regardless of the method and depth will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the pertinent latex modified concrete overlay item .
num furnishing placing finishing and curing of the lmc overlay will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for the latex modified concrete overlay item .
measurement for the volume of concrete will be based on the meter readings on the mixers dispensing the latex modified concrete excluding the calculated volume of any waste .
num repair bar for deck reinforcement will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num when traffic bearing surfaces are required supplying and removal of them and any repairs of damage to existing deck will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items specified in the contract documents .
num furnishing and installing any formwork required for full depth deck repairs will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square foot for the pertinent formwork for full depth deck repairs item .
the measurement will be based upon the exposed opening at the bottom of the deck .
the cost for form work extending beyond these limits will be incidental to the item .
section num thru num reserved section num metal structures num description .
furnish fabricate transport and erect steel beams plate girders trusses grillages columns and bents shoes pedestals castings miscellaneous steel and incidental structural steel .
refer to section num for bearings and sections num and num for cleaning and painting new and existing structural steel respectively .
substitutes for rolled members .
fabricated shapes may be substituted for the specified rolled shape provided the substitution is at no additional cost to the administration and the fabricated shape meets the following requirements num num metal structures a the moment of inertia is equal to or greater than the rolled shape for the full length of the member .
b the depth is greater than or equal to the rolled shape and does not decrease the designated minimum underclearance .
c the web or leg thickness is at least num in .
d the flange thickness is at least num in .
the flange width is at least num in .
and the width to thickness ratio does not exceed num. e it is made of the same material specified for the rolled shape .
f all normal criteria for creating a welded member are adhered to .
num materials .
grout num .
numcde metals num bolts a num nuts a num grade c d and dh washers f num direct tension indicating washers dti f num num construction .
unless otherwise specified all welding and dimensional tolerances shall meet aws dnum .
num working drawings .
refer to section num .
if lateral bracing is required for shipping or erection specify the details on the working drawings .
num work scheduling .
refer to section num .
at least two weeks prior to beginning shop work notify the engineer when and where to allow for inspection .
do not fabricate any materials unless otherwise directed .
num facilities for shop inspection .
furnish all facilities for the inspection of material and workmanship in the shop .
allow the inspector free access to the required areas of the premises and provide an approved office area .
num material identification .
identify main member material by heat number .
num mill orders .
furnish copies of mill orders and test reports .
num num metal structures num testing .
furnish sample specimens as directed without charge .
num defective material and workmanship .
the acceptance of any material and workmanship will not deter subsequent rejection .
replace or repair rejected material and workmanship as directed .
num marking and shipping .
paint or mark each member with an erection mark for identification .
furnish an erection diagram with erection marks clearly delineating the orientation of diaphragms .
erection marks for field identification of members and weight marks for members weighing over num lb shall be painted on surface areas previously painted with the shop coat .
material may be loaded for shipment when the shop coat is thoroughly dry but not less than num hours after the paint has been applied .
where unpainted steel is specified for a finished structure do not place any companys name on the structural steel .
erection marks and inspection stamps shall appear only on the top surface of the top flange of girders beams and diaphragms unless otherwise directed .
do not apply paint after the materials have been loaded for transport .
furnish copies of material orders shipping statements and erection diagrams .
show the weight of the individual members on the shipping statements .
load transport unload and store structural material so that the metal is kept clean and does not become excessively stressed deformed or otherwise damaged .
when handling long steel members place handling devices at approximately the quarter points .
when storing and shipping members place blocking at intervals that prevent sag and distortion .
keep beams and girders in an upright position during shipping storage and handling .
for other members keep the stronger axis vertical .
all girders having stiffeners the full height of the web on both sides of the web shall be adequately blocked before shipment .
locate this blocking at the quarter points and midpoint of the girder and at additional locations to ensure that the blocking interval does not exceed num ft. for members too long to fit inside a truck or trailer limit the cantilever to one quarter of the length of the member .
support members too long to comply with this requirement on dollies additional vehicles or other vehicles that fully support the long pieces as approved .
num num metal structures num storage of material .
store fabricated material off the ground and protected from rust producing conditions .
keep materials free of dirt accumulation oil or other deleterious matter .
num changes and substitutions .
do not make changes or substitutions in any approved drawing unless approved in writing by the director office of bridge development .
num fabrication .
use bolted or welded fabrication and construction as specified or as directed .
when girders are to be curved by the heat shrinkage method submit the proposed method .
num holes .
a punched holes .
the diameter of the die shall not exceed the diameter of the punch by more than num in .
holes requiring enlargement shall be reamed .
provide holes that are clean cut with no torn or ragged edges .
ensure that holes punched full size or subpunched are punched so that after the steel is assembled and before any reaming is done a cylindrical pin num in .
smaller in diameter than the nominal size of the punched hole can be entered perpendicular to the face of the member without drifting in at least num percent of the contiguous holes in the same plane .
if this requirement is not met the nonconforming punched pieces will be rejected .
holes not passing a pin num in .
smaller in diameter than the nominal size of the punched hole will be rejected .
drifting done during assembling is permitted only to bring the parts into position but not to the extent that holes are enlarged or distorted .
if the required accuracy can not be obtained otherwise holes for connections shall be subpunched and reamed with the members assembled instead of being punched full size .
b reamed or drilled holes .
holes shall be cylindrical perpendicular to the member and not more than num in .
larger than the nominal diameter of the bolts .
where practical direct the reamers by mechanical means .
remove burrs on the surface .
poor matching of holes will be cause for rejection .
use twist drills for reaming and drilling .
if directed take assemblies apart and remove burrs caused by drilling .
assemble connecting parts that require reamed or drilled holes and securely hold them while reaming and drilling .
match mark them before disassembling .
after holes are reamed or drilled num percent of the holes in any contiguous group shall show no offset greater than num in .
between adjacent thicknesses of metal .
num num metal structures c subpunching and reaming .
holes in all field connections and field splices of main truss or arch members continuous beams plate girders and rigid frames shall be subpunched and reamed while assembled in the shop unless otherwise specified .
the assembly including camber alignment accuracy of holes and milled joints shall be acceptable to the engineer before reaming is started .
holes for floor beam and stringer field end connections shall be subpunched and reamed utilizing a template or reamed while assembled .
if specified do additional subpunching and reaming as required .
the accuracy of subpunched holes shall be the same as required for punched holes .
num shop assembly .
surfaces of metal that will be in contact after assembly shall be cleaned .
ensure that parts of a member are assembled well pinned and firmly drawn together with bolts before starting reaming or tightening of fasteners .
the member shall be free from twists bends and other deformations .
ream material that has been punched full size if necessary prior to tightening of fasteners .
refer to numc .
parts not completely fastened in the shop shall be secured with bolts to prevent damage in shipment and handling .
members assembled in the shop for reaming of field connections shall remain assembled until the engineers shop inspection .
num camber diagram .
furnish a camber diagram showing the camber at each panel point for each truss taken from actual measurements during truss assembly .
for all beams and girders furnish a camber diagram showing the camber at all splice points points of dead load inflection and any other points designated by the engineer .
stringers shall be cambered to the specified dimensions when measured after completion of all shop welding .
the maximum tolerance for camber is zero under to num in .
over .
make provisions for dead load deflections fabricating tolerances and irregularities at all points along all stringers so that the superstructure concrete may be placed to match the profile grade line .
num match marking .
match mark connecting parts assembled in the shop for the purpose of reaming holes in field connections .
furnish a diagram showing these marks .
num num metal structures num use of high strength bolts and lockpin and collar fasteners .
use high strength bolts and lockpin and collar fasteners unless otherwise specified .
unfinished bolts or machine bolts may be used for the temporary erection of structural steel .
replace them with high strength bolts lockpin and collar fasteners or welding for final erection .
use turned bolts only when specified .
draw the heads nuts and washers tightly against the work .
where bolts or lockpin and collar fasteners are used in beveled surfaces provide beveled washers to give full bearing to the head nut or collar except as otherwise specified in num .
where high strength bolt assemblies are used for joint connections perform the additional testing specified by the office of materials technology .
num high strength bolt joint requirements .
a use only one grade of bolts nuts and washers in a structure .
bolts may be supplied from various manufacturers provided that each bolt of a given length and diameter is made by the same manufacturer .
nuts and washers may be supplied from different manufacturers provided that the same manufacturers make all the respective nuts and washers to be used throughout the structure on all bolts having the same diameter .
all bolts nuts and washers used with a num grade numw steel shall meet a num type num. b the slope of surfaces of bolted parts in contact with the bolt head and nut shall not exceed num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis .
where an outer face of the bolted parts has a slope of more than num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis use a smooth beveled washer to compensate for the lack of parallelism .
when assembled bolted parts shall fit solidly together and shall not be separated by gaskets or any other compressible material .
the holes shall be truly cylindrical and at right angles to the surface of the metal so that both head and nut bear squarely against the metal .
when assembled all joint surfaces including those adjacent to the bolt heads nuts or washers shall be free of scale except tight mill scale dirt burrs and other deleterious material and defects that would prevent solid seating of the parts .
contact surfaces within joints shall be free of oil lacquer and rust inhibitor .
refer to num for contact surfaces to be painted .
c when all bolts in the joint are tight every bolt shall conform to the minimum installation tension specified for its size by the office of material technology .
when field conditions prevent tightening at the nut bolts may be tightened at the head provided that the nut is prevented from turning .
place a washer under the element nut or bolt head turned in tightening .
threaded bolt connections shall be num num metal structures tightened by the turnofnut method unless dtis are opted for use .
if impact wrenches are used they shall be of adequate capacity and have a sufficient supply of air to perform the required tightening of each bolted connection .
d to provide the bolt tension specified in numc first bring enough bolts to a snug tight condition ensuring that the parts of the joint are in full contact with each other .
snug tight is defined as the tightness attained by a few impacts of an impact wrench or the full effort of a man using an ordinary spud wrench .
place bolts in any remaining holes in the connection and bring to snug tightness .
then additionally tighten all bolts in the joint with tensioning progressing systematically from the most rigid part of connection to the free edges .
ensure that there is no rotation of the part not turned by the wrench during this operation .
after all bolts in the joint have been tightened to a snug tight condition as described above tighten the joint by the applicable amount of nut rotation specified in the nut rotation from snug tight condition table below .
all bolt assemblies in the completed structure shall have full thread engagement which is accomplished when the end of the bolt is flush with or extends beyond the outer face of the nut .
nut rotation from snug tight condition disposition of outer faces of bolted parts bolt length as measured from underside of head to extreme end of bolt both faces normal to bolt axis one face normal to bolt axis and other face sloped not more than num beveled washer not used both faces sloped not more than num from normal to bolt axis beveled washers not used up to and including num diameters num turn num turn num turn over num diameters but not exceeding num diameters num turn num turn num turn over num diameters but not exceeding num diameters num turn num turn num turn note num this table is for coarse thread heavy hexagon structural bolts of all sizes and lengths and heavy hexagon semifinished nuts .
note num nut rotation is rotation relative to bolt regardless of the element nut or bolt being turned .
tolerance on rotation num degrees for bolts installed by num turn or less and num degrees for bolts installed by num turn or more .
num num metal structures e inspection .
the engineer will be present during the installation and tightening of bolts to determine that the tightening procedure is followed and all bolts are properly tightened .
provide a sufficient number of safe working platforms at splices for checking torque requirements .
maintain the platforms until all checking is complete and the splice is accepted .
turn of nut method .
provide a calibrated torque wrench to be used as the inspection wrench and a calibrated bolt tension calibrator .
both shall be as approved .
conduct the following inspections unless otherwise specified .
num three bolts of the same size length and condition as those under inspection shall be placed individually in the bolt tension calibration device .
place a washer under the part turned in tightening each bolt .
num tighten each of the three bolts in the calibration device by any convenient means to the tension specified for its size .
then use the inspecting wrench to further tighten the bolt and determine the torque necessary to turn the nut or headnum degrees approximately num in .
at num in .
radius .
use the average torque measured in the tests of three bolts as the job inspecting torque to be used in the manner specified in num .
num use the inspecting wrench to inspect bolts represented in the sample above that have been tightened in the structure .
apply the job inspecting torque in the tightening direction to num percent of the bolts but not less than two bolts selected at random in each connection .
if no nut or bolt head is turned the connection will be accepted as properly tightened .
if any nut or bolt head is turned apply the job inspecting torque to all bolts in the connection and tighten and reinspect all bolts whose nut or head is turned .
alternatively the fabricator or erector may opt to retighten all of the bolts in the connection and then resubmit the connection for the specified inspection .
f do not reuse bolts nuts or washers that were previously torqued to installation tension as described in d or e above .
num lockpin and collar fastener requirements .
a ensure that lockpin and collar fasteners meet num for one manufacturer weathering characteristics sloped surfaces and applicable inspection .
num num metal structures b a representative sample of at least three sets of lockpin and collar fasteners of each diameter length and grade shall be checked at the job site in a device capable of indicating bolt tension .
the test assembly shall include flat hardened washers if required in the actual connection arranged as in the actual connections to be tensioned .
the calibration test shall demonstrate that each assembly develops a tension at least num percent greater than the tension required for the comparable a num or a num bolt .
follow manufacturers installation procedure for installation of bolts in the calibration device and in all connections .
perform periodic retesting when directed .
c install fasteners in all holes of the connection and initially tighten sufficiently to bring all plies of the joint into firm contact but without yielding or fracturing the control or indicator element of the fasteners .
then additionally tighten all fasteners progressing systematically from the most rigid part of the connection to the free edges in a manner that will minimize relaxation of previously tightened fasteners .
in some cases proper tensioning of the fasteners may require more than a single cycle of systematic partial tightening prior to final twist off of the control or indicator element of individual fasteners .
num welding .
welding of structures shall meet the contract documents and aashtoaws bridge welding code dnum unless otherwise specified .
the provisions contained herein apply to both shop and field welding .
ensure that all welders welding machine operators and tackers employed to work on structures are approved by the office of materials technology .
a qualification testing .
welders will be approved based on qualification testing according to aashtoaws bridge welding code dnum .
the office of materials technology omt will conduct qualification testing .
contact omt at least num days prior to the start of welding operations to schedule testing .
at the time of test ensure that welders have an authorization .
this authorization shall contain the welders name social security number contract number and the contractors name and phone number .
num num metal structures b qualifications from outside sources .
welders having certifications from outside sources in accordance with the aashtoaws bridge welding code dnum may submit that certification for approval to omt .
ensure that all field welders approved by omt have a current administration welders certification card available at all times for inspection .
unless otherwise specified only submerged arc welding will be permitted on members carrying primary stress .
members carrying primary stress are specified in num .
after fabrication no welding will be permitted on tension flanges for attachments such as metal forms and ty screws except for specified steel stud shear developers .
welding transversely across tension flanges of beams or girders will be cause for rejection unless otherwise specified .
num inspection of fabricated metal structures .
fabricated metal structures shall meet aashtoaws bridge welding code dnum .
perform quality control inspection .
prior to receiving source approval a current approved quality control plan shall be on file with the office of materials technology .
this plan shall specify the frequency and method of inspection and provide for documentation .
ensure that the inspection frequency is at least the minimum specified in aashtoaws bridge welding code dnum .
the administration requires num days to review quality control plans not previously on file .
keep complete and current records and make them available to the administrations representatives at all times .
when work is completed the documentation for all quality control tests and inspections shall become the property of the administration .
num planing .
plane the top and bottom surfaces of steel slabs base plates and cap plates of columns and pedestals or have the plates or slabs heat straightened .
ensure that parts of members in contact with them are faced .
in planing the flat surfaces of expansion bearings the cut of the tool shall be in the direction of expansion .
num num metal structures num abutting joints .
ensure that abutting joints in compression members and in tension members where specified are faced and brought to an even bearing .
where joints are not faced limit the opening to no more than num in .
num end connection angles .
floor beams stringers and girders having end connection angles shall be built to the exact length backto back of connection angles .
if end connections are faced ensure that the finished thickness of the angles is not less than specified .
num main members .
principal portions of main members carrying primary stress refer to num shall be fabricated so that the direction of stress and rolling are the same .
num web plates .
at web splices ensure that the clearance between the ends of the web plates is not more than num in .
ensure that the clearance at the top and bottom ends of the web splice plates is not more than num in .
num bent plates .
unwelded cold bent load carrying rolled steel plates shall be taken from the stock plates so that the bend line will be at right angles to the direction of rolling except that cold bent ribs for orthotropic deck bridges may be bent in the direction of rolling if approved and shall meet the following minimum coldbending radii a num grades thickness in .
t up to num over num to num incl .
over num to num incl .
over num num numt numt numt numt num numt numt numt num numw numt numt numt num hpsnumw numt numt num numt num numt num numt numt numw numt num numt numt a bend so that no cracking of the plate occurs .
minimum bend radii measured to the concave face of the metal shall meet the following .
b for brake press forming the lower die span should be at least num times the plate thickness .
multiple hits are advisable .
num num metal structures c if a shorter radius is essential bend the plates at a temperature no greater than num f. hot bent plates shall be taken from stock so that the bend line will be at right angles to the direction of rolling .
d before bending round the corners of the plate to a radius of num in .
throughout the portion of the plate where the bending is to occur .
num erection plan .
submit an erection plan for approval outlining erection procedure of the main members .
submit the erection plan as specified in section num and to the director office of bridge development at least num days prior to beginning erection .
include the numbers and types of equipment to be used including crane capacity location of crane for lifting falsework when required and main member erection sequence and weight .
ensure that all wheels and outriggers of a crane or wheels of a structural steel delivery truck are at a minimum distance from the rear face of an abutment equal to the vertical distance from the top of a spread footing or to the original groundline if the footing is on piles .
ensure that no other heavy construction equipment operates within this distance from the rear face of abutments .
erect bridges with continuous main members in a manner providing the proper reactions and avoiding overstressing main members .
when preparing erection plans and procedures take into account the restrictions imposed by the water resources administration relative to pollution or disturbance of existing waterways .
num falsework .
comply with the provisions specified in tcnum and section num .
build and maintain the falsework in accordance with the approved falsework plans .
any changes subsequent to initial approval shall be proposed through the contractors professional engineer and be as approved .
before permitting any loads to be placed on falsework the engineer shall receive written certification by the contractors professional engineer that the falsework system has been assembled in conformance with the approved falsework drawings .
this certification shall be accompanied by a certificate of compliance stating that all manufactured materials and assemblies fully comply with the falsework design and plans .
the engineer may either accept the certificate or invoke any provision of gpnum .
perform all tests required at no additional cost to the administration .
num num metal structures in addition to protective measures shown on the falsework plans the engineer may direct that further protection of falsework be provided against accidental collision by highway or construction traffic and equipment traffic vibration flood waters or high winds etc .
that are necessary for public safety and protection of the work .
num damaged or defective material .
submit a written procedure for correcting damaged or defective material to the director office of bridge development .
do not proceed with corrections until approved .
the engineer will inspect damaged or defective material before and after correction .
make corrections in the presence of the engineer .
num assembling steel .
carefully handle material without bending breaking or otherwise damaging parts .
before assembly clean the bearing surfaces and those to be in permanent contact .
before beginning field bolting and welding adjust the structure to correct grade and alignment and properly regulate the elevations of panel points ends of floor beams .
fill half the holes in splices and field connections using bolts and cylindrical erection pins num percent bolts and num percent pins before torquing high strength bolts .
if the member will carry traffic during erection fill three fourths of the holes before torquing .
cylindrical erection pins shall be num in .
larger than the diameter of the fasteners .
num anchor bolts .
per num .
do not cast anchor bolts in the concrete .
create a template to locate the anchor bolt holes and use it to shift the reinforcement prior to placing the concrete to eliminate conflicts between the reinforcement and the anchor bolt holes .
set anchor bolts in round holes drilled or cast in the concrete .
accurately position bolts by using templates set to correct location and alignment to ensure proper span lengths and carefully set tops of bolts to proper elevation .
unless otherwise noted install bolts plumb or normal to the finished bearing surface of the masonry .
bolts shall have the portion below the bridge seat swedged .
drill or cast holes to a diameter at least num in .
larger than the bolt diameter .
do not paint anchor bolts nuts and washers .
after anchor bolts are finally and correctly positioned completely fill the holes with grout however do not grout until all structural steel is set in its final position .
after the masonry plates or shoes are set use the same grout to fill the space between the bolts and the round holes of fixed plates and shoes .
do not fill slotted holes in expansion devices unless specified .
num num metal structures maintain an air temperature of at least num f around the mortar surface for a period of three days unless otherwise recommended by the manufacturer .
when mortar filling is used first check the depth of the hole by inserting and withdrawing the bolt .
then partially fill the hole with mortar and immediately insert the bolt by forcing with uniform pressure or light blows from a hammer flogging and running is prohibited so that excess mortar is pushed out at the top of the hole .
remove excess mortar .
set the bolt to project approximately num in .
above the nut and ensure that it is threaded to approximately num in .
below the nut in their final position .
set rockers or expansion plates with slotted holes with the proper tilt or offset as determined by the temperature prevailing at the time and so that they will be in their midway position at num f or as specified .
num maintenance of concrete .
keep all exposed concrete surfaces free from stains and discoloration .
prevent staining of the finished concrete surfaces where unpainted structural steel is specified .
remove any stains and restore the concrete to its original color .
num safety hazards .
perform gas detection in and ventilation of confined spaces as specified in tcnum .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all high strength bolt and lockpin and collar fastener assembly testing and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num fabricated structural steel will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
num fabricated structural steel will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per pound computed on the theoretical weight .
where measurement and payment of fabricated structural steel is based on weight the weight will be computed on the basis of the net finished dimensions of the parts as shown on the approved working drawings deducting for copes cuts clips and all open holes .
computations will be made on the basis of the following num num metal structures material pounds per cubic foot aluminum cast or wrought num bronze cast num copper alloy num copper sheet num iron cast num iron malleable num lead sheet num steel rolled cast copper bearing silicone nickel and stainless num zinc num the weight of rolled shapes will be computed on the basis of their nominal weight per foot as specified in the contract documents or listed in handbooks .
the weight of rolled shapes will be computed on the basis of their nominal weight for their width and thickness as specified plus an estimated overrun computed as half the permissible variation in thickness and weight as tabulated in a num .
the weight of all shop weld metal not included in weighed unit and field weld metal will be computed on the basis of the theoretical volume from dimensions of the welds .
the weight of temporary erection bolts shop and field paint boxes crates and other containers used for shipping and materials used for supporting members during transportation and erection is excluded from the calculation of weight for payment .
structural members or materials which fail to conform to requirements of tests and all materials rejected as a result of these tests will not be measured or paid for under any method of payment .
num when a pay item for fabricated structural steel is not specified the fabricated structural steel will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items .
num rotational capacity testing for high strength bolt assemblies will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract price for the fabricated structural steel item or other pertinent items specified .
num num steel stud shear developers section num steel stud shear developers num description .
furnish fabricate and install steel stud shear developers .
num materials .
steel stud shear developers num num construction .
erect all structural steel and install all applicable forming and decking in a particular span before attaching shear developers to the structural steel .
install shear developers per aashto aws bridge welding code dnum .
after welding is completed and prior to concrete placement the engineer will inspect all studs .
correct defects as directed .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num steel stud shear developers will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
num steel stud shear developers for which there is no specific pay item included in the contract documents will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items specified .
num steel stud shear developers will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
section num bearings num description .
furnish and install bearings .
num materials .
steel plates num bronze or copper alloy bearing and expansion plates num elastomeric bearing pads num preformed fabric pads num epoxy adhesives num num bearings num num construction .
num storage and handling .
store all types of bearings at the site under cover and on suitable blocking or platform at least num in .
above all types of surfaces and vegetation .
protect from damage at all times and when placed keep them dry clean free of dirt oil grease and other foreign substances .
num installation .
place preformed fabric pad on surfaces meeting numc prior to installing the masonry bearing plate .
ensure that all bearings and pedestals of truss stringer spans and the center and end bearing of swing spans are rigidly and permanently located to correct alignments and elevations .
refer to the applicable portions of section num for the attachment of bearings or plates to steel superstructures .
num steel bronze or copper bearings .
when steel bronze or copper alloy bearings are specified thoroughly clean the machined bearing surfaces immediately before installation .
as soon as practicable after installation apply one prime coat to all unpainted exposed surfaces of the bearings scheduled for painting .
then proceed with the application of the specified field coats .
num elastomeric bearing pads .
prior to installation give the pads and abutting surfaces a final cleaning to ensure that they are free of dust dirt oil grease moisture and other foreign substances .
use an approved solvent that is compatible with the adhesive prior to application of the epoxy adhesive .
mix and apply the epoxy adhesive according to the manufacturers recommendations .
when elastomeric pads are used without masonry bearing plates grind the masonry bearing surfaces to remove all laitance before applying the adhesive .
apply the adhesive to the surfaces of the masonry bearing areas that will be in contact with the bearing pads and to the full contact area of the bearing pad .
after the pads are in place use blocking or other approved mechanical methods to secure the pads in their final position until the adhesive sets .
surface temperatures and predicted ambient air temperature for the next four hours shall be num f or higher at the time of application unless otherwise specified or recommended by the epoxy adhesive manufacturer and approved .
num num bridge mounted sign supports num measurement and payment .
bearings will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items specified .
section num bridge mounted sign supports num description .
furnish and construct bridge mounted sign supports and sign luminaire supports .
this work does not include sign panels electrical work or luminaires .
references to grade numw structural steel shall be construed to include similar structural steel having weathering characteristics .
num materials .
epoxy grout numd structural steel num anchor bolts nuts and washers num high strength bolts nuts and washers num paint num paint system b on new structures construct the sign support using the same structural steel and fasteners used for the fabrication of the structure .
when a num grade numw structural steel is used make the vertical supports from material meeting a num grade num or num .
on existing structures use structural steel meeting a num grade num or num for the sign support .
when the existing structure consists of a num grade numw structural steel construct the sign support from steel meeting a num grade numw except make the vertical supports from steel meeting a num grade num or num .
use fasteners meeting num and use type num when used with a num grade numw .
vertical supports for the sign panels shall be galvanized per a num .
all bolts nuts and similar fasteners in contact with the galvanized material shall be mechanically or hot dipped galvanized meeting the thickness adherence and quality requirements of a num .
num construction .
construct the sign support according to the applicable portions of section num .
paint according to section num except as specified herein .
set the anchor bolts by epoxy grouting or casting in place when applicable .
num cleaning and painting new structural steel num on new structures clean and paint the nongalvanized portions of the sign support using the same system specified for the structure .
portions of the sign support mounted on structures constructed with grade numw steel and attached to areas designated to be painted shall also be cleaned and painted .
on existing structures not constructed with grade numw steel either the entire sign support may be galvanized or those areas not designated to be galvanized may be painted .
refer to section num for cleaning and painting nongalvanized portions of the sign support .
blast clean to a surface condition of near white sspcsp num prior to painting .
unless otherwise specified refer to num for repair of damaged coatings on existing structures .
portions of the sign support mounted on existing structures constructed with grade numw steel and attached to areas that are painted shall also be cleaned and painted .
num measurement and payment .
bridge mounted sign supports will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num reserved section num cleaning and painting new structural steel num description .
clean and paint new structural steel used for work such as new construction deck widening and repairs that require installation of new structural steel .
when the existing steel is not scheduled for repainting this work will include repairing existing coatings damaged during the contractors operations and areas where new steel ties into existing steel .
when the existing steel is scheduled for repainting refer to section num .
when the new or existing steel is prepared by abrasive blast cleaning in the field refer to section num for containment and environmental monitoring requirements .
num areas to be coated .
areas of shop cleaning and priming and field cleaning and painting pertain to the following surfaces a nonweathering steel all surfaces .
refer to numa .
num num cleaning and painting new structural steel b weathering steel .
num the outside facing surfaces of the fascia stringers for all structures over roadways and for structures over water that contain curb openings .
for dual structures this includes the median fascia .
these surfaces include the underside of the top flange the web facing away from the structure the top of the bottom flange the outside edge of the bottom flange the underside of the bottom flange the inside edge of the bottom flange and the top of the bottom flange on the inside facing surface up to and including the fillet weld .
a sharp well defined transition between the new paint on the flange and the bare steel above the fillet is not required .
overspray onto the web is acceptable .
all attached bearings are included in the cleaning and painting .
num at abutments the end num ft of all stringers and all other structural steel within the num ft area e.g .
stiffeners cross bracing and bearings .
num at piers num ft in each direction from the center line of the pier giving a total length at each pier of num ft and all other structural steel within the area .
num at bolted field splices num in .
beyond the longest splice plate for each particular splice and all splice material .
c roadway joints .
num new roadway joints .
prior to any shop painting operations clean all surfaces of the expansion dam and backwall angles .
apply the prime coat in the shop to the entire area of the backwall and expansion dam angles including those areas in contact with concrete except the portion that is masked to receive adhesive for the seal .
num existing roadway joints and new portions .
prior to any painting operations on existing expansion joints and new steel used to modify them all surfaces of the expansion dam angles and backwall angles to be painted or receive adhesive for the seal shall be thoroughly cleaned .
the area that will be in contact with the seal shall then be completely masked for full length and depth of seal .
num num cleaning painting new structural steel the backwall and expansion dam angles shall have all coats applied to the entire area that will be exposed in the finished structure both above and below the seal .
num general .
refer to num .
num minimum contracting requirements for field painting .
refer to num .
num definition of bridge .
refer to num .
num materials .
paint systems num and num num paint systems .
refer to num .
new steel includes new structures repairs and widenings .
the paint shall meet paint system b .
touch up paint for the shop primer prior to coats ii and iii shall conform to coat i of paint system c as approved by the coating manufacturer .
existing coatings damaged due to steeldeck repairs or new connections .
use spot coats of coat i of paint system h and coats ii and iii of paint system b. bolts and field welds .
prime all bolts and field welds with coat i of paint system c prior to the application of paint system b coats ii and iii .
roadway joints .
the color of the finish coat shall conform to federal standard num color no .
num. a new roadway joints .
num system b. b existing roadway joints and new portions .
num system e. num abrasives .
refer to num .
num construction .
num submittals .
refer to num .
num num cleaning painting new structural steel num inspection equipment .
the shop and field contractor shall provide for the exclusive use of the engineer the equipment for the qa observations of the contractors cleaning and painting operations .
refer to num .
num paint quality assurance qa inspector notification .
a field .
refer to num. b shop .
notify the office of materials technology at least num working days prior to beginning cleaning and painting .
num floodlighting .
refer to num .
num shop priming of new steel .
solvent clean abrasive blast clean and prime all new structural steel in the shop with coat i of paint system b .
perform blast cleaning and painting after all shop fabrication is complete .
num field cleaning and painting .
solvent clean pressure wash and handpower tool clean the surfaces of the shop primed steel after it is erected .
follow with touch up using coat i of paint system c. apply coats ii and iii of paint system b to all exposed structural steel in the completed structure .
when new steel is added to existing steel and the existing steel is not scheduled for repainting repair the existing coating at new steel connection points and at locations where the existing coating is damaged by the steel installation work .
solvent clean and handvacuumshrouded power tool clean the surfaces .
follow with the spot application of the penetrating sealer of paint system h and the spot application of coats ii and iii of paint system b .
num painting sequence .
refer to num .
num surface preparation .
prepare surfaces as specified in numa thru h the pertinent sspc specifications and the contract documents .
surface conditions shall meet the pertinent sspcvis standards .
surface preparation performed in the shop shall also meet num .
num methods of cleaning .
methods shown in the following table apply to both shop and field cleaning and shall be performed in the order num num cleaning painting new structural steel shown .
the methods are invoked based on the paint system specified .
refer to num for methods of cleaning .
substrate condition paint system methods of cleaning shop coating a and h abrasive blast cleaned steel .
b coat i ii and iii shop touch up of damaged primer damage extending to substrate f damage not extending to substrate d and e field coating of shop primed steel a and b followed by localized repair of damage damage extending to steel substrate f damage not extending to substrate d and e bolts and field welds c coat i b coat ii and iii field a followed by d and e existing coatings damaged due to steel repair new connection or contractors operations .
h coat i b coat ii and iii field a followed by d and e existing roadway joints and modified portions e coat i ii and iii field a followed by f or h num base metal readings bmr .
bmr shall be obtained in the fabrication shop on the bare steel in conformance with sspcpa num .
report this reading along with the dry film thickness readings from the shop for the shop applied coatings .
if not obtained or reported field inspectors will assume a num mil bmr in conformance with sspcpa num .
num repair of surface imperfections .
refer to num .
num surface condition prior to painting .
refer to num .
num paint storage and mixing .
refer to num .
num paint representative .
refer to num .
num shop priming and field finish painting .
meet sspcpa num for painting application and num thru .num .
num time restrictions for field painting .
do not apply field paint between december num and april num .
apply shop paint at any time provided it is done indoors under controlled environmental conditions and in conformance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num num cleaning painting new structural steel num weather restrictions for painting .
refer to num .
num shop application of prime coat .
apply the prime coat in the shop from agitated containers and as recommended by the manufacturer in a single application employing multiple spray passes .
apply the dry film thickness specified in num except reduce the thickness to approximately num mil within the areas of field welding and on the top and both edges of the top flange where steel stud shear developers will be attached .
measurements shall be according to sspcpa num .
remove all dry spray runs mud cracking and damaged primer .
feather the area prior to touch up so that the repainted surface has a reasonably smooth appearance .
use organic zinc primer to touch up the inorganic zinc primer coat in the shop and field unless otherwise approved by the manufacturer and the engineer .
ensure that touch ups have the same dry film thickness as the coat being repaired .
organic zinc may be applied by brush .
num field application of prime intermediate and finish coats .
prior to field coating pressure wash the surfaces of the steel with potable water as specified in numb to remove dirt and contaminants as described in num .
unless otherwise specified apply coats ii and iii after all field welded areas bolted areas and damaged primer coatings are cleaned and primed as specified or as directed .
apply all paint according to the manufacturers recommendations except the dry film thickness shall conform to num .
spray painting will be permitted provided the engineer approves the location and method of spray application .
paint all areas adjacent to machinery and mechanical components etc .
by brush application unless the engineer approves spray application .
surfaces inaccessible for painting by regular means shall be painted using sheepskin daubers or by other means as necessary to ensure coverage of the proper coating thickness .
the thickness measuring instruments shall be maintained calibrated adjusted and measurements taken in conformance with sspcpa num .
stripe coat all edges outside corners crevices welds including welds of fabricated members rivets bolts nuts and washers .
apply a stripe coat of the intermediate coat prior to the application of the full intermediate coat .
apply a stripe coat of the finish coat prior to the application of the full finish coat .
apply stripe coats by brush dauber or roller .
num num cleaning painting new structural steel ensure that each coat is free of shadowthrough skips misses and thin or heavy coating thickness .
repair defects prior to the application of the next coat .
keep the surface to be coated dust free during painting operations and protect newly coated surfaces from the cleaning operations .
if a previously cleaned area becomes soiled contaminated or rusted reclean the area to the specified condition and completely recoat at no additional cost to the administration .
apply the finish coat within num days after the intermediate coat unless approved in writing by the paint manufacturer .
if the recoat window is exceeded reclean the surface as approved by the paint manufacturer and the engineer .
num bolts and field welds .
do not shop coat bolts for field assembly .
after field welding and prior to applying coat ii first field coat clean these bolts field welds and adjacent areas .
cleaning shall be as specified in num .
apply the first field coat coat ii within num hours of cleaning .
before coat ii is applied solvent clean any prime coat stained from rusted bolts according to sspcsp num .
num control of overspray and spills .
refer to num .
num caulking .
refer to num .
num defective work .
refer to num .
num repair of coatings .
refer to num .
num final identification .
refer to num .
num field cleaning waste containment .
refer to num .
num field cleaning containment system plan guidelines .
refer to num .
num containment system requirements by method of preparation .
refer to num .
num worker protection .
refer to num .
num environmental protection .
refer to num .
num environmental protection plan of action .
refer to num .
num num cleaning painting existing structural steel num methods for assessing emissions .
refer to num .
num field cleaning waste disposal .
refer to num .
num waste handling plan of action .
refer to num .
num waste sampling and analysis .
refer to num .
num hazardous waste transportation and disposal .
refer to num .
num nonhazardous waste disposal .
refer to num .
num measurement and payment .
the contract unit price for the item specified will be full compensation for all cleaning and painting scaffolding platforms containment systems permits working drawings daily quality control records professional engineers services used for containment industrial hygienist services air monitoring sampling and testing of materials for toxic metal content including any revisions and resubmissions that may be required during the execution of the work providing safe access for inspections hand wash stationclean up area floodlighting test plates drums collection and storage at the temporary storage site hauling and disposal at an approved industrial waste site or hazardous waste site removing and replacing planking removal of debris and all material labor equipment including test equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num cleaning and painting new structural steel will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the pertinent fabricated structural steel item .
num all costs associated with repair of existing coatings due to new connections and existing coatings damaged during steeldeck repairs will not be measured but will be incidental to the pertinent repair structural steel or cleaning and painting items .
section num cleaning and painting existing structural steel num description .
clean and paint existing structural steel and repair existing coatings damaged during repairs or by the contractors operations .
refer to section num for cleaning and painting new structural steel .
num cleaning painting existing structural steel num num definitions of areas to be cleaned and painted .
the following terms designate the specific areas to be cleaned and painted a all steel surfaces .
steel superstructure elements including but not limited to steel beams girders rockers bearing assemblies trusses floor beams stringers joists purlins crossbracings lateralbracings diaphragms swaybracings scupper downspouts and support brackets for utilities light poles and sidewalks .
it does not include substructure elements railings sign structures utilities or light poles .
b outside facing surfaces of beams .
the exteriorfascia beams of the structure including the underside of the top flange and the web facing away from the structure the top of the bottom flange the outside edge of the bottom flange the underside of the bottom flange the inside edge of the bottom flange and a portion of the top of the bottom flange on the inside facing surface .
the transition between the existing and new coating on the top of the bottom flange shall occur approximately half way between the edge of the flange and the fillet .
a sharp welldefined transition between the new and existing coating is not required but the existing coating shall be feathered .
clean and paint all attached bearings .
c inside facing surfaces of beams .
beams adjacent to longitudinal joints including the underside of the top flange and the web facing toward the longitudinal joint the top of the bottom flange the inside edge of the bottom flange the underside of the bottom flange the outside edge of the bottom flange and a portion of the top of the bottom flange on the outside facing surface .
the transition between the existing and new coating on the top of the bottom flange shall occur approximately half way between the edge of the flange and the fillet .
a sharp welldefined transition between the new and existing coating is not required but the existing coating shall be feathered .
clean and paint all attached bearings .
d bearings and beam ends .
bearing assemblies and structural steel for the specified distance from the ends of the beams at the abutments and the specified distance in each direction from the center line of the piers for a total of twice the specified distance .
num num cleaning painting existing structural steel e roadway joints .
all roadway joint steel on the outside top and inside surfaces of the parapets and from the parapet to the first pavement marking .
the paint system finish coat color and areas to be cleaned and painted for each structure shall be as specified in the cleaning and painting table included in the contract documents .
num general .
perform the work according to sspc standards and the manufacturers recommendations .
notify the engineer of structural defects including cracks missing bolts or rivets and deterioration detected during cleaning and painting .
protect utility pipes conductors light fixtures and conduits from these operations .
do not clean and paint them unless specified .
perform quality control qc inspections to ensure that each phase of the work meets specification requirements .
all maintenance of traffic required for corrective action shall be at no additional cost to the administration .
when a railroad is included in the project all railroad fees shall be as specified except that any additional impact on the railroad and associated fees due to corrective actions or additional inspections shall be at no additional cost to the administration .
ensure that all operations meet the requirements of osha including exposure to lead arsenic and cadmium .
comply with num cfr num construction standards and the applicable federal state and local laws including comar num .
existing paint systems and abrasives used for blast cleaning may include toxic metals such as lead arsenic cadmium and chromium .
consider them as hazardous waste when removed unless tests conducted as specified in the toxicity characteristic leaching procedure tclp epa method num prove otherwise .
prior to bidding become familiar with the current environmental regulations and safety procedures .
in accordance with the epas rcra regulation the administration shall be considered the waste generator of the paint wastes generated by the work on existing structures .
the contractor shall be considered the hazardous waste generator of all other waste associated with the work .
these include wastes produced such as petroleum waste solvent related waste unapplied waste num cleaning painting existing structural steel num paints used rags used protective clothing and other personal protective clothing ppe determined to be wastes .
obtain an epa hazardous waste generator id number and dispose of waste under manifest as required by rcra num cfr num thru num and num .
prevent waste from entering into the environment by containing collecting storing testing and disposing of all waste in accordance with federal state and local regulations .
num minimum contracting requirements for field painting .
the contractorsubcontractor removing or applying paint shall be certified as specified in a below .
when the paint being removed contains toxic metals the contractorsubcontractor removing the paint shall be certified as specified in b below .
all certificates shall be effective prior to award of contract and shall remain in effect for the duration of the contract .
refer to num. a sspcqpnum .
standard procedure for evaluating qualifications of painting contractors field application to complex structures .
b sspcqpnum category a .
standard procedure for evaluating qualifications of painting contractors to remove hazardous paint .
num definition of bridge .
the definition of the word bridge as defined in tcnum does not apply to this specification .
references to bridges in this specification shall mean any structure carrying traffic regardless of their length .
num materials .
paint systems num and num num paint systems .
all coats within the paint systems specified herein shall be from the same manufacturer .
when more than one paint system is used all overlapping paint systems shall be from the same manufacturer .
the color of the touch up finish coat on existing steel shall match the existing finish coat .
the color of the finish coat shall be as specified .
num abrasives .
abrasive media shall produce blasted surfaces having a surface profile height of num to num mils as determined according to d num method c. provide material safety data sheets msds for the abrasives and a letter from the abrasive supplier indicating that num num cleaning painting existing structural steel expendable abrasives meet sspcab num and recyclable abrasives meet sspcab num .
verify the cleanliness of recycled abrasives according to sspcab num .
num construction .
num submittals .
submit the following drawings plans and information for accomplishing the work .
except for e below submit six copies on company letterhead to the office of bridge development bridge inspection and remedial engineering division .
do not proceed with the work until the submittals are approved by the administration .
a copy of sspcqp certification .
refer to num. b personnel qualifications .
provide applicable personnel qualifications to the project engineer prior to using the personnel on site .
refer to num. c quality control qc plans .
refer to num for detailed submittal requirements for shop and field quality control plans .
send all shop qc plan submittals to the office of materials technology .
submittals shall meet num and num .
submit all field qc plans as specified in num. d paint manufacturer certifications and letters .
submit the following information per num and num to the office of materials technology num when detergents or additives are proposed to be incorporated into the water used for washing provide msds and a letter from the coating manufacturer that approves the use of the detergents with their coating .
num the manufacturer shall provide a letter that approves any proposed solvents for use in solvent cleaning prior to painting or between coats .
provide msds for the solvents .
num provide the paint manufacturers application and thinning instructions msds and product data sheets .
num when caulking is used provide a letter from the coating manufacturer identifying the recommended caulking material the application sequence for integrating the caulking into the num cleaning painting existing structural steel num coating system between coats ii and iii and the minimum cure time prior to paint application .
num if the only portion of bridge to be painted is the roadway joint the paint need not be tested by the laboratory if prior to use a copy of the certified test results has been furnished to the engineer specifying that the paint conforms to section num. e containment plans .
refer to num and .num .
make submittals as specified in section num .. f worker protection compliance program .
required when abrasive blast cleaning is conducted in the field or paint containing toxic metals is being disturbed .
refer to num. g environmental protection plan of action .
required when abrasive blast cleaning is conducted in the field or paint containing toxic metals is being disturbed .
refer to num. h waste handling program .
required for the handling of all hazardous waste regardless of the presence of toxic metals .
the waste handling program shall also include disposal of unused paint and solvent .
refer to num .
a written program is not required for the handling of nonhazardous waste .
do not construe approval of the submittals to imply approval of any particular method or sequence for conducting the work or for addressing health and safety concerns .
approval of the proposed plans shall not remove the responsibility to conduct the work in accordance with federal state or local regulations this specification or to protect the health and safety of all workers involved in the project and any members of the public who may be affected by the project .
the contractor remains responsible for the adequacy and completeness of the programs and work practices and adherence to them .
num personnel qualifications and responsibilities .
provide documentation that all applicable project personnel meet the training and accreditation requirements of comar num. a qc inspectors .
a qc inspector shall be on site full time during cleaning and painting operations .
provide documentation that personnel performing quality control related functions are num num cleaning painting existing structural steel experienced and qualified to perform the work and have completed the training specified for sspcqpnum and when paint containing toxic metals is being disturbed sspcqpnum .
b competent person .
a competent person as specified in sspc qpnum shall be on site full time when paint containing toxic metals is being disturbed .
this person shall perform all quality control related functions involving the oversight of worker and environmental protection containment performance and waste handling .
provide documentation of qualifications including experience and records of training as specified in sspcqpnum .
this person shall hold a current sspc cnum competent person certificate or current cnum refresher a certificate of completion of num cfr numl lead in construction training and shall be accredited in accordance with comar num. c certified industrial hygienist cih .
provide the services of a cih when the work involves the disturbance or removal of paint containing toxic metals .
provide evidence that the cih has the following qualifications and insurance requirements num certification by the american board of industrial hygiene .
num field sampling and oversight experience involving removal of paint that contains toxic metals from structures .
num num num num errors and omissions insurance coverage for this type of work .
all field sampling and testing shall be performed by the cih or by an employee working under the direct supervision of the cih and shall be witnessed by a representative of the administration .
notify the bridge inspection and remedial engineering division at least num hours prior to sampling and testing .
the cih shall review all results of sampling and testing performed on the project .
the cih or a person working under the direction of the cih shall prepare written reports interpreting these results for compliance to the applicable regulations .
submit a copy of all reports analysis etc .
to the engineer within five working days after sampling .
submit a written certification within five days after the end of each month stating that the contractor has complied with the plans of num cleaning painting existing structural steel num action and compliance programs specified within this specification for worker protection environmental protection and waste handling and has addressed any deficiencies found .
the certification shall be prepared and signed by the cih or a person working under the direction of the cih .
num quality control qc plan inspection procedures and recording systems .
submit a quality control plan for providing daily job quality control per sspcqpnum for surface preparation and painting operations .
the quality control plan shall include the following a records of standards and specifications for coating inspection work and their utilization .
b system for filing inspection reports .
c demonstration that inspection equipment and calibration standards and procedures for calibrating the inspection equipment are available .
d procedures to stop nonconforming work .
e procedures for verifying proper coating application .
f procedures to ensure that each major operation is inspected and the inspection results documented .
contractor qc inspections shall include num effectiveness of protective coverings to control project debris paint spatters overspray drips paint spills etc .
while painting over roadways waterways machinery areas and areas in the vicinity of abutments and private properties .
num ambient conditions .
num compressed air cleanliness and if required acceptability for breathing .
num surface preparation solvent cleaning pressure washing hand power tool or abrasive blast cleaning etc .. num coating application specified materials mixing thinning and wet film thickness .
num num cleaning painting existing structural steel num dry film thickness per coat .
num recoat times and cleanliness between coats .
num coating continuity and coverage free from runs sags overspray dryspray pinholes shadowthrough skips etc ..
maintain on site copies of the contractors daily job quality control records and make them available to the engineer at any time .
submit records from on site audits .
num inspection equipment .
provide for the exclusive use of the engineer the following equipment for the qa observations of the cleaning and painting operations .
maintain calibrate and verify the equipment in a condition that is satisfactory to the engineer .
the equipment will remain the property of the contractor at the conclusion of the contract .
a the latest editions of sspcvis num sspcvis num or sspcvis num as applicable to the project or other approved visual standards .
b sspc manual volumes num and num latest editions .
c spring micrometer with coarse and extra coarse surface profile replica tape .
d electric or sling psychrometer f. e u.s .
weather bureau psychrometric tables .
f surface thermometer num to num f. g probe thermometer for paint temperature .
h highlow thermometer for paint storage area .
i wet film thickness gauge .
j digital magnetic dry film coating thickness gauge capable of transferring data to a computer sspcpa num type num. k plastic calibration shims for digital magnetic dry film thickness gauge .
l inspectors mirror .
num cleaning painting existing structural steel num m wind meter .
n clean white lintfree absorbent rags .
o light meter for measuring light intensity during surface preparation painting and inspection work .
p putty knife at least num mils thick and num to num in .
wide .
q blotter paper .
num paint quality assurance qa inspector notification .
notify the bridge inspection and remedial engineering division at least five working days prior to beginning field cleaning and painting of new and existing steel .
a paint inspector will be provided to assist the engineer in performing the qa observations of the cleaning and painting portion of the work .
failure to comply with this notification shall be cause for not accepting the work performed .
paint applied without qa acceptance may be required to be removed and reapplied at no additional cost to the administration .
any test to determine acceptance shall be at no additional cost to the administration .
do not perform additional work until a determination has been made .
num floodlighting .
provide floodlighting including power sources to supply adequate illumination to all surfaces being prepared painted or inspected including the underside and inside of the containment system when containment is employed .
floodlighting shall meet sspctechnology guide no .
num be maintained in good working condition and be of an approved design .
adjust the floodlighting to avoid glare to marine and vehicular traffic .
num field cleaning and painting .
refer to the contract documents for the appropriate cleaning and painting requirements .
num painting sequence .
do not paint the outside facing surfaces of beams until all concrete has been placed and parapet form brackets removed .
however the primer coat may be applied to these areas prior to placing the form brackets provided that it is properly touched up prior to placing the next coat of paint .
protect concrete from being stained by painting operations .
restore painted or stained concrete surfaces to originally intended color without damaging the concrete .
proceed with cleaning and painting by sections bays or other readily identifiable part of the work as approved .
num num cleaning painting existing structural steel start the work at the top and proceed toward the bottom .
num surface preparation .
prepare surfaces as specified in the pertinent sspc specifications and the contract documents .
surface conditions shall meet the pertinent sspcvis standards and the test platessections specified in num .
num methods of cleaning .
methods shown in the following table apply to both shop and field cleaning and shall be performed in the order shown .
the methods are invoked based on the paint system specified .
paint system substrate method of cleaning c d abrasive blast cleaned steel existing paint to be removed localized a and b and complete h e f h overcoating existing paint existing paint to be overcoated localized a and complete c followed by d and e a solvent cleaning .
use solvents emulsions cleaning compounds steam cleaning or similar approved materials and methods in accordance with sspcsp num to remove grease oil diesel smoke residue soot and similar surface contaminates .
use soap steam cleaning for steel open grid decks and walkways and machinery areas of drawbridges .
before it evaporates remove contaminated solvent by wiping or rinsing with clean solvent to prevent a film of contaminants from remaining on the surface .
solvent wiping may be required between coats .
use solvent approved in writing by the paint manufacturer .
b low pressure water cleaning lpwc .
use potable water on all bearings transverse and longitudinal joints and beam ends prior to abrasive blast cleaning to remove salts bird droppings dirt and debris .
at beam ends wash to the limits defined in numd .
use lpwc as necessary between coats to remove surface contamination .
perform lpwc per sspcsp num except use a nozzle pressure of num to num psi together with a rotating tip num to num in .
from the surface .
the pressure washer shall be equipped with easily accessible gauges and a pressure regulator .
perform lpwc no more than num hours prior to blast cleaning .
use this method to remove concrete spatter dirt debris salt contaminants grease oil num cleaning painting existing structural steel num and similar surface interference material from newly coated structures prior to the application of additional coats .
should the surface not be blast cleaned within num hours after lpwc the engineer will determine if additional preparation is required .
when the water is to be recycled and the coating being cleaned contains toxic metals test for toxic metals before reuse .
do not reuse water that exceeds the threshold value for any toxic metal .
c high pressure water cleaning hpwc .
use potable water prior to hand and power tool cleaning in preparation for overcoating to remove loose paint loose rust loose mill scale salts bird droppings dirt debris grease oil hydrocarbons diesel smoke residue soot chalk and similar surface interference material .
perform hpwc per sspcsp num wjnum except use nozzle pressures of num to num psi and a rotating tip .
a biodegradable detergent may be added to the water for the removal of grease oil and hydrocarbons if approved .
the pressure washer shall be equipped with easily accessible gauges and a pressure regulator .
perform the cleaning at close range to the surface approximately num in .
using a pattern of overlapping drops followed by cross hatching with the same overlap .
at the end of cleaning ensure that the swirling patterns created by the rotating tip are not visible on the surface .
perform the hpwc within num hours of applying the first coat .
should the surface not be painted within num hours the engineer will determine if additional preparation is required .
when the water is to be recycled and the coating being cleaned contains toxic metals test for toxic metals before reuse .
do not use water that exceeds the threshold value for any toxic metal .
d power tool cleaning .
perform per sspcsp num and as depicted in sspcvis num .
the use of num grit sanding discs is recommended .
refer to e for inaccessible areas .
e hand tool cleaning .
perform per sspcsp num .
the use of num grit sanding paper is recommended .
restrict the use of this method to areas that are inaccessible for power tool cleaning .
f power tool cleaning to bare metal .
perform per sspcsp num and as depicted in sspcvis num with a surface profile of at least num mil .
num num cleaning painting existing structural steel g brush off blast cleaning .
the end surface condition shall meet sspcsp num brush off blast cleaning and as depicted in sspcvis num .
ensure that abrasives are dry and free of oils grease and other harmful materials such as lead dust at the time of use .
h near white metal abrasive blast cleaning .
do not use steel shot in the field .
when using steel shot in the shop add a sufficient amount of steel grit .
maintain the mixture to produce an etched surface texture as opposed to the peened surface texture that results when blast cleaning with shot alone .
the end surface condition shall meet sspcsp num near white and as depicted in sspc vis num .
ensure that abrasives are dry and free of oils grease and other harmful materials such as lead dust at the time of use .
num test platessections .
when abrasive blast cleaning is specified furnish two num x num x num in .
steel test plates and clean them to meet sspc vis standards and the contract documents .
apply a clear protective coating to these standard test plates and use them as a job sample standard for cleaning operations .
when approved as an alternative to the test plates portions of an actual work piece may be used in order to reach agreement on the degree of cleaning before production surface preparation begins .
when the sspc vis standards accurately depict the agreed upon degree of cleaning on the test section the prepared section does not have to be sealed and retained for future reference .
when the sspc vis standards do not accurately depict the degree of cleaning the test section shall be sealed and retained or the test plates utilized .
for the production cleaning operations the written requirements of this specification the sspc definitions the test plates and the sspc vis standards shall be used in that order for determining compliance with the contractual requirements .
num removal of vegetation planking and signage .
prior to surface preparation remove vegetation overhanging or fouling the structure .
when the structure has planking timber or plywood between the beams carefully remove it in the areas of work operations .
store and maintain the planking in good condition .
dispose of all debris on the planking .
unless otherwise directed the planking will not have to be reinstalled until cleaning and painting operations are complete .
the engineer may direct that portions of the planking be reinstalled prior to opening any lane to traffic during the same working day .
the engineer may also direct that planking be reinstalled during periods of work stoppage .
num cleaning painting existing structural steel num when the fascia webs of the structure contain street identification signs remove them prior to beginning cleaning operations in the area .
clean and paint areas exposed by the sign removal including bolt holes .
whenever a sign is removed notify the engineer .
the engineer will notify the office of traffic and safetys chief traffic operations division .
street signs may be reinstalled by the office of traffic and safety utilizing the contractors maintenance of traffic .
they will coordinate this work with the contractor .
num repair of surface imperfections .
regardless of the method of cleaning remove surface imperfections such as sharp fins and slivers rust scale weld spatter and pack rust by a combination of cleaning procedures such as using hand or power impact tools chipping hammers or scaling hammers blast cleaning etc .
without scarring good steel .
num feathering and removal of defects in existing coating .
for projects involving the touch up or overcoating of newly installed steel or existing coatings in the field regardless of the method used for cleaning feather the edges of old paint permitted to remain .
remove portions of paint on previously painted surfaces that are chalky powdered cracked or otherwise unacceptable .
remove runs and sags in the existing paint on the outside facing surfaces of fascia beams over highways .
ensure a smooth appearance after application of the new coating .
num surface condition prior to painting .
remove residual dust dirt and grease from the surface as the final procedure prior to painting and between coats whenever the coating is contaminated .
cleaning includes the removal of all dust puddles grease oil exhaust from trucks debris concrete spatter and other foreign matter on the surfaces being painted .
also remove debris on surfaces adjacent to those being painted .
concrete spatter stains that discolor the primer need not be removed provided material is not dislodged when wiping the surface with a cloth .
cleaning involves vacuuming solvent cleaning handpower tool cleaning and pressure washing as appropriate .
should an area of previously cleaned steel become soiled contaminated or rusted reclean the area prior to painting at no additional cost to the administration .
prior to the application of paint in the shop and field the qc personnel shall inspect the surfaces and establish that they have been prepared according to the specifications .
upon qc acceptance obtain approval that the surfaces to be painted during that day have been cleaned as specified .
num num cleaning painting existing structural steel num paint storage and mixing .
store paints and thinners in well ventilated areas that are not subject to excessive heat open flames electrical discharge and direct rays of the sun .
adhere to the manufacturers recommendations .
store materials in heated areas when necessary .
use materials on a rotating stock basis and leave containers closed until used .
do not use paints that can not be stirred to normal consistency .
store paint in tightly covered containers at an ambient temperature of at least num f. maintain containers in a clean condition free of foreign materials and residue .
remove and discard thin skins formed in the container .
do not use material that is livered gelled thick skinned or otherwise questionable .
mix paints per manufacturers instructions and as approved .
do not thin the paint unless authorized by the paint manufacturer and approved .
the engineer shall be present whenever the paint is thinned .
do not use materials that are beyond their pot life or shelf life .
for multiple component paints only complete kits shall be mixed and used .
partial kit mixing is prohibited .
remove waste chemical solutions oily rags and other waste daily .
take precautionary measures to ensure protection of workers and work areas from fire hazards and health hazards resulting from handling mixing and applying materials .
num paint representative .
the representative shall be a technical representative of the paint manufacturer and shall be present during the initial execution of the work to approve with the engineer the degree of cleanliness prior to painting and the method of application of the coating system .
the engineer may stop paint operations for failure to meet this requirement regardless of the reason for the failure .
areas cleaned prior to ceasing paint operations shall be recleaned if required .
num field painting .
meet sspcpa num for painting application and num thru .num .
num time restrictions for field painting .
do not perform field painting between december num and april num .
num weather restrictions for painting .
all surfaces to be painted shall be sound and cleaned per the contract documents .
do not paint when num cleaning painting existing structural steel num a there is rain snow fog or mist dampening the surface .
b the relative humidity exceeds the maximum humidity specified by the paint manufacturer .
c the ambient air temperature in the shade is below num f. d the surface temperature is below the minimum temperature specified by the paint manufacturer however paint shall not be applied when the surface temperature is below num f. e the surface temperature is expected to drop to num f or below before the paint has cured the minimum time and temperature for recoat specified by the manufacturer .
f the surface temperature is less than num f above the dew point .
g the surface temperature exceeds the value recommended by the manufacturer .
whenever it is suspected that moisture is condensing upon the surface the psychrometer will be used to check dew point etc .
if the conditions measured by the psychrometer are marginal the engineer may permit a well defined area of the surface to be lightly moistened with a damp cloth and observed .
if the dampness evaporates in num minutes the surface will be considered satisfactory for the application of paint .
regardless of any environmental test results when fresh paint is damaged by the elements replace or repair the paint at no additional cost to the administration .
schedule the operations so that all cleaned surfaces are painted within num hours .
if rust bloom appears or the air or steel temperature falls below five degrees above the dew point after cleaning and prior to application of the primer coat reclean the affected areas to the satisfaction of the engineer at no additional cost to the administration .
num application of prime intermediate and finish coats .
all surfaces shall meet the specified degree of preparation prior to the application of the paint system .
apply all paint according to the manufacturers recommendations except the dry film thickness shall conform to num .
spray painting will be permitted provided the engineer approves the location and method of spray application .
paint all areas adjacent to machinery and mechanical components etc .
by brush application unless the engineer approves spray num num cleaning painting existing structural steel application .
surfaces inaccessible for painting by regular means shall be painted using sheepskin daubers or by other means as necessary to ensure coverage of the proper coating thickness .
the thickness measuring instrument shall be maintained calibrated adjusted and measurements taken in conformance with sspcpa num .
stripe coats shall be applied using brush dauber or roller to all edges outside corners crevices welds rivets bolts nuts and washers prior to application of coatings in conformance with the following schedule system coat b ii iii c i ii e i ii f ii iii h ii iii striping of coat i is permitted after the application of coat i if the stripe coat is tinted per manufacturers recommendation .
ensure that each coat is free of shadowthrough skips misses and thin or heavy coating thickness .
repair defects prior to application of the next coat .
keep the surface to be coated dustfree during painting operations and protect newly coated surfaces from the cleaning operations .
when a previously cleaned or painted area becomes soiled contaminated or rusted reclean the area to the specified condition and completely recoat at no additional cost to the administration .
apply each coat within num days after the prior coat unless approved in writing by the paint manufacturer .
if the recoat window is exceeded reclean the surface as approved by the paint manufacturer and the engineer .
num control of overspray and spills .
protect the environment from paint droplets overspray and spills by providing containment for the paint application area .
assume responsibility for any damage resulting from wind and cleaning and painting operations .
up to num in .
of overspray will be permitted onto the adjacent surface of the bridge deck next to the top flange .
no other overspray will be permitted .
whenever the method of protection fails to function at the required level of efficiency immediately suspend all operations except those associated with minimizing adverse impact to the environment .
do not resume num cleaning painting existing structural steel num operations until modifications have been made to correct the cause of the failure .
use fire retardant containment screens curtains and tarpaulins .
paint operations may be stopped by the engineer due to wind .
however operations shall stop if the wind velocity exceeds num mph unless specific and approved precautions are taken to prevent the escape of paint droplets and overspray .
num caulking .
caulk the following areas with a material approved by the paint manufacturer .
install caulking between the intermediate and finish coats a areas of plate delamination that are num in .
or greater that can not be cleaned and sealed during the application of the coatings .
b gaps between steel members that are num in .
or greater that can not be cleaned and sealed during the application of the coatings .
c interface between the steel and concrete surfaces where through girders penetrate the concrete .
apply caulking to the surfaces above the deck only .
do not caulk surfaces below the deck .
d gaps at the interface of steel and concrete surfaces that can not be cleaned and painted .
num defective work .
neither conditions during application nor laboratory acceptance of paint shall remove the responsibility of obtaining a satisfactory paint system .
when rusting occurs or a paint coat lifts blisters wrinkles or shows evidence of having been applied under unfavorable conditions the workmanship is poor impure or unauthorized paint has been used or for any other reason the painting is unsatisfactory remove the affected paint and thoroughly clean the steel and repaint .
ensure that there is a uniform appearance throughout the structure .
num repair of damaged coatings due to contractor operations .
notify the bridge inspection and remedial engineering division to determine the methods of cleaning and painting to be used .
num final identification .
when the final coat of paint is dry stencil a legend on the structure indicating the type of paint used in each coat and the month and year in which each application was completed .
the letters shall be num to num in .
high and be applied with black paint to the inside surface of a fascia beam near the abutment at a location num num cleaning painting existing structural steel selected by the engineer .
stencil paint shall be compatible with the paint system applied .
when more than one paint system is used apply additional stencils .
num field cleaning waste containment .
meet the sspc guide num containment levels specified in num and .num .
applicable portions of these requirements apply to shops when existing steel coated with hazardous material is cleaned in the shop .
with the exception of paint removal on the top flanges of members in preparation for deck replacement provide a written containment system plan per num unless otherwise directed .
num field cleaning containment system plan guidelines .
unless otherwise directed the following submittal requirements apply when a containment system is specified regardless of the presence of toxic metals .
even if a written containment plan is not required meet the technical requirements listed below when containment is used .
provide all submittals to the office of bridge development working drawing review section .
provide the following a working drawings of the proposed containment system showing the design of the paint removal containment rigging and ventilation system if applicable including all calculations and assumptions .
the working drawings shall num indicate which structures are covered by the plans submitted .
show the containment system in plan and elevation views including details of clips and hangers .
num identify all containment system components on the plan sheets .
num indicate the type and size of scaffolding or rigging to be used .
num indicate sizes of the containment areas and when ventilation is specified the capacity of the dust collectors equipment data sheets and types of airflow systems to be provided including volume of air from ventilation fans and minimum velocity of air movement .
b the containment system and equipment shall not encroach upon the minimum structure clearances specified .
c secure all curtains screens and tarpaulins used for containment .
make connections to the steel work of the structure with clamps or num cleaning painting existing structural steel num other approved devices .
do not drill holes into the existing structure or weld to the existing steel work .
do not make permanent attachments or fastenings to the structure .
do not attach any load to the structure railings unless details and calculations showing loading have been approved .
d use fire retardant containment curtains screens and tarpaulins .
e indicate maximum waste load permitted on the containment system expressed in inches of debris .
f indicate all restrictions on the structure and if it is posted .
g when the containment or rigging system or methods of erection will apply a load to the structure e.g .
suspended platform the submittals shall include an analysis of the load that will be added to the existing structure including blast waste .
when vehicles containing surface preparation materials or waste will be stationed on the structure indicate allowable load and location .
the load analysis shall be performed signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state of maryland .
the analysis shall ensure that the system will not affect the structural integrity of the structure .
when the containment or rigging system does not impose a load to the structure e.g .
tarpaulin materials suspended from the structure at an abutment or cables and picks used for access a professional engineer analysis and review of the drawings is not required .
h all drawings requiring a professional engineer review and seal as defined in g above shall be prepared and submitted per section num .
drawings not requiring a professional engineer review and seal can be provided on standard paper .
submit num copies of each drawing .
when a professional engineer stamp is required each sheet shall be signed and sealed by the professional engineer .
the submittal letter shall be on company letterhead .
at least one copy of the submittal shall have an original seal .
i when the structure is over water show a skimming boom for emergency backup .
num containment system requirements by method of preparation .
refer to num .
num num cleaning painting existing structural steel a washing .
when pressure washing newly installed steel coated only with inorganic zinc primer the surfaces may be washed without any containment or collection of the water .
prevent spray and runoff water from entering traveled areas such as roadways walkways and railroads .
whenever pressure washing is being performed on other painted surfaces prevent paint chips from falling into rivers streams wetlands wetland buffers or other bodies of water and when specified from falling onto the ground .
should inadvertent spills or releases of paint chips occur clean them up before the end of the shift or immediately if directed .
num when pressure washing paint containing toxic metals or inorganic zincvinyl systems the containment shall meet sspc class numw .
all wash water and debris shall be collected and disposed of per the applicable regulations and num and .num respectively .
prevent paint chips from falling onto the ground .
num when pressure washing all other systems systems other than inorganic zinc inorganic zincvinyl or systems that contain toxic metals collect all dislodged paint chips but the water need not be captured .
when dislodged chips are collected on suspended containment screens the maximum mesh opening shall be num mils .
when working over ground chips may be collected from the ground in lieu of utilizing containment screens provided all chips are collected before the end of the shift .
dispose of collected paint chips and debris per applicable regulations and num. b power tool and hand tool cleaning .
prevent paint chips from falling onto the ground or into rivers streams wetlands wetland buffers or other bodies of water .
should inadvertent spills or releases of paint chips occur clean them up before the end of the shift or immediately if directed .
num if paint system contains toxic metals the containment for open power tool cleaning shall meet sspc class nump .
dispose of collected paint chips and debris per the applicable regulations and num .
num if paint system does not contain toxic metals the containment for open power tool cleaning shall meet sspc class nump .
num cleaning painting existing structural steel num dispose of collected paint chips and debris per the applicable regulations and num .
num for roadway joints and other small areas approved by the engineer high efficiency particulate air hepa filter vacuum shrouded power tools may be used in lieu of containment in areas of paint containing toxic or nontoxic metals .
vacuumshrouded power tools may eliminate the need for containment if it can be demonstrated that all paint chips and debris are sufficiently collected by the vacuum .
c spot abrasive blast cleaning or brush off blast cleaning .
prevent paint chips from falling onto the ground or into rivers streams wetlands wetland buffers or other bodies of water .
should inadvertent spills or releases of abrasives or paint chips occur clean them up before the end of the shift or immediately if directed .
with the exception of new steel installed with inorganic zinc primer the containment for spot abrasive blast cleaning or brush off blast cleaning regardless of the presence of toxic metals shall meet sspc class numa .
dispose of collected paint chips and debris per the applicable regulations and num .
containment for spot abrasive blast cleaning or brush off blast cleaning of newly installed inorganic zinc primer shall meet sspc class numa .
dispose of collected paint chips and debris per the applicable regulations and num. d total paint removal by abrasive blast cleaning .
prevent paint chips from falling onto the ground or into rivers streams wetlands wetland buffers or other bodies of water .
should inadvertent spills or releases of abrasives or paint chips occur clean them up before the end of the shift or immediately if directed .
when totally removing any coatings by abrasive blast cleaning regardless of the presence of toxic metals the containment shall meet sspc class numa .
dispose of collected paint chips and debris per the applicable regulations and num .
meet ambient air and worker exposure requirements established by the maryland department of the environment and mosh .
num num cleaning painting existing structural steel maintain containment systems while work is in progress .
do not deviate from the approved working drawings .
deny public access to all rigging scaffolding containment systems and work sites at all times .
when cleaning structures over water provide a skimming boom for emergency backup consisting of a float with a skirt or other approved system that shall be employed immediately to collect floating debris .
clean the skimming boom at least once a day .
upon completion of the project clean the skimming materials or if cleaning is not possible or practical dispose of as hazardous or nonhazardous waste as applicable .
num worker protection and exposure monitoring .
in addition to complying with all applicable osha and mosh regulations when the project involves coatings that contain toxic metals provide the services of a cih per numc and submit a worker protection compliance program per num .
the cih or a technician working under the direction of the cih shall monitor worker exposures during paint disturbance operations at each structure and provide worker protection oversight .
regardless of the presence of toxic metals provide a hand wash station with soap and towels at each work site .
as dictated by the monitoring results and the applicable osha standards provide a clean up area with a shower soap hot and cold potable pressurized water a change area with a locker and an approved container for collecting and disposing of waste at each work site .
the hand wash and shower facilities shall be available for contractor and administration personnel .
hygiene facilities shall meet num cfr num sanitation standard .
num worker protection compliance program .
a worker protection compliance program is not required when the coatings being disturbed do not contain toxic metals .
the program shall be on company letterhead and meet osha and the mosh lead in construction standards and other applicable toxic metal standards .
the compliance program shall be reviewed and signed by the cih and at least one copy of the submittal shall have an original cih seal .
the program shall include a commitment for the cih or a person working under the direction of the cih to provide written certification each month that the contractor has complied with the worker protection compliance program including biological monitoring .
the letter shall be provided to the contractor within five working days after the end of the month and the contractor shall provide the engineer with a copy of the letter the following workday .
num cleaning painting existing structural steel num num environmental protection .
at the end of the shift each day and upon completion of all project activities the surrounding property and the entire project area shall be cleaned free of visible debris from the cleaning and painting activities .
num environmental protection plan of action eppa .
an eppa confirming that the environment is protected from contamination is required when the coatings are being abrasive blast cleaned regardless of the presence of toxic metals or the coating being disturbed contains toxic metals regardless of the method of preparation .
when an eppa is required it shall be reviewed and sealed by a cih and shall include procedures for monitoring air soil and water .
include a location plan showing the type and location of high volume ambient air monitors if applicable and the procedures that will be followed for visible emissions assessments and inspections of the soil water surrounding property and structures and pavement .
submit six copies of each plan signed and sealed by the cih .
all submittals shall be in writing and on company letterhead .
at least one copy shall have an original seal .
address the proposed procedures that will be implemented for the following as defined in num a for any paint disturbance using dry methods of preparation address the daily visual emissions observations that will be performed and the corrective action that will be implemented in the event emissions or releases occur .
b when paint containing toxic metals is being disturbed address the provisions for high volume ambient air monitoring tsp monitoring monitor citing calibration and operation filter handling and shipping and laboratory analysis including the name and qualifications of the laboratory .
test results shall be reviewed and summarized by the cih and provided to the contractor within five days of sample collection .
provide copies to the engineer the following work day after receipt .
c for any paint disturbance address the visual assessments for soilwatersediment that will be undertaken each day and upon project completion together with the proposed clean up activities .
d include a commitment from the cih or a person working under the direction of the cih that within five days after the end of the month a written certification will be furnished certifying that the num num cleaning painting existing structural steel contractor has complied with the eppa .
provide a copy of the letter to the engineer the following work day after receipt .
num methods for assessing emissions .
unless otherwise specified the following requirements apply to all projects regardless of the presence of toxic metals a sspc level num visible emissions .
the following level num visible emissions criteria apply when any paint is disturbed by dry methods such as blast cleaning or power tool cleaning .
level num emissions are defined as random visible emissions of a cumulative duration of no more than num percent of the workday or approximately five minutes in an eighthour day .
level num is required for all structures .
the contractors qc person or competent person in the case of toxic metals projects shall perform at least two num minute documented observations during each work shift .
in addition to the numminute observations all contractor personnel shall be directed to routinely observe the work area and to report unacceptable emissions to qc or supervisory personnel or to the competent person .
when unacceptable emissions are detected locate and immediately correct the source of the emissions .
retain the records on site and make them available to the engineer .
the visible emissions criteria are not required when the paint is cleaned or disturbed using water .
when water is used on existing coatings that contain toxic metals or on inorganic zincvinyl systems all water shall be collected and emissions are prohibited .
when water is used to clean all other coating systems the water need not be collected and emissions are not restricted .
b ambient air monitoring .
unles s otherwise directed ambient air monitoring is required when the coatings being disturbed contain toxic metals and whenever the paint removal operations are located within num ft of houses schools parks playgrounds shopping areas or similar areas of public exposure .
num abrasive blast cleaning .
daily ambient air monitoring at each structure being abrasive blast cleaned shall begin one day prior to beginning work and during the first num days of productive abrasive blast cleaning operations .
when the results indicate that the containment is controlling emissions full time monitoring may be discontinued unless otherwise num cleaning painting existing structural steel num directed .
however monitoring shall be repeated for two consecutive days every month thereafter during the work shift while blast cleaning or other dust producing operations are underway .
when the results of the original num days of monitoring or the periodic monthly tests are unacceptable monitoring shall continue full time .
monthly monitoring may be initiated or resumed only when approved and only after the results of the testing indicates that the containment is controlling emissions .
full time monitoring shall also be resumed when unacceptable visible emissions or residues are observed on the ground or water .
num hand and power tool cleaning .
begin daily ambient air monitoring at each structure one day prior to beginning work and during the first five days of hand tool cleaning and power tool cleaning .
when the results indicate that the containment is controlling emissions full time monitoring may be discontinued unless otherwise directed .
resume monitoring when visible residues are observed on the ground or in the water or visible dust is observed exceeding the visible emissions criteria established above .
num monitor placement and reporting .
place total suspended particulate tsp monitors in areas of potential public exposure e.g .
adjacent to homes businesses parks or pedestrian walkways that are within num ft of each project site during cleaning operations in conformance with method d of sspc guide num .
the cih shall provide for engineer acceptance the proposed monitoring locations in advance together with the rationale for the selection of each site .
monitoring shall be conducted at least seven hours per work shift .
all tsp monitoring samples shall be analyzed using method num cfr num appendix b and g by a laboratory approved by the american board of industrial hygiene .
the cih shall use an adjusted daily allowance ada as described in sspc guide num not an average daily allowance for evaluating the tsp monitoring results .
the cih or a person working under the direction of the cih shall provide the contractor with a written report and analysis of monitoring results including the relevant acceptance criteria based on the num num cleaning painting existing structural steel ada within five days of sample collection .
provide the results to the engineer the following work day after receipt .
c removal of visible project debris .
at the end of the shift each day and upon completion of all project activities the surrounding property structures and the entire project area shall be cleaned free of visible project debris .
prevent paint chips abrasives dust and debris from being deposited onto surrounding property vehicles concrete pavement slope protection soil water sediment etc .
when there are spills or releases of such material immediately shut down the operations producing the emissions and clean up the debris .
change work practices modify the containment or take other appropriate corrective action as needed to prevent similar releases from occurring in the future .
contain and collect water used for washing paint containing toxic metals or existing inorganic zincvinyl systems .
water used to wash all other paint systems need not be contained and may contact the ground and water .
num field cleaning waste disposal .
store all project waste regardless of the presence of toxic metals in rolloffs or sealed numgallon drums .
containers shall be labeled with the structure number contract number contractors name contents and the date .
refer to num thru .num .
when the waste is hazardous comply with sspc guide num .
each day collect clothing and other waste material and seal them in approved containers .
when drums are used they shall be sealed numgallon open head type drums meeting i.c.c .
specification numh .
all containers shall be in new condition .
num waste handling plan of action .
required for the handling storage and disposal of all hazardous waste regardless of the presence of toxic metals .
when the project involves the removal of paint containing toxic metals the program shall be signed and sealed by the cih .
at least one copy of the submittal shall have an original seal .
the plan of action shall address the following a names addresses and licenses for the proposed hazardous waste transporters and disposal facilities .
b hazardous waste handling and storage procedures .
num cleaning painting existing structural steel num c waste and waste water sampling and analysis procedures .
d provide all test results to the engineer within five days of sample collection .
num waste sampling and analysis .
when the project involves hazardous waste the cih or an employee working under the direct supervision of the cih shall take at least four samples of the accumulated residues of each waste stream collected at each structure or a sample from every third drum whichever is greater .
all sampling shall be random and representative .
the samples shall be analyzed for tclp as outlined in comar num and the epa test procedure manual swnum for all rcra num metals .
waste shall not accumulate for more than num days before sampling .
the representative samples collected shall be analyzed by an approved laboratory and the results returned to the engineer within five working days of collection .
additional samples may be required if the average test results exceed num mgl for lead or exceed the threshold levels for other toxic metals allowed by comar and epa procedures .
the disposal method will be based on the results of these analyses except that waste generated using steel abrasives shall be handled stored and disposed of as hazardous waste regardless of the test results .
num temporary waste storage site .
obtain an approved temporary storage site and haul the waste material away from the work site at the end of each working day .
ensure that the storage site prevents the migration of the contaminated material into the environment and that it is protected from vandalism and unauthorized access by the general public .
remove the waste from the temporary storage site within num days from the initial date of accumulation or before the completion of work whichever comes first .
when the contract documents specify that the waste containers shall be stored at a particular facility owned by the administration contact that facility to schedule delivery .
num waste water disposal .
test the waste water collected from bridge washing and hygiene facilities for toxic metals .
tests shall be performed using epa method num by a laboratory approved by the american board of industrial hygiene .
provide the engineer with the test results and written plans for the disposal of the water including the name and address of the licensed transporter and disposal facility .
if the local publicly owned treatment num num cleaning painting existing structural steel works potw authorizes the disposal of the water down the sanitary sewer system provide a letter from the potw authorizing the disposal .
num hazardous waste transportation and disposal .
maryland law provides that when samples tested using tclp exceed the threshold value num mgl for lead they shall be considered hazardous waste and be removed under manifest by a licensed hazardous waste transporter to a permitted disposal facility .
when tested waste material is determined to be hazardous waste request through the administration an epa identification number as specified in comar num .
provide the engineer with written plans for the transportation and disposal of the waste including the name and address of the licensed transporter and disposal facility .
waste containing less than the threshold value by the tclp test including the confidence interval shall be disposed of in accordance with num for rcra num metals .
prepare a manifest for hazardous waste to be transported from the approved temporary storage site .
the manifests shall be prepared and contain the information stipulated in comar num and as otherwise required by state regulations .
forward the manifests to the bridge inspection and remedial engineering division .
drums of other wastes such as solvent contaminated rags disposable protective clothing disposed dust collector filters and other contaminated substances shall be sampled individually and tested appropriately .
comar num stipulates the pretransport requirements and the amount of time permitted for the accumulation of hazardous waste .
waste shall be transported by a certified waste hauler to a landfill permitted to accept this material .
obtain a list of certified haulers and other information regarding handling and disposal of blast waste by contacting the department of environment hazardous waste administration .
num nonhazardous waste disposal .
waste containing less than the threshold value refer to num by the tclp test including the confidence interval may be disposed of as an industrial waste at a landfill permitted to accept this material .
dispose of all waste in accordance with and local regulations .
num prestressed concrete beams and slab panels num waste containersdumpsters shall be covered when not in an active filling process .
num measurement and payment .
the contract unit price for the item specified will be full compensation for all cleaning and painting scaffolding platforms containment systems permits working drawings daily quality control records professional engineers services used for containment industrial hygienist services air monitoring sampling and testing of materials for toxic metal content including any revisions and resubmissions that may be required during the execution of the work providing safe access for inspections hand wash stationclean up area floodlighting test plates drums collection and storage at the temporary storage site hauling and disposal at an approved industrial waste site or hazardous waste site removing and replacing planking removal of debris and all material labor equipment including test equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num cleaning and painting existing structural steel will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for the pertinent cleaning and painting item .
num all costs associated with repair of existing coatings due to new construction structural repairs and damage caused by contractors operations will not be measured but will be incidental to the pertinent repair structural steel or cleaning and painting items included .
section num thru num reserved section num prestressed concrete beams and slab panels num description .
furnish and place prestressed concrete beams and slab panels elastomeric bearing pads bearing plates and other embedded items all steel strands jacks and other required devices .
the concrete overlay riding surface for slab panel bridges is included in this work .
num materials .
fine aggregate num coarse aggregate num num num prestressed concrete beams and slab panels fine aggregate for overlay bonding grout num fine aggregatesand mortar and epoxies cement num admixtures air entraining num retarding num water reducing num .num pozzolans num .num concrete overlay num mix no .
num nonshrink grout numc reinforcing steel num welded steel wire fabric num prestressing strand num elastomeric bearing pads num closed cell neoprene sponge elastomer num fusion bonded epoxy powder coating for steel num water num epoxy adhesive num threaded tie rods a num tie rod heavy hex nuts supplied by tie rod manufacturer shall provide full tensile strength of tie rod concrete protective coatings contract documents num portland cement concrete .
ensure that the composition proportioning and mixing of concrete produces a homogeneous concrete mixture of a quality that meets the specified material and design requirements .
the required cylinder strength of the concrete at transfer of the tensioning load and the minimum required cylinder strength of the concrete at num days will be specified .
include an air entraining admixture and a type d or g admixture in the concrete mix .
type g high range water reducing admixtures may only be used if the engineer determines that the producer can design and show by trial mix that the concrete meets the specified strength requirements and the following a maximum slump of num in .
num prestressed concrete beams and slab panels num b air content of num num percent .
c cement factor of at least num lbydnum .
d maximum wcm ratio of num .
testing .
allow the engineer to take six test cylinders from each member or members cast and cured with the beam as a unit for the purpose of checking the quality of the concrete being produced for determining the time when forms may be removed and for determining the time when prestressing forces may be applied to a member .
provide metal or plastic molds for all test cylinders .
have the manufacturers quality control technician make at least three test cylinders and cure under laboratory conditions as specified in t num .
have the technician make and test the test cylinders at the manufacturing site according to t num in the presence of the engineer .
num reinforcing steel and tie rod tubes .
except for prestressing strands all reinforcing steel in and extending from beams and slab panels and in the concrete overlay shall be epoxy coated .
tie rod tubes shall consist of corrugated rigid or semirigid type galvanized steel sheathing or rigid plastic sheathing .
num debonding material .
use solid or split plastic sheathing having a thickness of at least num in .
for debonding of pretensioning steel strands .
num joint sealers .
per the manufacturers specifications .
num overlay bonding grout .
use equal parts by weight of portland cement and sand and mix with sufficient water to produce a slurry .
mix to a consistency that provides for application with a stiff brush or broom in a thin even coating that will not run or puddle .
num construction .
num working drawings .
refer to section num .
address reinforcing anchorages steel strand profiles lifting inserts and all other pertinent information .
if methods other than specified are proposed submit changes per section num .
when proposed changes are accepted or rejected construct members accordingly at no additional cost to the administration .
num num prestressed concrete beams and slab panels num prestressed concrete plants .
the prestressed concrete manufacturing plant shall be registered and certified under the precast prestressed concrete institute program .
submit a valid certificate to the engineer prior to the start of production .
num beds and forms .
support casting beds on unyielding foundations .
clean the beds and forms after each use .
prevent accumulation of bond breakers .
prior to stringing steel strands inspect the bottom of forms for cleanliness and alignment .
coat the contact surfaces of forms with bond breaker that dries to a surface hardness .
ensure that the coating is dry to prevent contamination of the steel strand .
num meetings .
conduct a prepour meeting prior to beginning any prestress concrete work .
ensure a representative of the prestress concrete plant is present .
num protection of prestressing steel strand .
store under shelter and keep it free of deleterious material such as grease oil wax dirt paint loose rust or other similar contaminants .
do not use steel showing corrosion etching pitting or scaling .
a light coating of surface rust is acceptable if it can be removed completely from the steel by wiping with a cloth .
do not store on a surface that contributes to galvanic or battery action .
do not use steel strand as a ground for electric welding .
protect it from electric welding sparks .
num reinforcing steel inserts and chairs .
place reinforcing steel within the specified tolerances and secure it to beds and forms using chairs blocking or ties .
fabricate cages of bars by tying only .
do not support cages by tensioned strands .
bend tie wire ends into the slab panel .
show the type and placement of inserts on the working drawings .
except for stainless steel accessories recess form ties chairs and inserts in the concrete by at least num in .
num methods of force measurement .
use one of the following methods as the primary measuring system .
check it by using one of the other methods as a secondary measuring system num prestressed concrete beams and slab panels num a curves .
use current stressstrain or elongation curves furnished by the strand manufacturer .
an average modulus may be used if acceptable to the engineer .
provide means for measuring the elongations of the strands to at least num in .
b pressure gauges .
use gauges to measure force by the pressure applied to hydraulic jacks .
these gauges shall be furnished with dials calibrated with the jacking system .
c dynamometers .
dynamometers connected in tension to the stressing system for the initial force may be used .
gauging system .
use tensioning systems equipped with accurately calibrated hydraulic gauges dynamometers load cells or other devices for measuring the stressing load to an accuracy of reading within num percent .
have a qualified testing laboratory calibrate and issue a certified calibration curve with each gauge .
recalibrate a gauging system whenever it shows erratic results at intervals not exceeding six months and when directed .
gauges for single strand jacks may be calibrated by an acceptable and calibrated load cell .
calibrate gauges for large multiple strand jacks acting singly or in parallel by proving rings or by load cells placed on either side of the movable end carriage .
all jacks and gauges shall be calibrated by an independent laboratory at no additional cost to the administration and documentation forwarded to the engineer .
provide pressure gauges and dynamometers preferably with full pressure and load capacities of approximately twice their normal working range .
limit loads to within num to num percent of the total graduated capacity unless calibration data establishes consistent accuracy over a wider range .
each gauge shall indicate loads directly in pounds or be accompanied by a chart with which the dial reading can be converted into pounds .
tensioning systems employing hydraulic gauges shall be equipped with appropriate bypass pipes valves and fittings so the gauge reading remains steady until the jacking load is released .
gauge readings elongation measurements and calculations for elongation shall include appropriate allowances for operational losses in the tensioning system due to strand slippage movement of anchorages and abutments elongation of abutment anchorage rods strand rotation temperature variation friction bed shorting and other forces and influences acting on the strand .
num num prestressed concrete beams and slab panels in multiple strand tensioning systems clean and lubricate the sliding surfaces to minimize friction .
establish a force override compensatory operational loss correction for standard strand pattern series .
thermal effects .
increase the design prestress force by num percent for each num f ambient temperature below num f. no adjustment is required when the ambient temperature is above num f. do not stress steel strands when the ambient temperature is below num f. after the steel strands are tensioned maintain the temperature of the air surrounding the steel strands at num f or more until the prestress force is transferred to the concrete .
control of jacking force .
use either manual or automatic pressure cutoff valves for stopping the jacks at the required load .
use automatic cutoffs capable of adjustment to ensure that the jacking load corresponds to the required load .
verify the setting accuracy for the automatic cutoff valves whenever there is reason to suspect improper results and at the beginning of each days operation .
num stringing steel strands .
do not reuse strands containing former vise grip points unless the points are outside the new vise locations .
do no reuse strands that have been draped .
all steel strands shall have the same lay or direction of twist .
use shears or abrasive cutting wheels to cut the ends .
position over chairs to eliminate sagging of strands in the bottom rows .
num steel strand splices .
only one splice is permitted per strand .
for single strand tensioning the number of strands that may be spliced in each bed is not restricted .
for multiple strand tensioning either splice all strands and adjust the elongation for average slippage or no splices are permitted .
num steel strand vises .
vises shall be capable of anchoring stressing loads positively with minimum slippage and shall be cleaned lubricated and inspected between each use .
do not use grips that show wear or distortion or that allow slippage in excess of num in .
clean and inspect the full set of vises before starting each prestressing operation .
the maximum permissible time for holding tensioned strands in the bed before placing concrete is num hours .
num prestressed concrete beams and slab panels num num wire failure in steel strands .
remove and replace any seven wire steel strand that contains a broken wire .
check all strands for wire breakage before placing concrete .
num pretensioning .
apply the specified total load to each strand .
apply the load as a total of two loading stages .
the initial load shall straighten the strand eliminate slack and provide a starting or reference point for measuring elongation .
limit the initial load to num percent of the specified tensioning force .
any initial loading exceeding num percent shall be approved by the engineer i.e .
multiple bed casting .
measure the initial load within a tolerance of num lb .
do not use the initial elongation measurement to determine the initial force .
in all stressing operations keep the stressing force symmetrical about the vertical axis however in tensioning single strands the initial and final loads may be applied in immediate succession to each strand .
use jack mounted pressure gauges as the primary system of force measurement for the final tensioning of straight single strands .
check elongation against pressure gauge readings on all strands .
check vise slippage .
the computed elongation including operational losses and equivalent elongation for the initial tensioning force shall agree with the pressure gauge reading within num percent .
use jack mounted pressure gauges as the primary system of force measurement for the final tensioning of multiple strands .
for uniform application of load to the strands the position of the face of the anchorage at final load shall be parallel to its position under initial load .
verify parallel movement by measurement of equal movement on opposite anchorage sides and by checking the plumb position of the anchorage before and after final load application .
check vise slippage .
after stressing the steel strands as specified and placing all other reinforcement cast the concrete member to the specified length .
maintain strand stress between anchorages until the concrete has reached the specified compressive strength .
num steel strand tensioning .
in all methods of tensioning measure the stress induced in the strands both by jacking gauges and by elongation .
num num prestressed concrete beams and slab panels if any jack or gauge appears to be giving erratic results or gauge pressures and elongations indicate materially different stresses during manufacturing recalibration will be required .
provide means for measuring elongation to the nearest num in .
for differences in indicated stress between jack pressure and elongation of up to num percent place the difference so that the discrepancy will be on the side of a slight overstress rather than understress .
for discrepancies in excess of num percent carefully check the entire operation and determine the source of the discrepancy before proceeding .
thoroughly seal split plastic sheathing for debonded steel strands with tape prior to placing concrete .
cut all pretensioned steel strands flush with the end of the member .
where the end of the member will not be covered by concrete clean the exposed ends of the strands and the concrete face .
use wire brushing or abrasive blast cleaning to remove all dirt and residue that is not firmly bonded to the metal and concrete surfaces .
coat the strands and the concrete face with a protective coating as specified .
work the protective coating into all voids in the strands .
num surface finish and curing .
rough finish the top surface of all members with a rake wire brush or other approved means to a full amplitude of num in .
begin initial curing of all members by fogging wet burlap or other approved methods as soon as the concrete is hardened sufficiently to withstand surface damage .
continue the initial curing until the concrete has attained its initial set but at least three hours however when a retarding agent is used continue the initial curing for at least five hours .
following the initial curing resume curing using an accelerated curing method .
accelerated curing .
use one of the following methods to accelerate curing of the concrete a low pressure steam curing .
use a suitable enclosure to contain the live steam and minimize moisture and heat loss .
ensure that the concrete has attained initial set before application of the live steam .
do not permit live steam to be directed on the concrete or the forms so as to cause localized high temperatures .
maintain the temperature of the interior of the enclosure at num to num f. during initial application of the steam increase the ambient air num prestressed concrete beams and slab panels num temperature within the enclosure at a rate not to exceed num f per hour .
hold the maximum temperature until the concrete has reached the required release strength .
maintain the steam temperature and the curing temperature uniformly throughout the extremities of the prestressed member .
at the end of curing reduce the concrete temperature at an average of num f per hour .
ensure that the producer furnishes at least one recording thermometer for each enclosure .
if the enclosure is longer than num ft furnish an additional recording thermometer for each additional num ft of length or fraction thereof .
the temperature at any point within the enclosure shall not vary more than num f from that of the recording thermometer or the average of the recording thermometers if more than one is used .
b radiant heat curing .
radiant heat may be applied by means of pipes circulating steam hot oil or hot water or by electric heating elements .
provide a suitable enclosure to contain the heat .
minimize moisture loss by covering all exposed concrete surfaces with plastic sheeting or by applying an approved liquid membrane curing compound to all exposed surfaces .
uniformly maintain the heat application throughout the extremities of the member .
apply the same temperature constraints as outlined for low pressure steam curing .
num detensioning .
a slab panels .
do not transfer the tension force to the prestress slab panel until the concrete strength as indicated by cylinder strengths meets the specified transfer strength .
except to move to storage ensure that the design strength is met before handling the slab panel or releasing it for shipment .
prior to detensioning remove or loosen forms ties inserts hold downs and other devices that restrict longitudinal movement along the bed or use a method and sequence to minimize longitudinal movement .
release prestressing forces using a method that minimizes sudden or shock loading .
single strand detensioning may be accomplished by heat cutting the strands .
the sequence shall maintain prestressing forces nearly symmetrical around the slab panels vertical axis .
num num prestressed concrete beams and slab panels eccentricity around the vertical axis shall be limited to one strand .
obtain approval of the cutting pattern prior to use .
multiple strand detensioning may be accomplished by gradually reducing the force applied to each strand equally and simultaneously .
b beams .
the schedule for detensioning of beams having deflected steel strands shall incorporate the following num the manufacturers sequence of releasing deflected steel strands and uplift points shall be approved .
num all hold down devices for deflected steel strands shall be disengaged and all hold down bolts removed from the beams .
num the manufacturers sequence of releasing the remaining straight steel strands shall be as approved .
all hold down devices may be released prior to release of tension in deflected steel strands if num the weight of the prestressed beam is more than twice the total of the forces required to hold the steel strands in the low position .
num the weight or other approved vertical restraints are applied directly over the hold down points to counteract the uplifting forces at least until the release of deflected steel strands has proceeded to a point that the residual uplifting forces are less than half the weight of the beam .
follow all procedures for releasing prestressing forces of deflected steel strands .
failure to follow these procedures may result in the rejection of the beams .
adequately separate all beams in storage immediately following removal from the bed to facilitate the repair of surface blemishes and to allow inspection of the finished surfaces .
num camber .
during the period of beam fabrication select a representative number of beams to be known as camber control beams subject to approval .
num prestressed concrete beams and slab panels num clearly and permanently identify them so that the camber readings taken as indicated below can be associated with the proper beam .
take camber readings as follows a just prior to prestressing .
b immediately after prestressing .
c at weekly intervals thereafter within the three months after casting .
d at biweekly intervals after the three month period expires .
e just prior to shipment from the casting yard to the job site .
f continue camber determinations at these intervals if the beams are stored or stockpiled at the job site .
furnish two copies of the camber reports prior to erecting the beam .
num tolerances .
the tolerances for each beam or slab panel shall be as shown in tables num a or b respectively unless otherwise specified num num prestressed concrete beams and slab panels table num a prestressed concrete beam tolerance depth overall num in .
width flanges fillets num in .
width web num in .
length of beam num in .
per num ft or num in .
whichever is greater exposed beam ends deviation from square or designated skew horizontal num in .
vertical num in .
per ft of beam height side inserts spacing between center of inserts and from the centers of inserts to the ends of the beams num in .
bearing plate spacing from the centers of bearing plates to the ends of the beams num in .
stirrup bars average of all bars individual bar longitudinal spacing num in .
num in .
horizontal alignment deviation from a straight line parallel to the center line of beam num in .
per num ft max camber differential between adjacent beams of same type and steel strand pattern num in .
per num ft at time of erection or num in .
max center of gravity of steel strand group num in .
center of gravity of depressed group steel strand at end of beam num in .
position of hold down points for depressed strand num in .
num prestressed concrete beams and slab panels num table num b prestressed concrete slab panel tolerance depth overall num in .
num in .
width overall num in .
slab panel length center line based on design length specified num in .
horizontal alignment deviation from a straight line parallel to the slab panel center line num in .
max horizontal misalignment of adjacent form sections num in .
max camber deviation from specified camber as measured at prestress transfer or at the beginning of slab panel storage at the fabrication plant num in .
location of each strand num in .
center of gravity of strand group num in .
stirrup bars longitudinal spacing num in .
longitudinal position of handling devices num in .
concrete bearing area variation from plane surface when tested with a straightedge through middle half of slab panel num in .
tie rod tubes spacing between the tube centers and from tube centers to slab panel ends num in .
tie rod tubes spacing from tube center to slab panel bottom num in .
threaded inserts spacing between the center of inserts and from center of inserts to ends of slab panels num in .
skew ends deviation from designated skew num in .
vertical ends deviation from specified dimension num in .
num slab panel plant assembly .
before shipping the slab panel units to the job site assemble all slab panels for the entire bridge width to ensure that there is no misalignment .
any misalignment of the holes will num num prestressed concrete beams and slab panels be cause for rejection of the affected slab panels .
do not drill or core holes into the slab panels .
num marking handling shipping and storage .
mark each member with an erection mark for identification weight marks for beams num lb or more and inspection stamps .
for beams paint the erection marks on the top surface of the top flange .
do not place markings of any kind on any surface of a beam that will be visible in the completed structure .
mark slab panels with an individual consecutive identification mark at a permanently exposed location .
the identification mark shall match that shown on the approved working drawings .
furnish an erection diagram clearly indicating erection marks that show the position of the member in the structure .
utilize the castinplace lifting devices and a sufficient number of cranes and spreader beams whenever the prestress concrete members are lifted .
furnish copies of material orders and shipping statements .
show the weight of each individual prestress concrete member .
during shipment ensure that blocking is placed at intervals that will prevent sag and distortion .
ship all members in the upright position adequately braced and supported to dampen vibrations during transport as shown on the working drawings .
members too long to fit inside of a truck or trailer shall not cantilever beyond the bed more than one quarter of their length .
support members too long to comply with this requirement on dollies additional vehicles or other vehicles that will support the long pieces as approved .
load restrictions are as specified in gpnum .
do not ship prestress members until approved at least five days have elapsed since the prestress transfer and the minimum num day compressive strength has been attained .
store beams off the ground in an upright position .
protect them as far as practical from surface deterioration and keep them free of accumulations of dirt oil and other deleterious material .
num erection .
refer to num .num .num .num .num and .num .
num prestressed concrete beams and slab panels num slab panels .
immediately prior to erecting slab panels clean the abrasive blasted shear key surfaces with compressed air stiff bristle fiber brushes or vacuuming .
pull the slab panels together and field tighten in the transverse direction using tie rods .
perform field tightening by placing the washer and nut on the tensioning end of the tie rod and running them down to the recessed concrete face .
attach a jacking assembly or other type of loading apparatus to the threads extending beyond the nut .
provide the engineer with certification that the gauge or other load measuring device has been calibrated within one year however the engineer may require the load measuring device to be recalibrated if it appears to have been damaged or mishandled .
the loading apparatus shall be capable of applying a load to the tie rod nut equal to num num lb for spans up to num ft and num num lb for spans greater than num ft .
maintain the load until the tie rod nut is snug tight as defined in numd .
do not use a torque wrench to apply the tensioning load .
after tightening grout all tie rod holes .
after field tightening all slab panels seal the joint below the shear keys using an approved method .
then grout the shear keys by overfilling the joints .
drive the grout or compactly tamp it into the keyways do not vibrate .
after a half hour strike off the excess grout flush with the top of the panels .
follow the manufacturers recommendations for grouting in cold or hot weather .
equipment may be placed on the slab unit prior to placing the concrete overlay if all slab units are in place the tie rods are tensioned and the joints have been grouted for at least two days .
num bearing pads .
store them at the site on suitable blocking or platforms at least num in .
above all surfaces and vegetation .
keep free from vegetation growth and accumulations of dirt oil and other foreign material .
coat the surfaces of the concrete bearing areas that will be in contact with the bearing pads and the full contact area of the bearing pads with epoxy adhesive .
adhere to the manufacturers recommendations for mixing and applying the epoxy adhesive material .
the surface temperatures when applying epoxy adhesive shall be at least num f with a predicted ambient temperature for the next four hours of num f or above .
ensure that the surfaces are clean dry and sound .
be prepared to use water jets abrasive blasting and air blasting for satisfactorily cleaning the surfaces .
num num prestressed concrete beams and slab panels accurately set the bearing pads in the epoxy adhesive and secure them in place by blocking or other mechanical means until the adhesive sets .
num placing and finishing concrete overlay .
place cure groove protect etc .
the overlay according to num including superstructure placement restrictions .
place the top of the overlay to the true as planned line and grade of the roadways .
place the overlay in a manner that meets the grade of the proposed adjoining portions of the new bridge decks and adjoining roadways .
place the entire bridge slab overlay in one continuous pour .
no transverse or longitudinal joints will be permitted .
place the finishing machines supporting rails outside the overlay .
do not use hold down devices that are shot or drilled into the concrete .
submit plans for anchoring support rails and the concrete placing procedure for approval .
take precautions to secure a smooth riding bridge deck meeting numd .
prior to placement operations review the equipment procedures and personnel with the engineer .
the inspection procedures will be reviewed to ensure coordination .
take the following precautions a before placing the overlay thoroughly clean and abrasive blast the entire surface that will be in contact with the overlay .
perform abrasive blasting within num hours prior to placing the overlay .
then clean the surface by air blast followed by flushing with water .
prior to placing the overlay wet the surface and keep it wet for at least one hour and remove puddles of water .
no loads other than construction equipment will be permitted on any portion of the bridge deck that has undergone preparation prior to placement and curing of concrete overlay .
b after cleaning the surface and immediately before placing the concrete overlay scrub a thin coating of the overlay bonding grout into the prepared surface .
ensure that all parts receive a thorough even coating and that no excess grout collects in pockets .
control the rate of grout application so that the grout does not become dry before it is covered with the overlay .
num num retaining walls c utilize a suitable portable lightweight or wheeled work bridge behind the finishing operation .
hand finishing may be required along the edge of placements .
num measurement and payment .
prestressed concrete members will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for the pertinent prestress concrete beams or prestress concrete slab panels item .
the payment will be full compensation for all concrete forms reinforcing bearing pads steel strands sheathing steel components steel rods inserts tensioning grout bearing assemblies epoxy adhesive testing furnishing and applying concrete protective coatings when specified transporting storage erection and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num concrete overlay for the precast concrete slab bridge deck will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for the pertinent superstructure concrete item .
the payment will be full compensation for surface preparation overlay bonding grout furnishing placing finishing curing and grooving the concrete overlay fabricating coating and placing the epoxy coated welded steel wire fabric or reinforcing steel within the concrete overlay roadway angle and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num thru num reserved section num retaining walls num description .
construct castinplace reinforced concrete footings and stems conforming to the aashto definitions of rigid retaining walls .
when retaining wall mounted noise barriers are specified the anchorage assemblies are included in the retaining wall .
all components shall be as specified unless prior approval for alternatives is obtained from the administration .
when piles or drilled shafts caissons are specified refer to sections num and num respectively .
num preapproved alternate retaining walls .
alternate retaining walls may only be used when specified .
only those retaining walls specified will be permitted .
all other retaining walls even though they num num retaining walls are preapproved or have been previously used on administration projects are prohibited for use .
the administration will not consider any other alternate retaining walls as a value engineering change proposal .
enforcement .
these requirements will be enforced on all projects .
preapproved alternate retaining wall list .
alternate retaining walls are selected from the list of preapproved alternate retaining walls which is maintained by the office of bridge development .
procedures for adding products to the prequalified list may be obtained from the office of bridge development .
alternate retaining walls that have been previously used on administration projects without complying with the preapproval requirements shall be formally submitted through these procedures before they will be added to the preapproved lists for consideration to be used on future projects .
these and other retaining wall systems may be submitted for addition to the preapproved lists but the administration will not permit these submittals to be used on an advertised or awarded project .
deviations .
submit any proposed deviation in materials post size or shape panel size or shape reinforcing type size or placement from what is shown in the contract documents or from the preapproved alternate retaining wall details on file in the administrations office of bridge development .
all costs for reviews whether the details are accepted or rejected shall be borne by the contractor .
any fabrication or creation of any retaining wall element that is a deviation and is made prior to written approval of the administration shall be at the risk of the contractor .
contract documents for preapproved alternates .
if electing to use preapproved alternate retaining wall systems only one type retaining wall may be constructed throughout the contract .
submit substitute plans design calculations and specifications .
plans shall be similar in size and detail to advertised documents .
working drawings from the fabricator are not acceptable as substitute plan submissions .
include drainage details and all revisions required to construct the alternate retaining wall system .
all plans calculations and specifications shall be prepared signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state of maryland and who has experience in design of the proposed alternate retaining wall system .
the substitute plans shall bear the administrations title block and be furnished on reproducible paper linen or mylar .
contract num num retaining walls documents for construction of alternate retaining walls shall conform to the policy and procedures of the office of bridge development .
these plans will be issued as a contract revision replacing the administrations plans and be kept by the administration as permanent records .
all work pertaining to contract documents for preapproved alternates shall be at no additional cost to the administration .
after substitute plans are approved and issued as a redline revision submit working drawings bearing the fabricator or suppliers title block for review and approval to the administration or directly to the consulting engineer as directed by section num .
num materials .
refer to num .
when retaining wall mounted noise barriers are specified refer to num for the anchorage materials .
sample panel .
refer to the architectural treatment specifications in the contract documents .
some projects may require a specified surface such as an ashlar stone pattern or matching a similar structure or stonework in the area .
the contractor may request or the engineer may direct that the sample of the texture be submitted for approval prior to submission of the sample panel containing the specified stain .
num reinforcement .
reinforcing bars and welded wire fabric in retaining walls that are less than num ft from the edge of paved surface includes shoulders shall be epoxy coated .
supports for epoxy coated reinforcement shall be coated the same as the reinforcing steel .
num backfill for preapproved alternates .
use size no .
num stone as backfill for all preapproved alternate retaining walls regardless of the type backfill recommended or specified by the retaining wall manufacturer .
use geotextile when specified .
num concrete stain .
when a color is specified for the exposed surfaces of the retaining wall select the stain from the prequalified list of concrete stains maintained by the office of materials technology .
the color number shall meet federal standard num .
num textures .
a unless otherwise specified the exposed surfaces of the retaining wall shall receive a special surface treatment as specified in numb .
num num retaining walls b when a special texture is specified it shall be produced by using an approved form liner .
num preapproved alternate retaining wall .
match the materials and details as approved and on file in the office of bridge development .
num construction .
construct retaining walls as shown on the plans as specified in num and herein .
construct alternate retaining walls according to the details and specifications that are on file with the office of bridge development .
should any detail or specification change the retaining wall firm shall submit the revision for review and approval prior to using that revision on administration projects .
revisions shall not be submitted for projects that are already bid .
do not apply any loading to retaining wall concrete until the concrete in that portion has attained a compressive strength of at least num psi .
in addition complete the backfilling prior to placing any other loads on the wall .
num concrete stain .
when stain is specified apply two coats according to the manufacturers recommendations or as directed .
before application ensure that all surfaces are structurally sound clean dry fully cured and free from dust curing agents form release agents efflorescence scale and other foreign materials .
num anchor bolt assemblies .
when required install as specified .
refer to section num .
all holes and welding required in the assemblies shall be done before galvanizing .
keep all assemblies free of oil and mill coatings .
num measurement and payment .
retaining walls will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for the pertinent retaining wall item .
the payment will be full compensation for all piles caissons footings forms and form removal architectural treatment reinforcement steel concrete curing anchorage assemblies stains and coatings excavation sheeting and shoring drainage systems backfill including size no .
num stone and geotextiles for alternate retaining walls and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
when specific items for piles for retaining walls are included in the contract documents they will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num num noise barriers when specific items for drilled shafts caissons for retaining walls are included in the contract documents they will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
section num thru num reserved section num noise barriers num description .
construct noise barriers .
the standard noise barrier system consists of precast concrete panels steel or concrete posts concrete foundations fire hose connections doors and hardware necessary to construct a noise barrier .
either steel or concrete posts may be used but the same type of post shall be used throughout an entire noise barrier system .
when drilled shafts caissons are specified refer to section num .
bidders may view samples of the proposed panel finishes by contacting the office of highway development directors office .
num special bidding instructions .
when the contract documents permit optional post spacings place the bid in the appropriate items for the post spacing selected .
only bid the items pertaining to the selected post spacing .
all remaining items pertaining to the alternate post spacings not selected shall be filled in as num .
only one alternate post spacing may be bid per barrier .
num preapproved alternate noise barriers .
alternate noise barriers may only be used when specified .
only those noise barriers specified will be permitted .
all other noise barriers even though they are preapproved or have been previously used on administration projects shall not be used on the project .
the administration will not consider any other alternate noise barriers as a value engineering change proposal .
enforcement .
these requirements will be enforced on all projects .
preapproved alternate noise barrier list .
alternate noise barriers are selected from the list of preapproved alternate noise barriers which is maintained by the office of bridge development .
procedures for adding products to the prequalified list may be obtained from the office of bridge development .
num num noise barriers alternate noise barriers that have been previously used on administration projects without complying with the preapproval requirements shall be formally submitted through these procedures before they will be added to the preapproved lists for consideration to be used on future projects .
these and other noise barrier systems may be submitted for addition to the preapproved lists but the administration will not permit these submittals to be used on an advertised or awarded project .
deviations .
any proposed deviation in materials post size or shape panel size or shape reinforcing type size or placement from what is shown on the plans or from any preapproved alternates allowed on this project will be reviewed by the administrations noise barrier consultant .
all costs for these reviews whether the details are accepted or rejected shall be borne by the contractor .
any fabrication or creation of any noise barrier element that is a deviation and is made prior to written approval of the administration shall be at the risk of the contractor .
num contract documents for preapproved alternate systems or alternate post spacing .
when the contract documents permit and the contractor elects to use preapproved alternate noise barrier systems or alternate post spacing not shown on the plans the administration will furnish substitute plans and specifications to the contractor within num days after issuing notice to proceed .
only one type noise barrier may be used per barrier .
the substitute plans may include other pertinent modifications and aesthetic changes necessitated by the selection such as requiring tapered panels grade beams or offset brackets doublewide panels larger or smaller caissons additional grade beams and offset brackets or doublewide panels or higher panels if the changes in elevation between adjacent panels are determined to be too severe .
no additional compensation will be given to the contractor due to revisions detailed in the substitute plans and specifications .
the substitute plans will be issued as a contract revision replacing the advertised plans .
all work under this section including any changes required in grading drainage paving utility locations and permits that are a direct result of the substitute plans shall be done at no additional cost to the administration .
after substitute plans are issued as a redline revision submit working drawings bearing the fabricator or suppliers title block as specified in section num .
num noise barriers num num materials .
reinforcement for concrete structures num concrete stain num color no .
as concrete specified num pretensioning strand num num in .
diameter seven wire elastomeric bearing pads elastomeric shims num num fusion bonded polyester coating anchor assembly plate num color as specified for stain on highway side of roadway a num rods f num grade num snum nuts chemical composition and carbon equivalent a num washers f num steel posts including plates and shapes a num grade numw supply fire hose connections fire doors miscellaneous hardware etc .
as specified .
num hardware .
no material substitutions will be permitted for anchor rods nuts and washers .
these items shall be hot dip galvanized to meet a num .
num epoxy zinc rich primer .
prior to applying the polyester powder coating apply an epoxy zinc rich primer provided by the polyester coater .
the material shall withstand temperatures used for the polyester powder coating process and shall be subject to approval .
num precast concrete panels .
cast each panel with an embossed or impressed legible and unique identification number located on a portion of the panel that will not be visible in the completed structure .
panels will be rejected at any phase if identification numbers appear to have been tampered with or altered in any manner .
use mix no .
num concrete except use a design compressive strength of num psi .
num num noise barriers when exposed aggregate is specified use coarse aggregate meeting aashto size no .
num washed quartz gravel .
the layout of stacked noise barrier panels shall ensure that the seamsjoints between panels are consistent with the specified aesthetic design .
this applies to all panels within the proposed noise barrier system not just the panels between two posts .
do not alternate full height panels and stacked panels on a continuous section of a noise barrier .
if full height panels are required at certain locations adjacent to stacked panels provide a false joint to give the appearance of stacked panels .
form liner seamsjoints shall be as speicifed and shall not be visible in the noise barrier system unless they are an integral part of the noise barrier systems aesthetic design .
this applies to all components of the noise barrier system panels posts etc .
and applies to both full height and stacked panel designs .
caulking and coating material shall be compatible with the aesthetic aspects and acoustical requirements of the proposed noise barrier system .
textures .
consider all panel surfaces as having architectural finishes and carefully produce a consistent high quality finish .
when stacked panel systems are used ensure that the panels stacked within a single frame match in quality and appearance .
make aesthetic inspections for all panels in outdoor lighting conditions .
panels failing to conform to these requirements may be rejected .
take measures to prevent cement laden spray and spatter created from the process of exposing the aggregate from adhering to the finish surfaces of other panels .
wash surfaces of all panels to remove cement laden spray dust and all other foreign matter prior to shipping .
do not use abrasive blasting to expose the aggregate .
unless otherwise specified the finishes for the panels shall be as follows a exposed aggregate finishes shall be produced on the bottom side of each panel in the precast form .
b double rake finishes shall be produced on the top side of each panel .
sample panels .
refer to architectural treatment specifications in the contract documents .
num num noise barriers additionally after the small sample panels and working drawings are approved erect a fullsize frame set panel a single full height panel or a complete set of stacked panels assembled full height between two posts at the precasting site and prepare them for visual inspection .
the frame set panel will be used to determine conformance with the contract documents for finishes and to determine the quality of the fit and finish .
this frame set panel shall have the textures specified in a and b above on the appropriate highway and residential sides as well as caps or any other specified finishes .
make the frame set panel available outdoors with both sides visible for inspection .
upon written approval by the administration produce all subsequent panels equal in appearance to this approved panel .
transport this panel to the project site and use it as one of the panels in the noise barrier after all other panels have been accepted .
supply a frame set panel for inspection for each barrier finish type on the project .
sample panel digital photograph inspection .
refer to architectural treatment specifications in the contract documents .
reinforcement .
reinforcement bars and welded wire fabric in concrete barrier panels that are less than num ft from the edge of paved surfaces including shoulders shall be epoxy coated .
supports for epoxy coated reinforcement shall be coated the same as the reinforcement steel .
num concrete posts .
use mix no .
num concrete except use a design compressive strength of num psi .
when exposed aggregate is specified use coarse aggregate meeting aashto size no .
num washed quartz gravel .
when concrete posts include base plates galvanize plates and all hardware to meet a num and a num .
textures .
unless otherwise specified finish the posts as follows a produce exposed aggregate finish on the bottom side of posts in the precast form .
b produce double rake finish on the top side of posts .
sample posts .
when concrete posts are used submit a num in .
long sample of the concrete post to the construction site for approval .
submit the sample with the panel samples as specified in num .
ensure that the sample post exhibits the specified finishes .
num num noise barriers num construction .
refer to section num for additional requirements for noise barriers mounted on top of retaining walls .
perform all welding per aws dnum .
num galvanizing .
all holes and welding required in the hardware shall be done before galvanizing .
ensure that all hardware is free of oil and mill coatings .
ensure that all welds are ground smooth all weld spatter removed and hardware is free of burrs pits rust or other surface imperfections .
num anchor assemblies .
assemble anchor assemblies and place them at the specified elevation and spacing .
use templates for proper alignment and spacing of all anchor assemblies prior to concrete placement .
ensure that the threads of the anchors are long enough to provide room for a num in .
concrete encasement leveling nuts washers base plate and at least a num in .
protrusion through the top of the top nut when the noise barrier is properly installed .
num posts .
erect all posts plumb at the specified alignment and at the appropriate spacing .
embedded concrete posts .
when concrete posts are used erect them using a temporary support system to ensure the vertical and horizontal alignment and specified elevation .
temporary support systems shall include fixed ties between the post being set and a previously set post .
submit the design of the temporary support on the concrete post working drawings prior to erection .
leave the support system in place for at least num hours after completing the concrete placement for the drilled shaft that encases the post .
polyester coated steel posts .
steel posts shall be completely fabricated including base plates and all holes drilled before application of the polyester coating system .
ensure that posts are free of oil and mill coatings .
ensure that all welds are ground smooth all weld spatter removed and hardware is free of burrs pits rust or other surface imperfections .
abrasive blast all steel posts and other nongalvanized items to meet an sspcsp num surface condition of near white .
protect the cleaned surfaces from conditions of high humidity rainfall and surface moisture and do not allow to flash rust .
apply and cure the epoxy zinc rich primer to a dry film thickness of at least num mils prior to the application of the num num noise barriers polyester powder coating .
ensure that all solvents in the epoxy zinc rich primer are removed prior to the application of the polyester powder coating .
when galvanized surfaces are to be polyester coated roughen the galvanizing with a brush off blast cleaning according to sspcsp num prior to applying the polyester coating .
apply the polyester coating using an electrostatic spray system .
provide a polyester coating thickness after cure of num num mils .
the total thickness of coating primer plus polyester coating shall be num to num mils when measured according to g num .
after coating randomly check the posts for continuity using a num volt wet sponge detector to check for holidays pinholes and discontinuities .
check the coating thickness with a properly calibrated magnetic gauge .
use a liquid touchup to repair limited minor defects .
wrap all polyester coated posts to ensure safe arrival at the job site .
at the job site and during installation take measures to prevent damage to the posts .
num precast concrete panels .
fabricate and install precast concrete panels as specified .
submit working drawings that provide for all accessories additional reinforcement steel materials and methods not specifically indicated but that are essential for transportation handling installation or construction of the panels .
show the size shape and location of all panels and include complete reinforcement and connection details .
when specified show the method and sequence of erection method of plumbing panels and adjusting connections and the loads and movements due to erection .
all lifting devices and inserts used externally or installed in the panel shall have a factor of safety of four as determined under the loading conditions anticipated during the course of manufacture storage delivery and erection .
include all inserts on the working drawings .
when steel posts are used protect the innercoated steel surfaces from being scratched marred or chipped during panel installation .
the protective material shall not be visible in the finished structure .
do not use grease or similar lubricants .
num num noise barriers defects and tolerances .
place concrete in a manner so that there are no cold joints .
cracked panels or panels determined by the engineer to be nonrepairable or do not conform to the following tolerances will be rejected and shall be replaced with acceptable panels .
a panel dimensions shall be within num in .
except for panels with an effective thickness of less than num in .
where the thickness shall be within num in .
b panel squareness for rectangular panels shall be within num in .
c panel surface defects on texturedfinished surfaces shall not exceed num in .
per num ft. d tongue and groove joints shall be constructed within num in .
of the dimensions specified .
shipping handling and erection .
protect panels by padding or other means to prevent cracking staining chipping or spalling of the concrete during handling storage transporting and erection .
support or brace panels during installation to ensure safety .
maintain bracing or supports until proper alignment and adequate permanent support has been provided .
do not leave any panel in an unsafe support condition .
the engineer will evaluate damaged panels to determine whether they can be used .
if acceptable repair damaged panels in an approved manner .
erect panels centered between posts .
where a panel is not erected within the tolerances assumed in the connection design the structural adequacy of the installation will be checked by the office of bridge development and the connection design shall be modified as required .
changes other than adjustments within the specified tolerances shall be made only after approval .
panels will be inspected again after erection to determine if they have been damaged .
num concrete stain .
apply prior to backfilling .
for concrete posts use water blasting or other mechanical means to provide a surface for improved adhesion .
apply two coats according to the manufacturers recommendations and as directed .
apply to the top and full height of the panels but do not apply to exposed aggregate surfaces .
before num num noise barriers application ensure that all surfaces are defect free structurally sound clean dry fully cured and free from dirt dust curing agents and form release agents efflorescence scale and other foreign materials .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
modifications such as an increase or decrease in the size or number of grade beams drilled shafts caissons or retaining walls special anchorages conflicts with utilities or other obstructions when the utilities or obstructions were noted in the contract documents or any other modifications required due to the contractors selection of an alternate spacing or a preapproved alternate noise barrier when permitted will be incidental to the item .
num noise barrier system panels will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square foot of barrier including posts and panels and samples thereof architectural and noise absorptive finishes stains and coatings base plates anchor assemblies except when noise barriers are mounted on retaining walls construction templates temporary supports steel post protection during panel installation doors fire hose connections excavation backfill caulking and hardware .
measurement will be based on the asplanned dimensions using the length along the face of the barrier times the panel height .
the cost of any reviews for proposed deviations specified in num will be deducted from the monies due the contractor .
num grade beams and offset brackets will not be measured but will be paid for at the pertinent contract lump sum price which also includes excavation reinforcement concrete and backfill .
num drilled shafts caissons will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num retaining walls will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
section num thru num reserved num num expansion joints in structures section num expansion joints in structures num description .
furnish fabricate and install preformed joint fillers preformed elastomeric joint seals troughs structural steel and metal plates to be utilized in providing expansion and contraction capabilities in structures .
num materials .
hardware for drainage troughs num preformed joint fillers num preformed polychloroprene elastomeric compression joint seals num lubricant adhesive num troughs num structural steel a num grade num all structural steel for drainage troughs shall be hot dip galvanized to meet a num and a num .
ensure that troughs meet the thickness requirements for the type of material supplied .
place joints and splices for drainage troughs only where specified .
num paint .
refer to section num .
num construction .
store expansion joint material delivered to the bridge site under cover on platforms at least num in .
above all types of surfaces and vegetation .
protect it at all times from damage and when placed ensure that it is free from dirt oil grease or other foreign substances .
all welding shall meet aws dnum unless otherwise specified .
all material and installation methods shall be approved prior to installation of any expansion joint material .
provide the longest possible lengths of the preformed material with a minimum of joints .
lengths less than num ft shall be one piece .
cut material to a clean true edge .
ensure straight lines at the joint .
when installing the seal do not use any type of equipment that will damage the seal .
remove and replace damaged seals .
cleaning and painting .
refer to section num .
num num expansion joints in structures joint replacement and modification .
where the contract documents specify replacement or modification to existing expansion joints on bridges on which traffic will be maintained have available a supply of steel plates at least num x num ft and num in .
thick .
place these plates over the joints if traffic has to be restored before the concrete has cured and at any time the unfinished work will interfere with traffic .
where the contract documents specify modification to existing expansion joints remove the concrete as specified in num .
where the contract documents only specify replacement of existing roadway joint seal the work shall include cleaning and painting the joint .
throughly clean existing drainage troughs to remain of all debris .
clean and paint all exposed metal where noted on the plans or as directed .
all angles shall be cut with a saw .
all holes and slots shall be drilled .
do not cut with a torch .
power tool clean to bare metal and paint any areas where the existing steel coating is damaged due to the installation of new troughs .
after the joints are complete in place and just prior to placing the compression seal remove the masking tape and residue and install the seal .
then apply the finish coat to the exposed portion of the angles above the seal .
joint seals in bridge decks .
place transverse compression seals in one piece for the entire length of the roadway joint .
shop and field splices are prohibited .
use the longest compression seal pieces as practicable for longitudinal bridge joints .
apply the lubricant adhesive according to the manufacturers recommendations .
if the seal is stretched in excess of num percent remove and reinstall the seal as directed .
num inplace testing .
subject the completed joint to a water test to detect any leakage .
conduct the test at least five days after completing the joint .
provide all facilities required for the engineers inspections of the underdeck areas .
cover the roadway section of the joint from curb to curb or parapet to parapet with at least num in .
of water .
if this is not possible perform the water test in part section along the joint .
when testing subsequent part sections overlap at least num ft of the joint previously tested .
num num expansion joints in structures maintain the ponding for a period of five hours for the entire roadway or each section of joint being tested .
during and at the conclusion of the test examine the underside of the joint for leakage .
the expansion joint seal will be considered watertight if no obvious wetness is visible .
if the joint system exhibits evidence of water leakage at any point locate and repair all leaks .
when repairs are required perform a subsequent water test .
if the joint leaks after the second test remove replace and retest the seal .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for furnishing fabricating and placing structural steel roadway seals drainage troughs catch basins downspouts cleaning painting and all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num joints in structures will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the pertinent superstructure concrete item .
num when an item for modifying existing bridge roadway joints is included in the contract documents the cost of furnishing fabricating and placing new structural steel new roadway seals modifying existing joints on bridge roadway including saw cutting and removal of existing concrete new concrete steel plates cutting of existing steel welding drainage troughs catch basins downspouts etc .
shall also be included in the contract unit price per linear foot for the item .
the measurement will include the horizontal distance from the inside face to inside face of parapets plus the vertical distance of the curb faces and parapets .
num when an item for drainage trough for bridge is included in the contract documents the furnishing and placing of drainage troughs including catch basins downspouts structural steel and hardware will be measured and paid for at the pertinent contract unit price per linear foot .
this price will include cutting of angles cleaning painting drilling of concrete expansion bolts etc .
the measurement will be the center line distance from end to end of the installed drainage trough fabric .
num cleaning existing drainage troughs and cleaning and painting metal attachments will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items .
num num metal railing section num metal railing num description .
furnish fabricate coat and install metal railings .
num materials .
refer to the contract documents .
num construction .
fabricate and install all railings as specified .
submit working drawing as specified in section num .
num production handling and shipment .
store all parts at the site on suitable blocking or platform at least num in .
above any type surface or vegetation and protect from corrosion or damage .
keep materials free from dirt oil grease and other foreign matter .
protect surfaces to be painted both in the shop and in the field .
repair or replace damaged material as directed .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num metal railing will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num metal railing will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
num metal railing for which no specific item is included will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items .
section num timber structures num description .
construct structures or portions of structures using timber including fabricating erecting treating and coating of the timber elements .
for timber piling refer to section num .
for concrete refer to section num .
for structural steel refer to section num .
num num timber structures num materials .
asphalt cement num structural steel num gray iron castings num bolts and hardware num structural timber num preservative treatments for timber num metal timber connectors per manufacturer and as approved galvanizing a num fire stops and galvanized sheet metal a num coating designation g num num construction .
num storage and handling .
store timber in open stacked piles at the site on suitable blocking or platform at least num in .
above any type of surface or vegetation in a manner to shed water and prevent warping .
protect it from weather by a suitable covering .
clear the storage site of weeds and rubbish before placing material and throughout the storage period .
ensure that the site selected is not subject to flooding .
handle using rope or nylon slings to prevent the breaking of outer fibers bruising or penetrating the surface .
num cutting and boring .
when practical cut and bore treated timbers before pressure treatment .
brush coat all cuts in treated timbers and all abrasions after being carefully trimmed with two applications of an approved wood preservative before installing the timber in the structure .
when it is determined that treated timbers are damaged beyond repair remove them from the project and replace them .
when forms or temporary braces are attached to treated timber with nails or spikes fill the holes by driving galvanized nails or spikes flush with the surface .
num bolt holes .
when holes are bored after treatment fill them with asphalt cement applied with a caulking gun or as directed before inserting bolts .
place asphalt cement coated plugs in holes that are not to receive bolts .
num num timber structures num coating untreated surfaces .
in untreated timber structures coat all contact surfaces between members except adjacent flooring members with two coats of an approved preservative before assembly .
similarly coat the back faces of bulkheads and all surfaces of timber that will come in contact with earth metal or other timber .
coat the ends of timber members in the same manner .
num protection of ends of caps wales and planks .
cover the ends of all caps wales and planks with resin glass composite shields as approved .
apply the shields as follows a remove all dirt and other loose material from area to be capped .
b apply the first coat of resin to the top and num in .
down the side of the member .
c apply precut glass cloth using a num in .
grooved aluminum roller to achieve wetout and anchor using brass staples .
d when the initial coat of resin has taken a tack free set apply a second coat of resin to seal the entire application .
num diameter of holes .
holes bored in timber structures shall meet the following for the listed connectors a round drift bolts spikes and dowels num in .
less than the diameter of the device .
b square drift bolts spikes and dowels equal to the smallest dimension of the device .
c machine bolts same as the diameter of the bolts .
d rods num in .
larger than the diameter of the rods .
e lag screws equal to the diameter of the screw at the base of the thread .
f connector bolts num in .
larger than the diameter of the connector bolts .
num bolt assemblies .
bolt heads and nuts that come in contact with the timber shall be fitted with a washer of the size and type specified .
after all nuts are adequately tightened burr the bolt threads .
num num timber structures num countersinking .
countersink wherever smooth faces are required .
in treated timber paint recesses formed in horizontal surfaces with an approved preservative .
after the bolt or screw is in place fill recesses with an approved asphalt coating .
num connectors .
bore connector holes through members to be connected .
bore perpendicular to the face of the timber .
when spike grids or split ring connectors are specified install them according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num framing .
accurately cut and frame all timber to provide even bearing over the entire contact surface .
when making joints shimming and open joints are prohibited .
num sills .
ensure that sills have true and even bearing on mudsills or concrete pedestals .
remove all earth from contact with sills .
num timber caps .
place timber caps to secure an even and uniform bearing over the tops of the supporting posts or piles and to secure an even alignment of their ends .
secure all caps by drift bolts or as specified .
locate the drift bolts in the center of the post or pile .
num bracing .
bolt the ends of bracing through the pile post or cap .
bolt intermediate intersections also .
use spikes or nails in addition to bolts .
when bracing intersects use filler blocks with a bolted connection .
num stringers .
place stringers in position so that knots near edges are in the top portions of the stringers .
size bottom edges of stringers to provide uniform depth at bearings .
outside stringers may have butt joints with the ends cut on a taper but interior stringers shall be lapped to take bearing over the full width of the floor beam or cap at each end .
the lapped ends of untreated stringers shall be separated at least num in .
and securely fastened by drift bolts where specified .
when stringers are two panels long stagger the joints .
toenail cross bridging between stringers with at least two nails in each end .
leave the lower ends of all bridging and one side of each diaphragm disconnected and free to move until after the deck above is securely fastened to the stringers .
num floor planking .
unless otherwise specified floor planking shall be snumsnume hit or miss and have a uniform thickness with a maximum tolerance of num in .
where necessary to maintain traffic lay num num brick masonry planks in halfofbridge width sections .
timber plank floors shall always be accompanied with suitable hold down devices .
spike the planks to every stringer joist and nailer with at least two spikes .
the length of the spikes shall be at least twice the thickness of the plank .
where planks will be under wheel guards or hold down devices carefully select planks of as near equal thickness as possible .
before any hold down or wheel guard is bolted firmly drive treated shims or wedges between low planks and either the hold down or the wheel guard so that all planks are held down with equal pressure .
the shims shall occupy at least num percent of the area between the bottom of either the hold down or wheel guard and the top of the plank .
num bridge railings and wheel guards .
bridge railings shall meet a minimum of test level num tlnum as specified in the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications railings .
all dimensions for timber rail posts and spacers shall be the actual dimensions of the timber .
locate bridge rail and wheel guard splices so that rail and guard members are continuous over at least two posts .
install bridge railings and wheel guards in sections not less than num ft long .
splices shall be shiplapped with the lap equal to num in .
or the greater side of the piece whichever is larger .
num measurement and payment .
piles are excluded .
the payment will be full compensation for all timber treated or untreated storage and handling finishing of pile bents and abutments preservative composite shields asphalt cement metal components drilling holes and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num timber structures will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per num board feet mbm .
the computation of quantities will be based on the nominal sizes specified and the exact overall net length of pieces remaining in the completed structure .
no allowance will be made for waste .
num timber structures will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
section num brick masonry num description .
construct brick masonry as specified .
num num brick masonry num materials .
curing compound num brick num num mortar fusion bonded epoxy powdered coatings num water num dove tail anchors as specified sample panel .
when specified prepare and deliver a sample panel measuring at least num x num in .
to the construction site for approval prior to beginning work .
the panel shall be typical of the brickwork to be used on the project .
receive the administrations approval of the panel before beginning the brickwork on the project .
keep the sample panel on the project site .
all subsequent brickwork shall be equal in appearance to this approved panel .
num construction .
unless otherwise specified lay all brick masonry in level courses with faces plumb square and true to the dimensions specified .
ensure that all exposed surfaces are smooth .
lay brick masonry for parapets and end posts parallel to the roadway or barrier .
construct brick facing as specified .
num bond .
unless otherwise specified lay brick masonry in running bond .
lay adjoining courses to break joints by half brick as nearly as practical .
num bricklaying .
spray all brick with water to dampen the surface prior to laying .
only use fresh plastic mortar that is soft and workable when placed on the wall .
spread a layer of mortar on the beds and make not more than a shallow furrow in it that can be readily closed by the laying of the brick .
solidly fill all bed and head joints with mortar .
fully butter end joints of stretchers and side or cross joints of headers with mortar and make a shoved joint so that mortar is squeezed out at the top of the joint .
ensure that no brick is jarred or moved after it has been fully bedded in the mortar .
bricks loosened after the mortar has taken its set shall be removed cleaned and relaid with fresh mortar .
do not use broken or chipped bricks in the face .
do not use spalls or bats except where necessary to shape around irregular openings or edges .
place full bricks at ends or corners where possible .
use the bats in the interior of num num brick masonry the course .
in making closures do not use bricks shorter than the width of a whole brick .
use only whole brick as headers .
num joints .
slush all joints with mortar at every course but slushing alone will not be considered adequate for making an acceptable joint .
lay exterior faces in advance of backing .
back plaster or parge exterior faces with a coat of mortar at least num in .
thick before the backing is laid up .
prior to parging cut flush all joints on the back of face courses .
joints shall be num to num in .
wide .
uniformly maintain whatever width is adopted throughout the work .
num pointing .
tool all exterior head and bed joints with a round tool slightly larger than the joint pressed tight against the plastic mortar for a concave finish .
when nails or line pins are used plug the holes with mortar and point them immediately upon removal .
num cleaning .
upon completion of the work clean all exterior surfaces by scrubbing and washing down with water .
if necessary clean with a num percent solution of muriatic acid which shall be rinsed off with liberal quantities of clean fresh water .
num curing .
after the work has been laid up and pointed cure the exposed surfaces using one of the following methods a cover with two layers of burlap and keep wet for three days .
b apply a nonasphalt colorless liquid curing compound using an approved hand or motor driven spray operated at a pressure of num to num psi .
apply uniformly at a rate of num ydnumgal .
ensure that the surface is completely coated and sealed in one application .
where there is evidence of insufficient coating apply additional material as directed .
num cold weather protection .
do not perform brick masonry work and pointing when there is frost in the brick or when the air temperature is below num f unless suitable housing and heating devices are provided as necessary to keep the atmosphere surrounding the masonry at a temperature of at least num f for the curing period .
num backfill .
do not backfill before seven days after completion of the section .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all sample panels dove tail anchors curing and for num num epoxy protective coatings for concrete all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num brick masonry for structures will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square foot .
num brick masonry for structures will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
num brick masonry for structures will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
num brick masonry facing will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square foot .
num brick masonry facing will be measured and paid for at the contract lump sum price .
section num epoxy protective coatings for concrete num description .
furnish and apply epoxy protective coatings to concrete surfaces .
num materials .
sand num epoxy protective coatings num num construction .
coatings shall not be applied until num days after removal of the forms .
abrade all surfaces to be coated by abrasive blasting water blasting or other mechanical means to provide a surface profile for improved adhesion .
ensure that the surface is sound clean thoroughly dry and free of oil grease curing compound and other foreign matter before applying the first epoxy protective coating .
apply two coats to the specified areas of the structure .
each application shall follow a dry weather period of at least two consecutive days and be within the time frame recommended by the manufacturer .
mask adjacent areas not to be coated or otherwise protect to prevent staining .
num mixing and application .
mix and apply according to the manufacturers recommendations .
apply by brush or roller .
do not num num epoxy protective coatings for concrete apply to piers and abutments until the structural steel masonry plates are in place .
num coating requirements .
sprinkle an excess of sand on the second epoxy coating on the top surfaces of the piers and abutment bridge seat areas between beams pads while it is still wet .
when it has hardened sufficiently to resist marring remove sand not adhering to the coatings .
coat the following areas a for abutments under a transverse joint apply the coatings to the entire horizontal surface of the bridge seat areas between and around the beam pads and all exposed surfaces of the beam pads and the entire contiguous vertical faces of the backwalls and cheek walls .
b for piers under a transverse joint apply the coatings to the entire horizontal surface of bridge seat areas between and around the beam pads and all exposed surfaces of the beam pads .
num material precautions .
use the manufacturers material safety data in handling and use of the material .
num repairs .
repair all damage to the structure resulting from the coating operations including damage to the epoxy protective coating .
perform epoxy protective coating repairs according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for both coats and all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num epoxy protective coatings for concrete for which no specific item is included will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items .
num epoxy protective coatings for concrete will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for the pertinent epoxy protective coating item .
num epoxy protective coatings for concrete will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square foot for the pertinent epoxy protective coating item .
num num fusion bonded powder coatings for metal section num fusion bonded powder coatings for metal num description .
furnish and apply electrostatically applied fusion bonded powder coatings to metal surfaces .
num materials .
epoxy powder coating num except creep test will not be required polyester powder coating num use polyester powder coating unless otherwise specified .
num construction .
apply the coating in an environmentally controlled plant that is fully enclosed .
the coating system shall have the capabilities of preheating and post baking .
ensure that the surface is free of oil and mill coatings .
grit blast the surface to white metal according to sspcsp num using a mixture of steel shot and grit .
protect cleaned surfaces from high humidity rainfall and surface moisture .
surfaces shall not flash rust before coating .
provide a uniform angular anchor blast profile having a height of num to num mils .
check anchor pattern with an approved surface profile gauge .
apply and cure the material as specified by the coating manufacturer .
neither the metal surface nor the oven temperature shall exceed num f during any part of the curing process .
ensure that the cured coating has a uniform color gloss and thickness and is free of blisters fish eyes sags runs and any other irregularity .
ensure that the finished coating thickness is num num mils when tested according to sspc panum except the balls and sockets on steel sheet piling may have a lesser thickness of coating .
similarly coat new bolts nuts and washers to a thickness of num to num mils .
the nuts shall have oversize threads and fit the bolts after both are coated .
restrain the bolt heads from turning during torquing operations .
num num porous backfill the coater shall be responsible for all quality control checking including visual inspection and thickness measurements and shall keep the results of each inspection in a form suitable to the engineer .
the engineer shall have access to each part of the process and have the right and opportunity to witness or perform any of the quality control tests on a random sampling basis .
touch up .
provide a compatible touch up system for repair of defects all areas damaged during erection and all visible open areas .
apply touch up as follows a surface preparation .
the surface shall be clean dry and free of rust and scale .
blast clean to national association of corrosion engineers nace near white where possible .
use suitable solvents to remove grease oil and other contaminates .
apply coating directly to the cleaned surface before oxidation occurs .
b mixing .
mix ratio of part a to part b shall be as recommended by the manufacturer .
thoroughly mix the two parts until a uniform color is achieved .
if thinning is required thin each part separately using a thinner recommended by the manufacturer .
discard material not used within the recommended pot life .
num material precautions .
use the manufacturers material safety data in handling and use of this material .
refer to num for handling and protection .
num measurement and payment .
fusion bonded powder coatings for metal will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the pertinent items specified .
section num thru num reserved section num porous backfill num description .
furnish and place porous backfill material reinforced concrete base and pipe drains at the rear of abutments wing walls retaining walls and other locations .
num num utilities on structures num materials .
porous backfill size no .
num aggregate num concrete mix no .
num num pipe drains num reinforcement steel num geotextile class as specified num num construction .
place porous backfill material in layers in conjunction with the adjacent fill .
any fill material removed for placing the porous backfill material shall be at no additional cost to the administration .
when a form is used between the porous backfill material and the earth backfill completely remove the form from the completed fill .
slope concrete base to drain to points of discharge .
num measurement and payment .
porous backfill will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for the pertinent porous backfill item .
the payment will be full compensation for all excavation concrete reinforcement geotextiles drains and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
if no item for porous backfill appears in the contract documents the work will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other items specified .
section num utilities on structures num description .
place utility markers to identify utilities when they are newly installed replaced or relocated .
place the identification markers as specified herein and as approved .
num materials .
use decals or stencil high quality black or white print onto the pipe or carrier .
lettering height shall be num the pipe diameter but not less than num in .
or more than num in .
markers shall include the name of the utility and a description of the contents as shown in the contract documents or as directed .
submit a sample of the proposed markers .
num num application of bridge structure numbers num construction .
place identification markers within the first and last num ft of the structure and at intervals not to exceed num ft .
ensure that the surface to receive the marker is properly cleaned and prepared prior to the application .
orient the markings for best visibility .
num measurement and payment .
the application of utility markers on structures will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the pertinent items .
section num thru num reserved section num application of bridgestructure numbers num description .
apply bridgestructure numbers to all completed structures .
num materials .
select a paint that is suitable for the particular application subject to the approval of the engineer .
num construction .
apply the number as a last order of work .
refer to the pertinent details included in the contract documents for the size location etc .
ensure that completed work has sharp edges differentiating all coatings and the previous substrate .
properly prepare surfaces according to the paint manufacturers recommendations .
do not apply paint to wet or moist surfaces .
on rehabilitation projects repaint the number if it is faded removed or otherwise deemed necessary by the engineer .
num measurement and payment .
application of bridgestructure numbers will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the pertinent items specified .
section num thru num reserved num num working drawings section num working drawings num description .
schedule and distribute working drawings which are described in tcnum and specified in tcnum .
working drawings shall exhibit good drafting practices and represent the original work of the contractor fabricator or supplier .
duplicated portions of the plans will not be accepted .
when requested by the administration or consultant submit calculations or other information deemed necessary to backup working drawings .
calculations and other backup material shall be signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the state of maryland .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction .
num schedule .
as a first order of work prepare and submit a schedule for the submission of the working drawings as specified in num or num .
coordinate the schedule with and in full accord with the progress schedule submitted to the procurement officer as specified in gpnum and tcnum .
the schedule shall include each type of working drawings e.g .
form plans structural steel etc .
approximate number of drawings to be reviewed estimated date of first submission and estimated rate of submission of drawings e.g .
numwk .
where possible submit the most crucial drawings first with sufficient time for review so as to minimize delays during construction .
num consultant engineering firm .
when the contract documents specify that a consultant engineering firm is to review the working drawings for the structure send all working drawings to that firm .
to expedite the checking and distribution of working drawings fabricators or suppliers may send prints directly to the appropriate consultant engineering firm with copies of all correspondence to the contractor director office of bridge development and the district engineer .
if the contractor requests that all plans be routed through the contractors office then the establishment of that procedure should be the first order of work so as to avoid possible misunderstandings as to the processing .
be advised that this plan of action will delay the turn around time and will not constitute grounds for complaint or a time extension .
num num working drawings the contractor fabricator or supplier shall furnish to the consultant engineering firm num prints each of all working drawings etc .
for primary review .
once primary review is complete the contractor fabricator or supplier shall furnish to the consultant engineering firm additional prints number to be furnished by primary reviewer for stamping and forwarding to the administrations office of bridge development for secondary review and distribution .
all working drawings for the structures will not be considered accepted until they bear the acceptance stamps of both the consultant engineering firm and the administrations office of bridge development .
num office of bridge development .
when no consultant engineering firm is specified send all working drawings for the structures to the director office of bridge development .
to expedite the checking and distribution of working drawings fabricators or suppliers may send prints directly to the director with copies of all correspondence to the contractor and the district engineer .
if the contractor requests that all drawings be routed through the contractors office then the establishment of that procedure should be the first order of work so as to avoid possible misunderstandings as to the processing .
be advised that this plan of action will delay the turn around time and will not constitute grounds for complaint or a time extension .
the contractor fabricator or supplier shall furnish to the director num prints each of all working drawings etc .
for primary review .
once primary review is complete the contractor fabricator or supplier shall furnish to the director additional prints number to be furnished by primary reviewer for final review and distribution .
num revisions and substitutions .
all modifications regardless of whether or not the contract includes a consultant engineering firm shall be sent to the director office of bridge development for acceptance .
any modifications implemented without written acceptance from the director office of bridge development will be subject to the requirements of gpnum .
num measurement and payment .
this work will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items .
num category num paving section num aggregate base courses num description .
construct base courses using one of the following a graded aggregate without a stabilizing agent .
b plant mixed graded aggregate with a portland cement stabilizing agent .
c bank run gravel .
d sand aggregate .
num materials .
graded aggregate for base course num bank run gravel for base course num sand aggregate base course coarse aggregate num size no .
num fine aggregate num portland cement num type i or ia emulsified asphalt num production plant num water num moisture and dust control agents num num construction .
at least num days prior to the start of constructing the base course submit the proposed plants equipment and material sources for approval .
protect the subgrade and base against damage from all causes .
repair or replace damaged areas .
limit excavation for widening to an area that can be backfilled the same working day using graded aggregate base .
refer to standard no .
num for the area to be backfilled .
maintain the temporary graded aggregate base wedge with a num or flatter fill slope .
compact the material as directed .
leave the graded aggregate base wedge in place until placement of the hot mix asphalt base .
num num aggregate base courses num equipment .
all equipment including the production plant and onsite equipment is subject to approval .
have the plant ready for inspection at least num hours prior to the start of construction operations .
num weather restrictions .
a temperature and surface conditions .
place graded aggregate stabilized with portland cement when the ambient air and surface temperatures are at least num f and rising .
place graded aggregate bank run gravel and sand aggregate base when the ambient air and surface temperatures are at least num f and rising .
do not place material on a frozen subgrade .
b cold weather protection .
protect the plant mixed graded aggregate stabilized base from freezing during the sevenday curing period .
c precipitation .
do not place material during precipitation .
when precipitation has occurred during the previous num hours the engineer will determine if the subgrade is sufficiently dry .
if precipitation occurs during placement placement of material enroute from the plant to the job site shall be at the contractors risk .
num subgrade preparation .
before beginning base course construction complete the approved subgrade to final line and grade at least num ft ahead .
construct the foundation as specified in sections num and num .
if traffic including construction equipment is allowed to use the subgrade foundation or preceding layer distribute the loading over the entire width of the course to aid in obtaining uniform and thorough compaction .
remove rutting by reshaping and recompacting the affected area as specified in section num .
num stabilized graded aggregate base mix .
use the amount of portland cement determined per msmt num .
num bank run gravel base mix .
mixing or blending of materials using approved chemical additives will be permitted .
num sand aggregate base mix .
provide a mixture containing num to num percent coarse material as measured by dry weight of the total mix .
num transportation .
handle and transport mixed base materials in a manner that minimizes segregation and loss of moisture .
cover all loads in accordance with state laws unless hauling is off road and is approved .
unless approved do not dump material into piles haul over the completed base course or stockpile the material on the job site .
num num aggregate base courses num spreading .
spread the base material uniformly and in layers of approximately equal thickness to provide the specified planned depth .
avoid segregation of coarse and fine particles .
build shoulders or berms at least num ft wide on each side of the base and to the top elevation of each uncompacted layer except when placing the base against concrete curbs or gutters .
num grade or finished surface control .
shape the surface of the base material to the specified line grade and cross section .
set grades longitudinally and transversely with fixed controls spaced no greater than num ft .
compact and smooth the surface over its full width using a smooth faced steelwheeled roller or if rolling is not feasible by mechanical tampers and vibratory compactors as approved .
maintain the finished grade within num in .
from the established grade .
num compaction .
immediately after placement compact the material to the required density .
during compaction operations maintain the moisture content of the material to within num percent of optimum moisture .
determine the optimum moisture content and maximum dry density as follows a sand aggregate base and bank run gravel base per t num. b graded aggregate base and graded stabilized aggregate base per msmt num .
compact graded aggregate base bank run gravel base and sand aggregate base to at least num percent of the maximum dry density .
compact graded stabilized aggregate base to at least num percent of the maximum dry density .
measure in place density per msmt num or num .
begin compaction operations except on superelevated curves at the sides of the course .
overlap the shoulder or berm at least num ft and progress toward the center parallel to the center line of the roadway .
on superelevated curves begin compaction at the low side and progress toward the high side .
continue compaction operations until all compaction marks are removed .
num graded stabilized aggregate base protection and curing .
complete the spreading compacting and shaping within three hours after the mixing water cement and aggregate come in contact .
reconstruct any section not conforming to these requirements .
maintain the surface in a moist condition until the emulsified asphalt seal coat is applied .
apply the emulsified asphalt using distributing equipment as specified in num at the rate of num galydnum .
avoid ponding of the emulsified asphalt .
if ponding occurs use a sand blotter or an equivalent method as approved .
num num aggregate base courses allow the material to cure for a period of seven days .
during this period close the base course to all traffic .
repair damaged portions of the base course seal coat .
num moisture and dust control agents .
when specified add calcium or magnesium chloride at the plant or apply it to the surface of the material at the project site .
apply calcium chloride at the rate of num lbydnum .
apply magnesium chloride at the rate of num lbydnum or as a solution at the rate of num galydnum .
num maintenance .
during construction and after completion of the base course maintain the base until the surface course is placed .
when unacceptable work can not be repaired replace it for the full depth of the base .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all aggregate furnishing hauling placing curing and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num graded aggregate base course graded aggregate base course stabilized with cement bank run gravel base course and sand aggregate base course will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
surface area measurements will be based on the specified width of the base and the actual length measured along the center line of the base surface .
the temporary graded aggregate base wedge constructed in conformance with standard no .
md num maintaining the num or flatter slope compaction and removal of the material will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the graded aggregate base course item .
num the portland cement stabilizing agent and the emulsified asphalt for seal coat will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the graded aggregate base course stabilized with cement item .
num bank run gravel base .
material manipulation or addition of chemical additives will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the bank run gravel base course item .
num calcium or magnesium chloride will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard or per ton as specified .
num num soil cement base course section num soilcement base course num description .
construct soilcement base course using a combination of soil and portland cement uniformly mixed moistened compacted shaped and sealed .
unless otherwise specified the soil cement and water may be either plant mixed or mixed in place .
num materials .
portland cement num emulsified asphalts num production plant num soil num or num water num num construction .
at least num days prior to the start of constructing the base course submit the proposed production plants location of plants with respect to project site equipment and material sources for approval .
protect the subgrade and base against damage from all causes .
repair or replace damaged subgrade and base .
num equipment .
all equipment including the production plant and onsite equipment is subject to approval .
have the production plant ready for inspection at least num hours before the start of construction operations .
num weather restrictions .
a temperature and surface conditions .
place soilcement base course when the ambient air and surface temperatures are at least num f and rising .
do not place material on a frozen subgrade .
b cold weather protection .
protect the completed base from freezing during the sevenday curing period .
c precipitation .
do not place material during precipitation .
when precipitation has occurred during the previous num hours the engineer will determine if the subgrade is sufficiently dry .
if precipitation occurs during placement placement of material en route from the plant to the job site shall be at the contractors risk .
num subgrade preparation .
complete the subgrade to final line and grade at least num ft ahead before beginning base course construction .
num num soil cement base course construct the foundation as specified in sections num and num .
if traffic including construction equipment is allowed to use the subgrade foundation or preceding layer distribute the loading over the entire width of the course to aid in obtaining uniform and thorough compaction .
remove rutting by reshaping and recompacting the affected area as specified in section num .
num design mix .
at least num days prior to the start of constructing the base course submit samples of the soil and portland cement from the proposed material sources .
sample the materials as specified in the materials manual .
the engineer will determine the exact proportions of soil and portland cement and the optimum moisture content based on these samples .
proportions may be revised during construction to provide for changing conditions as directed .
plant mixed material shall be sampled at the plant .
mixed in place material shall be sampled from a num ft long control strip constructed on the site .
num transportation .
handle and transport mixed materials in a manner that minimizes segregation and loss of moisture .
cover all loads in accordance with state laws unless hauling is off road and approved .
unless approved do not dump material into piles haul over the completed base course or stockpile the material on the job site .
num spreading of plant mix material .
spread the base material uniformly in layers of approximately equal thickness to provide the specified planned depth .
avoid segregation of coarse and fine particles .
build shoulders or berms at least num ft wide on each side of the base and to the top elevation of each uncompacted layer except when placing the base against concrete curbs or gutters .
num mixed in place construction .
pulverize the soil base material to ensure that at the completion of moist mixing num percent passes a num in .
sieve and at least num percent passes a no .
num sieve .
limit any variation in the moisture content of the soil at the time of cement application to num percent from optimum .
then spread portland cement on the soil at the approved spread rate .
in the presence of the engineer use an accurate scale to verify the spread rate .
then thoroughly mix the pulverized soil and cement .
immediately after completing the mixing operation use a pressurized distributor to spray water on the mixture at the approved rate .
mix the soilcementwater combination until it is uniform .
num grade or finished surface control .
shape the surface of the base material to the specified line grade and cross section .
set grades longitudinally and transversely with fixed controls spaced no more than num ft .
compact and smooth the surface over its full width using a smooth faced steelwheeled roller or if rolling is not feasible by num num soil cement base course mechanical tampers and vibratory compactors as approved .
maintain the finished grade within num in .
from the established grade .
num finishing .
shape the surface of the base material to the specified line grade and cross section .
num compaction .
immediately after placement compact the soil cement base to a density of at least num percent of the maximum density as determined by t num .
measure the in place density per msmt num .
furnish a compaction block as specified in num .
at the start of compaction maintain the moisture in the mixture to within num percent of the specified optimum moisture .
begin compaction operations except on superelevated curves at the sides of the course .
overlap the shoulder or berm at least num ft and progress toward the center parallel to the center line of the roadway .
on superelevated curves begin compaction at the low side and progress toward the high side .
continue compaction operations until all compaction marks are removed .
num construction joints .
at the end of each days construction create a straight transverse construction joint by cutting back into the completed work to form a vertical face .
build the base for large wide areas as a series of parallel lanes of convenient length and width complete with longitudinal joints as approved .
num protection and curing .
complete all spreading compacting and shaping within three hours after the mixing water cement and soil come in contact .
reconstruct any section not meeting these requirements .
maintain the surface of the base course in a moist condition until the emulsified asphalt is applied .
use distributing equipment conforming to num to apply the emulsified asphalt at the rate of num galydnum .
avoid ponding of the emulsified asphalt .
if ponding occurs use a sand blotter or an equivalent method as approved .
allow the soil cement base course to cure for a period of seven days .
during this period close the base course to all traffic .
repair damaged areas .
num maintenance .
during construction and after completion of the base course maintain the base course until the surface course is placed .
when unacceptable work can not be repaired replace it for the full depth of the base .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for control strip and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num num chip seal surface treatment num soilcement base course will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
surface area measurements will be based on the specified width of the base and the actual length measured along the center line of the base surface .
num portland cement for soilcement base course will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
section num chip seal surface treatment num description .
apply one or two seal coats or a prime coat followed by one or two seal coats as specified .
the seal coat consists of emulsified asphalt followed by an application of aggregate .
the prime coat when required consists of preparing and treating an existing surface with emulsified asphalt .
num materials .
material section application size or grade spread rate lbydnum spray temp f spray rate single coat or first coat galydnum spray rate for second coat double galydnum aggregate num single or first coat no .
num num second double coat no .
num num crsnum num num num emulsified asphalts num seal coat crsnum num num num rsnum num num num rsnum num num num num construction .
at least num days prior to the start of placement of the chip seal surface treatment submit a proposed plan including equipment and material sources for approval .
protect the treated pavement against damage from all causes .
repair or replace damaged areas as directed .
num equipment .
all equipment is subject to approval .
num num chip seal surface treatment a asphalt distributing equipment .
this equipment shall be inspected and calibrated by the administration prior to use and shall bear a current administration inspection and calibration tag .
a calibration chart showing the total capacity in gallons of the distributor tank and the fractional capacity for each num in .
of tank depth shall be carried in the unit .
the unit shall be capable of uniformly applying the specified material on variable widths of surface at the rates specified in num .
in addition the equipment shall include the following num a fifth wheel tachometer for maintaining uniform speed .
num a thermometer graduated in num f increments to determine the specified temperature ranges .
num heaters for uniformly heating the materials to the proper temperatures .
num full circulation spray bars that are laterally and vertically adjustable plus a hand spray .
num a calibrated tank to determine the quantity of asphalt in each load and the amount used .
num a valve or petcock built into the equipment for sampling the asphalt .
num a motor driven pump with pressure gauges to deliver the material to the spray bars .
when a variable speed pump and metering system is used provide charts prepared by the manufacturer for selecting the proper pump speed for each application .
b aggregate spreader .
use equipment that is either selfpropelled or attached to a truck tailgate .
c rollers .
refer to numc .
num weather restrictions .
place when the ambient air and surface temperatures are at least num f and rising and the pavement is clean and dry .
when weather conditions differ from these limits placement of material en route from the plant to the job site shall be at the contractors risk .
when the engineer stops placement of the material dispose of all material en route at no additional cost to the administration .
num foundation preparation .
construct the foundation as specified .
when paving over existing pavement repair ruts and potholes num num chip seal surface treatment to provide a smooth surface for the application of the chip seal surface treatment .
num prime coat .
prior to the application clean the surface of all loose and foreign materials .
uniformly apply the prime coat to the surface at the application rate specified in num .
remove pooled material before applying the next coat .
num first seal coat .
a no sooner than num hours after the application of the prime coat spray emulsified asphalt on the surface at the application rate specified in num. b immediately following this asphalt application spread a dry dust free aggregate on the surface at the application rate specified in num .
remove excess aggregate and correct all areas containing insufficient aggregate .
num rolling .
immediately following the aggregate application roll the surface until the aggregate is uniformly embedded into the asphalt .
discontinue rolling if the aggregate begins to crush .
num second seal coat .
when specified after the first seal coat has cured at least num hours apply a second seal coat to the surface omitting the prime coat .
apply emulsified asphalt and aggregate at the application rate specified in num .
remove excess aggregate and correct all areas containing insufficient aggregate .
roll the surface as specified in num .
num traffic .
close completed sections to traffic until the final seal coat has completely cured .
maintain the treated surface after it has been opened to traffic until final acceptance .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for the foundation preparation and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
chip seal surface treatment will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for one or more of the items listed below .
num no .
num aggregate for single coat chip seal surface treatment per ton .
num no .
num aggregate for second coat chip seal surface treatment per ton .
num num emulsified asphalt for seal coat per gallon .
the actual number of gallons of emulsified asphalt distributed will be corrected to the corresponding volume at num f as determined by use of conversion tables furnished by the administration .
section num hot mix asphalt pavement num description .
construct hot mix asphalt hma pavement .
num materials .
performance graded asphalt binders num tack coat num hot mix asphalt mixes num crack filler num production plant num num construction .
quality control plan .
at least num days prior to the placement of any hma pavement submit a plant quality control plan to the office of materials technology omt and a field quality control plan to the district engineers representative for approval .
the quality control plans shall contain a statistically based procedure of random sampling and shall show how the contractor proposes to control the equipment materials production and paving operations to ensure conformance with these specifications .
a master plant and field quality control plan shall be submitted for this prior to approval .
when a master field quality control plan is submitted and approved an addendum shall be submitted for each specific contract .
the contractor shall discuss the qc plan requirements in the preconstruction prepave and progress meetings .
the field quality control plan shall contain a production plants location of plants with respect to the project site personnel qualifications inspection and record keeping methods and minimum frequencies of sampling and testing as specified in msmt num table num. b corrective actions that will be taken for unsatisfactory construction practices and deviations from the material specifications .
num hot mix asphalt pavement num num hot mix asphalt pavement c a quality control plan for the plant which addresses all elements necessary for quality control .
plan administrator and certified technicians .
the quality control plan shall designate a plan administrator who shall have full authority to institute any action necessary for the successful operation of the plan .
the plan administrator may supervise the quality control plan on more than one project if that person can be in contact with the job site within one hour after being notified of a problem .
as identified in the midatlantic region technician certification program martcp and the maryland technician certification program the quality control plan shall also designate a certified hma plant technician level num a certified hma field technician a certified inertial profiler operator and if used a certified hma plant technician level num a certified hma materials testerfield technician or any trainee technicians .
a certified plant technician shall be present at the plant during production and shipment of hma for the administration unless otherwise approved in the field quality control plan .
the technician shall perform the quality control sampling testing and documentation in conformance with the approved quality control plan and contract documents .
a certified field technician shall be present at the job site unless otherwise approved in the field quality control plan .
the certified technician shall be responsible for the required field quality control sampling and testing in conformance with the approved quality control plan and contract documents .
any deviation from the approved quality control plan shall be cause for immediate suspension of the production and paving operations .
in addition to quality control testing the contractors or producers technician certified by the administration shall perform sampling for quality control sampling for quality assurance sampling for acceptance and sampling for verification .
submit quality control test results to the engineer when requested .
when a certified technician is deficient in their duties as defined in msmt num and the midatlantic region technician certification program policy manual the technicians certification will be rescinded .
replace the deficient technician with another certified technician before resuming production and paving operations for the administration .
num num hot mix asphalt pavement records .
maintain and make available to the engineer upon request complete records of sampling testing actions taken to correct problems and quality control inspection results .
provide copies of the reports when requested .
the contractor shall maintain linear control charts or may elect to use other types of control charts such as standard deviation or range .
control charts may be maintained by production by mix or by mix per project .
current control charts shall be maintained in the quality control laboratory in a manner satisfactory to the engineer .
as a minimum the control charts shall identify the mix design number each test result and the upper and lower specification limits applicable to each test .
quality assurance qa .
the administration will perform qa by conducting independent sampling testing and inspection activities separate from the contractor and producer .
the engineer will perform the following to assure the quality of the hma pavement a periodically observe tests performed by the producer or contractor b monitor required control charts c direct the producer or contractor to take mix samples behind the paver prior to compaction d direct the producer or contractor to take mix samples at the plant site e direct the producer or contractor to take core samples from the compacted pavement f monitor conformance with the approved quality control plans and g evaluate quality control sampling and testing procedures and quality control sampling and testing equipment by an independent assurance ia program .
protect the pavement against damage from all causes .
repair or replace damaged pavement .
num equipment .
all equipment including the production plant and paving equipment shall be subject to approval .
have the plant ready for inspection at least num hours prior to the start of construction operations .
num num hot mix asphalt pavement a hauling units .
refer to numf .
b pavers .
inspection and approval will be based upon the manufacturers specification manual copy to be provided by the contractor on request .
the paver shall be equipped with means of preventing the segregation of the coarse aggregate particles when moving the mixture from the paver hopper to the paver augers .
the means and methods used shall be in accordance with the paver manufacturers instructions and may consist of chain curtains deflector plates or other such devices or any combination of these .
the contractor shall demonstrate to the engineer prior to use that the modifications to the paving equipment have been implemented on all pavers to be used on the project .
for mainline paving use a highway class num pounds or greater selfcontained selfpropelled unit .
for nonmainline paving a paver less than num num pounds may be used .
the paver shall num produce a finished surface of the required smoothness and texture without tearing shoving or gouging the mixture .
num be operated in a manner which delivers a homogeneous mixture the full width of the pavement .
num have automatic controls capable of maintaining the grade and transverse slope within the required tolerances set forth in the contract documents .
when screed extensions are used use auger extensions to maintain a distance no greater than num in .
from the end of the auger to the end gate .
manual operation will be permitted to make grade changes in the construction of irregularly shaped and minor areas .
whenever a breakdown or malfunction of any automatic control occurs the equipment may be operated manually for the remainder of the workday as directed .
provide reference lines or other approved markings to control the horizontal alignment .
num num hot mix asphalt pavement c rollers .
all rollers shall be inspected by the contractor and approved by the engineer before use .
rollers shall be self propelled reversible and steel wheeled or pneumatic tired .
the roller shall be operated num in conformity with the manufacturers recommendations .
num in a manner that does not damage the mat .
num in a manner that delivers the optimal combination of densification requirements and ride requirements .
num weather restrictions .
place hma mixtures used as the final surface when the ambient air and surface temperatures are at least num f. place mixtures used as intermediate and base layers when the ambient air and surface temperatures are at least num f and place polymermodified surface mixes when the ambient air and surface temperatures are at least num f. the pavement surfaces shall be clean dry and approved by the engineer before hma paving begins .
when weather conditions differ from these limits or when it begins raining while the work is underway the contractor is allowed to use material en route from the plant at the contractors risk .
the engineer reserves the right to perform any testing necessary to ensure the quality of the pavement .
all testing and associated cost including maintenance of traffic will be at the contractors expense .
if the engineer stops placement of the material all material en route shall be wasted at no additional cost to the administration .
do not place hma on a frozen graded aggregate base .
num foundation preparation .
prior to placement of paving material the foundation shall be constructed as specified .
when paving over existing pavement remove all excess crack filling and patch material .
all spalls and potholes shall be cleaned tack coated filled with hma and tamped before placement of paving material .
manholes valve boxes inlets and other appurtenances within the area to be paved shall be adjusted to grade as directed .
num tack coat .
prior to applying the tack coat remove all loose and foreign materials from the surface .
apply using full circulation spray bars that are laterally and vertically adjustable and that provide triple fanning and overlapping action .
the resulting coating shall be residual asphalt uniformly applied at a rate of num to num galydnum as directed .
num num hot mix asphalt pavement num hot mix asphalt placement .
delivery of the mixture by the hauling units and placement should be continuous .
at the time of placement the temperature of the mixture shall be at least num f or as identified in the approved quality control plan for field operations .
hma shall be placed by the paver .
do not broadcast loose mixture over the new surface .
num compaction .
immediately following placement of the hma roll the mixture to compact to the proper inplace density and ride smoothness requirement .
incentive or disincentive price adjustment for density will be as specified in num .
incentive or disincentive price adjustment for ride smoothness will be as specified in the contract documents .
use steel wheel rollers for the first rolling of all joints and edges the initial breakdown rolling and the finish rolling .
when base widening is too narrow to permit the use of conventional rollers use a power driven trench roller .
when the trench must be excavated wider than the proposed width of the widening form an earth berm or shoulder against the loose hma as soon as it is placed .
roll and compact the two materials simultaneously .
roller marks shall not be visible after rolling operations .
after rolling is completed no traffic of any kind will be permitted on the pavement until the pavement has cooled to less than num f. num joints .
both longitudinal and transverse joints in successive courses shall be staggered so that one is not above the other .
stagger transverse joints by the length of the paver .
stagger longitudinal joints at least num in .
and arrange so that the longitudinal joint in the top course is within num in .
of the line dividing the traffic lanes .
construct joints in a manner to provide a continuous bond between the old and new surfaces .
when constructing longitudinal joints adjacent to existing hma pavements overlap the existing pavement numinch to numinches .
the initial longitudinal roller pass shall be on the uncompacted hot mat and num inches to numfoot from the joint .
the successive roller pass shall compact the overlapped material and the numinch to numfoot material simultaneously .
apply tack coat to joints as directed .
when placing a surface course cut back the edge of the existing pavement for its full depth at transverse joints to expose a fresh surface and apply tack coat material as directed .
before placing the mixture against curbs gutters headers manholes etc .
apply tack coat to all contact surfaces .
num num hot mix asphalt pavement num edge dropoff .
where hma paving is being applied to highways carrying traffic all compacted pavement courses exceeding num in .
in depth shall be matched with the abutting lane or shoulder on the same working day .
where compacted pavement courses of num in .
or less are placed the contractor shall have the option of paving the abutting lane or shoulder on alternate days .
pave the abutting lane or shoulder prior to weekends and temporary shutdowns regardless of the depth of the compacted pavement course .
when uneven pavement joints exist place advance warning traffic control devices in conformance with the contract documents .
num tiein .
when hma paving is being applied to the traveled way carrying traffic with a posted speed num mph construct a temporary tiein at least num ft in length for each num in .
of pavement depth .
when hma paving is being applied to the traveled way carrying traffic with a posted speed num mph construct a temporary tiein at least num ft in length for each num in .
of pavement depth .
construct temporary tieins before traffic is allowed to cross the transverse joint .
construct temporary tieins numft or greater using a paver meeting the requirements of section num .
at the final tiein point remove a transverse portion of the existing pavement to a depth so the design thickness of the final surface course is maintained .
construct the final tiein to a length equal to the posted speed per num in .
depth of the design thickness of the final course with a length of at least num ft per num in .
depth and a maximum length of num ft per num in .
depth .
num sampling testing for mixture .
quality control qc sampling and testing shall be the responsibility of the producer or contractor .
the field qc plan shall identify the qc sampling location plant site or project site .
quality assurance qa sampling shall be performed by the contractor as directed and witnessed by the administration .
qa samples shall be obtained behind the paver prior to compaction .
qa testing shall be the responsibility of the administration .
a qc sampling for mixture at the plant site .
plant site mixture sampling shall be completed in conformance with msmt num method a .
the samples shall be obtained randomly .
at least one mixture sample per days shipment per mix or one per num tons of shipment per mix whichever yields a higher frequency shall be obtained .
the producer shall sample the mixture at the plant site .
the sample shall be obtained or witnessed by the certified technician .
qc plant site mixture sample results shall not be used in the pay factor calculation .
num num hot mix asphalt pavement b qc sampling for mixture at the project site .
project site mixture sampling shall be completed in conformance with msmt num .
the samples shall be obtained randomly and independent of qa mixture samples .
qc and qa samples shall not be split samples .
at least one mixture sample per paving day per mix or one per num tons of paving per mix whichever yields a higher frequency shall be obtained .
the contractors certified technician shall sample the mixture at the project site .
a mixture sublot size should not exceed num tons .
a sublot size up to num tons can be combined with the previous num ton sublot placed on the same day .
a mix lot constitutes all sublots of a mix created during the production of required tonnage for a lot as defined herein .
a new lot number for a mix will be given when there is a change in the approved job mix formula .
qc project site mixture sample results may be used in the pay factor calculation .
c qa sampling for mixture at the project site .
project site mixture sampling shall be completed in conformance with msmt num .
the samples shall be obtained randomly .
at least one mixture sample per paving day per mix or one per num tons of paving per mix whichever yields a higher frequency shall be obtained from behind the paver prior to compaction .
the contractors certified technician shall sample the mixture at the project site as witnessed by the administration .
the administration will immediately take possession of the qa mixture sample and deliver the sample to the laboratory for testing .
a mixture sublot size should not exceed num tons .
a sublot size up to num tons can be combined with the previous num ton sublot placed on the same day .
a mix lot constitutes all sublots of a mix created during the production of required tonnage for a lot as defined herein .
a new lot number for a mix will be given when there is a change in the approved job mix formula .
mixture acceptance determination .
an hma mixture acceptance lot size is approximately equal to num tons of a mix per project .
a mix acceptance lot ends on the day when num tons is reached .
a mixture sublot size should not exceed num tons .
a sublot size up to num tons can be combined with the previous num ton sublot placed on the same day .
a mix lot constitutes all sublots of a mix created during the production of required tonnage for a lot as defined herein .
a new lot number for a mix will be given when there is a change in the approved job mix formula .
the administration will test at least three behind the paver mixture num num hot mix asphalt pavement samples per acceptance lot in conformance with msmt num for asphalt content and gradation .
when qc samples are taken randomly from behind the paver the qc results and qa results from behind the paver will be compared based on the analysis in conformance with msmt num f test and t test method for each pay factor property in msmt num .
when f test and t test method results indicate a qc and qa pay factor property is not from different populations qc and qa results will be combined to calculate the mix pay factor property in accordance with msmt num and num .
when f test and t test method indicate a qc and qa pay factor property is from different populations the pay factor property will be determined using qa results only .
the administration will determine the acceptance evaluation procedure when less than three qa behind the paver samples are obtained for an acceptance lot .
the administrations laboratory will make the results of the individual days paving available to the engineer and the hma producer within five working days .
num sampling testing for density determination .
quality control qc sampling and testing shall be the responsibility of the producer or contractor .
quality assurance qa sampling shall be performed by the contractor as directed and witnessed by the administration .
qa testing shall be the responsibility of the administration .
the engineer will select at random the core sampling locations for each sublot in conformance with msmt num .
the contractor shall sample the qc and qa cores in conformance with msmt num as witnessed by the engineer .
a minimum of num cores per days paving per mix or two per num tons of paving per mix whichever yields the higher frequency of cores shall be taken .
a density lot is defined as a days paving per mix .
a sublot shall not exceed num tons .
the engineer will designate one core sample for qc and one for qa for each sublot .
a paving day shall begin with a new lot and sublots .
control strips shall be divided into five equal sublots .
the diameter of the cores shall be num in .
except that a num in .
core may be used for mixes smaller than num mm .
the engineer will note any density waivers on the daily field density forms with remarks for the waivers .
a quality control qc for density .
the contractor shall obtain and test one core per sublot for quality control .
the qc laboratory will test core samples in conformance with msmt num .
the density of the core samples will be expressed as a percentage of the maximum specific gravity of the mixture for each lots placement .
the maximum specific gravity will be determined in accordance with t num and the cores percent density will be expressed to the nearest num .
when more than one mixture sample is obtained per days placement an average of all maximum num num hot mix asphalt pavement specific gravity tests for the day will be used for the determination of percent density of each core sample .
the qc laboratory will make results of individual days paving available to the engineer and the contractor no later than the next working day .
the contractor shall retain core samples until notified of the results of the f t test .
b quality assurance qa for density .
the administration shall obtain and test one core per sublot for quality assurance .
the engineer will take immediate possession of the core samples and deliver the cores to the administrations laboratory for testing .
the laboratory will test core samples in conformance with msmt num .
the density of the core samples will be expressed as a percentage of the maximum specific gravity of the mixture for each lots placement .
the maximum specific gravity will be determined in accordance with t num and the cores percent density will be expressed to the nearest num percent .
when more than one mixture sample is obtained per days placement an average of all maximum specific gravity tests for the day will be used for the determination of percent density of each core sample .
the laboratory will make results of individual days paving available to the engineer and the hma producer within five working days .
c acceptance .
each hma density lot will be evaluated for compliance using the engineers quality assurance test data and the contractors qc data .
the qc and qa core specific gravity data will be analyzed in conformance with msmt num f test and t test method .
when test results are determined to be from the same population qc and qa sublot results will be averaged to calculate the density pay factor in accordance with and num .
when results are determined not from the same population the pay factor will be calculated using qa sublot results only .
the average qc maximum specific gravity test results and the average project site behind the paver qa maximum specific gravity test results shall be compared .
when qc results and qa results compare within num the average of the combined qc and qa results shall be used to calculate each core density .
when they do not compare within num qa maximum specific gravity results shall be used to determine each core density .
sublot density and lot density shall be between num and num percent .
pay reduction or incentive for the pavement compaction lot will be calculated in conformance with num .
the process for determining statistical outliers will be in conformance with msmt num .
an hma density lot size shall equal one paving days production per mix .
a lot shall be divided into a minimum of five equal sublots .
a sublot shall not be greater than num tons .
when a num num hot mix asphalt pavement paving days production per mix is greater than num tons then each sublot size shall be num tons or fraction thereof .
on contracts requiring less than num tons of hma or when hma is used in nontraffic areas or on bridge decks acceptance will be determined by the use of a thin layer density gauge tested in conformance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num thin lifts and wedgelevel courses .
pavement density shall be determined by using density gauge readings .
when the hma course is determined by the engineer to be a thin lift in accordance with the thin lift mix design identification table in section num construct a num to num ft control strip on the first day of paving .
readings shall be taken in five num random locations with a thin layer density gauge in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations to determine roller patterns and the number of coverages to obtain optimum density .
optimum density is defined as when the average density does not change by more than num percent between successive coverages and the percent density is between num and num .
this optimum density shall be used to determine hma acceptance after approval by the engineer .
any lot average num percent or more below optimum density shall require a new control strip to be constructed tested and approved before paving continues .
readings shall be taken in a minimum of num random locations per days paving per mix or two per num tons of paving per mix whichever yields the higher frequency of locations .
a density lot is defined as a days paving per mix .
a sublot shall not exceed num tons .
a paving day shall begin with a new lot and sublots .
wedgelevel courses placed at variable thicknesses shall be tested and accepted in accordance with this thin lift specification .
num control strip .
when mixes are not determined to be thin lifts the contractor may opt to construct a control strip for guidance in determining roller patterns to achieve optimum density .
when a control strip is constructed it shall be placed on the first workday in which hma is placed and shall be between num and num ft in length .
based on the contractors evaluation of the initial control strip paving may continue at the contractors risk .
the contractor will not be assessed a density pay adjustment for the amount of material required for construction of the control strips .
should the removal of any control strip be necessary the contractor shall remove it at no additional cost to the administration .
num num hot mix asphalt pavement the engineer may require the contractor to construct a control strip any time during placement of hma based on the evaluation of compaction results .
num pavement surface checks .
have an approved num ft straightedge available at all times .
after final compaction of each course the surface of each pavement course shall be true to the established line and grade and shall be sufficiently smooth so that when tested with the straightedge placed upon the surface parallel with the center line the surface does not deviate more than num in .
the transverse slope of the finished surface of each course when tested with the straightedge placed perpendicular to the center line shall not deviate more than num in .
check transverse joints using the straightedge immediately after the initial rolling .
when the surface of each course varies more than num in .
from true make immediate corrections so that the finished joint surface is within tolerance .
areas that are tested and reported in accordance with the pavement surface profile specification are not applicable to num .
num curbs gutters etc .
where permanent curbs gutters edges and other supports are planned they shall be constructed and backfilled prior to placing the hma .
num shoulders .
shoulders abutting the hma surface course of any twolane pavement that is being used by traffic shall be completed as soon as possible after completion of the surface course on that lane .
construct shoulders as specified .
num pavement profile .
refer to the pavement surface profile requirements specified in the contract documents .
num measurement and payment .
hot mix asphalt pavement will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
the payment will be full compensation for furnishing hauling placing all materials including antistripping additive tack coat control strip pot hole and spall repairs setting of lines and grades where specified and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
temporary tieins .
placement and removal of the temporary tiein where hot mix asphalt is being applied to the traveled way carrying traffic will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the pertinent hot mix asphalt item .
num num hot mix asphalt pavement removal of the existing pavement or structure for the final tiein will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for the pertinent items used .
the hot mix asphalt for the final tiein will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for the pertinent hot mix asphalt item .
adjustments .
adjustment of existing visible manholes valve boxes inlets or other structures will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the hot mix asphalt item .
adjustment of existing manholes valve boxes inlets or other structures that are encountered below the existing grade will be considered for payment in conformance with gpnum .
removal of existing raisedrecessed pavement markers .
removal of existing raisedrecessed pavement markers will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the hot mix asphalt item .
removal of existing raisedrecessed pavement markers that are encountered below the existing pavement will be considered for payment in conformance with gpnum .
num price adjustment for asphalt binder .
an adjustment will be made to the final contract unit price for hot mix asphalt if the price of asphalt binder fluctuates significantly from the prevailing price as quoted in the contract documents to the date of placement .
this includes hma patching material converted to tons .
the contract unit price will be adjusted by the amount of fluctuation above num percent for contracts scheduled to be paved during more than one construction season or having an estimated mix quantity of num num tons or more .
for contracts completed within one construction season and having an estimated mix quantity of less than num num tons the adjustment will be based upon the amount of fluctuation above num percent .
only the differential percent change beyond the above noted num and num percent will be used .
for the purpose of making these calculations a monthly price index will be maintained by the administration .
the adjusted contract unit price for hot mix asphalt will be computed monthly by using the following formula f pp pb pb num where f percent price increasedecrease of asphalt binder .
pp index price of asphalt binder per ton at placement date .
num num hot mix asphalt pavement pb prevailing index price of asphalt binder per ton as specified in the invitation for bids .
adjusted contract unit price due contractor when price of asphalt binder increases a b d t pb adjusted contract unit price due administration when price of asphalt binder decreases a b d t pb where a adjusted contract unit price per ton of hot mix asphalt .
b contract unit price per ton of hot mix asphalt .
d differential percentage expressed as a decimal f num percent or f num percent as defined above .
t design target asphalt content expressed as a decimal .
pb prevailing index price of asphalt binder per ton as specified in the invitation for bids .
num price adjustment for hot mix asphalt mixture and pavement density .
a price adjustment will be made as specified in gpnum when the hot mix asphalt properties or pavement density does not conform to specifications .
the contract unit price will be adjusted for noncompliance with hma properties and pavement density in conformance with these procedures .
a pay reduction or incentive payment adjustment for pavement density will be based on individual sublot core test data for a given lot and the lot average density as specified in this section .
pay adjustment due to noncompliance with the density requirements or incentive pay adjustment will be made against the adjusted contract unit price for hot mix asphalt in conformance with table numa .
price adjustment will be waived for that portion of the pavement where the engineer determines that inadequate density is due to a poor foundation .
num num hot mix asphalt pavement table numa dense graded hma mixes percent of maximum density lot average minimum no individual sublot below pay factor num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num num num or rejected by engineer note num when any test data is above num the lot may be rejected per the engineer .
when not rejected the lot will receive a pay adjustment in accordance with the following num num hot mix asphalt pavement a when the density lot average is above num the pay factor num b when num sublot densities are above num the pay factor num c when num or more sublot densities are above num the pay factor num note num pay incentive or pay disincentive will not be paid for placements identified as wedgelevel courses or thin lift courses .
note num when the contractors core specific gravity data does not compare with the administrations core specific gravity data only the administrations single sublot values and lot average value will be used in acceptance decision .
note num the average sublot values and the lot average will be used in acceptance decision .
acceptance of a mixture lot will be in conformance with sections num num and msmt num .
a composite pay factor cpf for asphalt content and gradation will be based on the total estimated percent of the lot that is within specification limits as computed using the quality level analysis in conformance with msmt num .
the lot payment for inplace density will be computed using the following formula lpipd cp df tl where lpipd lot payment inplace density cp contract unit price df density pay factor from table numa tl tonnage per lot .
the lot payment for asphalt content and gradation will be computed using the following formula lpmd cp mf tl where lpmd lot payment for mix design cp contract unit price tl tonnage per lot mf mixture pay factor refer to msmt num for cmpwsl mf num num cmpwsl an inplace density lot containing material with a pay factor of less than num may be accepted at the reduced pay factor provided the pay num num hot mix asphalt pavement factor for density is at least num and there are no isolated defects identified by the engineer .
a mixture lot containing material with a pay factor of less than num may be accepted at the reduced pay factor provided the composite pay factor for asphalt content and grading is at least num and there are no isolated defects identified by the engineer .
an inplace density lot containing nonconforming material that fails to obtain at least a num pay factor and a mixture lot containing nonconforming material that fails to obtain at least num pay factor for asphalt content and gradation will be evaluated by the engineer to determine its acceptance .
when the engineer determines to reject a lot the lot shall be replaced at no additional cost to the administration .
when less than five quality control or quality assurance samples per inplace density lot have been obtained the lot will not be evaluated for incentive payment .
when less than three mix samples have been obtained at the time of the acceptance sampling or at the time a lot is terminated the engineer will determine if the material in a shortened lot will be considered a part of the previous lot or will be accepted based on the individual test data .
num control strip price adjustment .
the cost of the control strip if constructed will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the pertinent hot mix asphalt item .
num dispute resolution .
this is a general procedure to resolve conflicts resulting from discrepancies between test results from the engineer and contractor and nontest related disputes of sufficient magnitude to impact payment .
when a dispute arises the producer or engineer will file a written complaint to the chief engineer describing the nature of the dispute along with the pertinent information .
the chief engineer will appoint a panel of three members to resolve the conflict .
the panel will include a member selected by the asphalt industry .
the panel will make recommendations to the chief engineer .
the chief engineer will decide the disposition of the dispute based on the panels recommendations .
a written report from the panel describing all subsequent actions and final disposition of the dispute shall be included in the project records .
if subsequent disputes arise on the same issue the written report will be included as a resource during the resolution process .
num num hot mix asphalt patches section num hot mix asphalt patches num description .
repair rigid flexible or composite pavements by removing part or all of the section of the existing pavement and replacing the removed materials using hot mix asphalt hma paving material .
the locations and extent of the repairs will be as specified or as directed .
partial depth patching pdp .
pdp consists of the removal of areas of unsound pavement material up to a num percent of the pavement thickness and replacement with hma .
the pavement thickness is defined as the thickness of all bound materials in the pavement structure including hma portland cement concrete pcc and any other asphalt or cement modified materials .
full depth patching fdp .
fdp consists of the removal of the full thickness of the pavement sections to the top of the aggregate base material and replacement with hma .
construct fdp whenever more than num percent of the pavement thickness requires repair .
num materials .
graded aggregate base num aggregates for hma num aggregates for superpave mixes num and mpnum performance graded asphalt binders and hot mix asphalt num crack filler num production plant num num construction .
keep disturbance to the base material to a minimum .
the faces of the remaining pavement shall be square and vertical without ragged edges .
do not use equipment that could damage the existing pavement .
num weather restrictions .
section num .
num existing pavement .
each day complete all repairs for which excavation has been completed .
do not leave open excavated areas at the end of the work day .
removal of pavement for pdp .
remove existing pavement by milling grinding or saw cutting and removal to the specified depth .
maintain square vertical faces after removal .
where concrete is encountered limit num num hot mix asphalt patches the depth of the patch to the top elevation of the pcc .
prior to application of the patch remove all loose and foreign materials .
for pdp of composite pavements protect the pcc from damage during removal of the hma .
before placing the patch treat all spalled cracks and joints by tack coating and filling and tamping with hma .
when the material at the bottom of the pdp is determined to be unsuitable remove additional material until sound material is encountered .
when pcc is encountered in a composite pavement and is determined to be unsuitable follow the removal and replacement procedures for a fdp .
removal of pavement for fdp .
make a perpendicular saw cut full depth around the perimeter and remove the existing pavement to the top of the aggregate base .
refer to the applicable portions of num for the concrete portion of a composite pavement .
maintain square vertical faces after saw cutting .
num base and subgrade preparation .
the engineer will evaluate the aggregate base of the fdp area to determine if it is suitable .
when it is determined to be unstable compact it as specified in num .
when no aggregate base is present construct the subgrade foundation as specified in section num or as directed .
when the aggregate base or subgrade material is unsuitable replace the material with graded aggregate base conforming to section num .
this operation is defined as the removal of unsuitable material and refill .
compact the replacement aggregate material in layers no greater than num in .
depth .
immediately remove and dispose of the existing pavement materials .
protect the aggregate base or subgrade after preparation .
no payment will be made for removal and replacement of subgrade that was not protected .
num subgrade drains .
the engineer may direct that subgrade drains be constructed in areas of wet underlying subgrade or areas where there may be a future drainage problem .
for construction refer to section num .
num emergency filler .
have sufficient approved cold patch material readily available to fill the void of the repair area .
place and compact the material when directed .
at the beginning of the next days work completely remove the material .
num steel plates .
have readily available on site an ample supply of num x num ft by num in .
thick steel plates to cover the emergency filler .
num patch construction .
complete patch construction as specified in the applicable portions of section num .
manual operation will be permitted for placement of the hma .
cores control strip and num num hot mix asphalt patches pavement profile measurements are waived .
furnish equipment and perform placement compaction and quality control procedures as approved .
num patch placement .
prior to placing the hma thoroughly clean and tack coat the exposed vertical surface of adjacent pavement as specified in num .
spread the hma mixture by shovel rake or other approved method approved .
do not place hma on a frozen base .
maintain lift thickness in conformance with the following hma superpave lift thickness mix designation mm minimum in .
maximum in .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num testing and acceptance .
acceptance will be determined by in place density gauge test data witnessed by the engineer .
calibrate the density gauge per the manufacturers recommendation .
take one test from each lift of each patch .
randomly select test locations within the patch .
in place density gauge test data shall be expressed as a percentage of the maximum specific gravity determined for each days production .
an in place density of num to num percent is required for each patch .
compliance will be determined for each patch separately by averaging all density tests performed within each specific patch .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for saw cutting milling grinding removal disposal trimming of the existing pavement subgrade preparation placing all materials including tack coat steel plates emergency filler and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
after removal steel plates and emergency filler will remain the property of the contractor .
num num hot mix asphalt gapgraded num partial depth patching and full depth patching will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard or per ton as specified .
the payment will be full compensation for furnishing hauling placing all material additional removal of pavement above the aggregate base and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num removal of unsuitable material and refill will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
the payment will also include excavation and disposal of unsuitable material backfilling with aggregate and compaction .
section num hot mix asphalt gapgraded num description .
place hot mix asphalt gapgraded surface hmagg .
hmagg shall conform to section num except as specified herein .
num materials .
hot mix asphalt gapgraded num production plant num num construction .
num demonstration .
before proceeding with the actual work demonstrate to the engineer that a satisfactory mix can be produced placed and the compactive effort determined .
place at least num tons of hmagg outside the project limits for the demonstration .
a new strip will be required if a project carries over to a new season .
for paver and rollers requirements refer to num .
a material transfer vehicle may be used in placing the demonstration strip .
num hauling units .
dry soap powder as approved may be used with the release agent specified in numf .
raise truck beds to drain excess water before loading .
a light dusting of no .
num aggregate coated with num percent asphalt may be used in lieu of the liquid release agent .
limit the time between plant mixing and shipment to one hour .
storage time may vary depending upon gradation type of binder and stabilizer .
storage material shall consistently have results of no less quality than mixtures discharged directly into hauling vehicles .
num num hot mix asphalt gapgraded completely cover each load with a full tarp extending at least num in .
over each side of the truck body and fasten securely .
num weather restrictions .
place hmagg when the ambient and surface temperatures are at least num f and rising .
num material transfer vehicle mtv .
place the final surface course using a material transfer vehicle .
use an mtv that performs additional mixing of the gapgraded material and then deposits the mixture into the paver at a uniform temperature and consistency .
num mix temperature .
the minimum temperature of the mixture required at the time of placement shall be established as part of the mix design procedure .
num pavement thickness .
place the pavement to the specified thickness .
num tack coat .
refer to num except apply tack coat so that the resulting residual asphalt coating is applied at a rate of num to num galydnum .
num compaction .
start rolling immediately after placement using at least three static steelwheeled rollers each weighing num to num tons following within num ft of the paver .
for in place density refer to numc except that the density requirement is num to num percent of maximum density .
perform sampling and testing as specified in num .num and .num .
use rollers equipped with a watering or soapy watering system that prevents material from sticking to the rollers .
do not use the vibratory mode without written approval .
maintain a roller speed of between num and num mph .
complete compaction before the mix cools below num f. do not use pneumatic wheeled rollers on hmagg .
num control strip .
prior to starting paving construct a full lane width control strip on the finished grade at least num ft in length .
the control strip will be used by to evaluate the application of the tack coat and to determine the compactive effort .
if compaction is not obtainable using rollers in static mode high frequency vibratory rollers may be used for breakdown rolling with the approval of the engineer .
after the control strip is complete do not deviate from the approved rolling pattern without constructing a new control strip .
density requirements will not be waived .
as determined by the engineer remove and dispose of any unacceptable control strip at no additional cost to the administration .
num num hot mix asphalt gapgraded num pavement profile .
refer to the pavement surface profile requirements specified in the contract documents .
num sampling and testing for density and mixture .
refer to num .num and .num .
num measurement and payment .
hot mix asphalt gap graded will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
the payment will be full compensation for furnishing hauling placing all materials material transfer vehicle antistripping additive tack coat control strips setting of lines and guides where specified and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
material produced for the demonstration will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the item hot mix asphalt gapgraded .
num price adjustment for hot mix asphalt mixture and pavement density .
refer to num except as follows hot mix asphalt gap graded mixes percent of maximum density lot average no individual sublot below pay factor num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num less than num num or rejected per engineer note num when any test data is above num additional pay reduction or reject per the engineer .
note num for option a section num when the contractors core density data does not compare with the administrations density data only the administrations single sublot values and lot average value will be used in the acceptance decision .
note num for option b section num the average sublot values and the lot average will be used in the acceptance decision .
num num slurry seal num dispute resolution .
refer to nume .
section num slurry seal num description .
construct a slurry seal course using a slurry seal ss or a latex modified slurry seal lmss .
num materials .
mineral filler num .num .num .num .num water num aggregate num emulsified asphalt num latex modified emulsion num num construction .
num weather restrictions .
place slurry seal when the air and surface temperatures are at least num f when it is not raining and when the local weather forecast does not predict precipitation or the temperature to fall below num f within num hours from the time the mixture is placed .
cease placement when the surface or air temperature falls below the specified limits .
any further placement is at the contractors risk .
num mixing equipment .
use a selfpropelled front feed continuous loading mixing machine .
the unit shall proportion and deliver the materials to a revolving multiblade shafted mixer and discharge it continuously and uniformly .
the mixer shall have devices that control the proportioning of each material at all times .
either calibrate the mixer for the mix design in the presence of a representative of the administration or submit certified calibration documents for approval of the engineer .
the machine shall have sufficient storage capacity for aggregate emulsified asphalt mineral filler additives and water to maintain an adequate supply of the materials for the proportioning controls .
the proper amount of mineral filler shall be added to the aggregate before introduction into the mixer .
use mixing machines equipped with water pressure systems and nozzle spray bars to provide a water spray ahead of and outside the spreader box when required .
num num slurry seal truck mounted machines with positive nonslipping aggregate delivery systems but without a front feed continuous loading feature may be used on project segments of less than num num ydnum or for spot repairs .
when truck mounted machines are used have at least two units on the project prior to construction .
num spreading equipment .
spread the slurry seal uniformly by means of a mechanical squeegee box attached to the mixer and equipped with paddles mounted on an adjustable shaft to continuously agitate and distribute the materials .
use equipment that provides sufficient turbulence to prevent the mix from setting in the box or causing excessive side buildup or lumps .
attach flexible seals where the box contacts the road front and rear to prevent loss of the mixture .
do not spray additional water into the spreader box .
num surface preparation .
apply the tack coat and slurry seal to surfaces that are clean dry and free of all objectionable materials .
apply tack coat consisting of one part asphalt emulsion to three parts water to all surfaces .
use the same emulsion type and grade as used in the slurry seal applied at a rate of num to num galydnum .
num application .
spread slurry seal to repair slight irregularities and to achieve a uniform skid resistant surface without skips lumps or tears .
use squeegees and lutes to spread the mixture in areas that are inaccessible to the spreader box and areas that require hand spreading .
when hand spreading is necessary additives may be used to provide slower setting time .
pour the slurry seal in a small windrow along one edge of the surface to be covered and then spread the material uniformly .
construct a smooth neat seam where two passes meet .
remove excess material immediately from the ends of each run .
a slurry seal .
apply ss at the rate of num num lbydnum for type ii mix and num num lbydnum for type iii mix based on the dry aggregate weight unless otherwise specified .
b latex modified slurry seal .
apply lmss in one or two coats as directed .
for roadways specified to receive one application apply lmss at the rate of num num lbydnum for type ii mix and num num lbydnum for type iii mix based on the dry aggregate weight unless otherwise specified .
when two applications are specified apply the material num num slurry seal at the combined rate of num num lbydnum for type ii mix and num num lbydnum for type iii mix .
num certification .
furnish certified weight tickets to the engineer for the emulsion latex emulsion aggregate and mineral filler .
the weight tickets will be used to determine in place application rates .
num sampling and testing .
sample the mixtures at least once daily during paving .
place each sample in a numgallon container .
submit the samples to the regional laboratory for testing .
residual asphalt content gradation stability and flow will be determined per t num t num and t num modified .
num tieins for entrances and connecting roads .
make tieins at entrances and connecting roads as directed .
num traffic .
the cure rate for permitting traffic on the pavement without damaging the surface shall be within two hours for ss and one hour for lmss .
repair traffic damaged slurry seal at no additional cost to the administration .
num measurement and payment .
slurry seal and latex modified slurry seal will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard for one or more of the pertinent items listed below .
the payment will be full compensation for furnishing and placing the aggregate tack coat tieins to entrances and connecting roads mineral filler emulsion latex emulsion and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num slurry seal using type ii mix one coat .
num slurry seal using type iii mix one coat .
num latex modified slurry seal using type ii mix one coat .
num latex modified slurry seal using type iii mix one coat .
num latex modified slurry seal using type ii mix first coat .
num latex modified slurry seal using type iii mix second coat .
num price adjustment .
material not conforming to these specifications may be accepted at a reduced price if the engineer determines that it is not detrimental to the work .
the following price adjustment will apply num num milling hot mix asphalt pavement a the residual asphalt content of samples will be averaged for each days production per lift and will be compared to the submitted mix design .
the contract unit price per square yard will be reduced num percent for each num percent the asphalt content is out of tolerance .
b the contract unit price per square yard will be reduced num percent for each gram per square foot of wet track abrasion test loss between num and num grams per msmt num .
material having a loss greater than num grams will be rejected .
c for applications less than the specified rate the contract unit price per square yard will be reduced num percent for each pound per square yard below the specified rate .
this adjustment will be determined by comparing the certified delivery tickets with the project specifications .
for applications at more that the specified rate no increase to the contract unit price will be considered .
section num milling hot mix asphalt pavement num description .
mill hot mix asphalt hma pavement .
num materials .
hot mix asphalt hma num num construction .
perform roadway patching before the milling operation .
additional roadway patching may be required after the milling operation .
refer to section num .
num equipment .
use a power operated planing machine or grinder capable of removing in one pass a layer of asphalt pavement at the specified depth and at least half the lane width .
the machine shall be capable of accurately establishing profile grade control and have a positive means for controlling slope elevation .
the machine shall be capable of preventing dust from escaping into the atmosphere .
the resultant surface shall be true to the established grade and be skid resistant .
furnish an approved num ft straightedge for testing the transverse and longitudinal surface after milling operations .
maintain a tolerance of num in .
num pavement milling .
mill one lane at a time .
if the milling depth exceeds num in .
on highways carrying traffic mill the abutting lane or shoulder on the same day .
mill the abutting lane or shoulder num num grinding hot mix asphalt pavement regardless of depth prior to weekends or temporary shutdowns .
otherwise if the milling depth is num in .
or less the abutting lane or shoulder may be milled on alternate days .
where uneven pavement joints exist provide adequate advance warning devices in conformance with the contract documents .
when hma paving is being applied to the traveled way carrying traffic with a posted speed num mph construct a temporary tiein at least num ft in length for each num in .
of pavement depth .
when hma paving is being applied to the traveled way carrying traffic with a posted speed num mph construct a temporary tiein at least num ft in length for each num in .
of pavement depth .
construct temporary tieins before traffic is allowed to cross the transverse joint .
construct temporary tieins numft or greater using a paver meeting the requirements of section num .
in addition to any other equipment required to remove debris from behind the milling operation use a vacuum equipped street sweeper to remove the dust prior to returning the area to traffic .
after the milling operation is complete fill all depressions potholes and other irregularities using hma .
construct an hma wedge at existing water valves meters manhole covers etc .
num measurement and payment .
num milling hot mix asphalt pavement will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
the square yard measurement will be computed from the actual width and length measurements of the milled area .
the payment will be full compensation for milling the disposal of milled material and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num hot mix asphalt for filling depressions and potholes and for wedging manholes valve boxes inlets or other structures will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num hot mix asphalt patches will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
section num grinding hot mix asphalt pavement num description .
grind hot mix asphalt hma pavement .
num materials .
hot mix asphalt hma num num num grinding hot mix asphalt pavement num construction .
perform roadway patching before the grinding operation .
additional roadway patching may be required after the grinding operation .
refer to section num .
num equipment .
use grinding equipment that has a cutting mandrel with carbide tipped cutting teeth and designed specifically for grinding asphalt surfaces to close tolerances .
the equipment shall accurately establish slope elevations and profile grade controls .
follow immediately behind the grinding machine with a vacuum equipped street sweeper capable of removing all loose material from the roadway without causing dust to escape into the air .
num control strip .
grind a control strip at least num ft in length with a uniformly textured surface and cross section as approved .
provide a final pavement surface with a transverse pattern of num in .
center to center of each strike area and with the difference between the high and low of the matted surface not exceeding num in .
num pavement grinding .
use the same procedures settings speed and requirements as those used in the control strip .
when necessary to maintain an adequate cross slope for drainage grind the pavement adjacent to the ground pavement .
grinding will not be required on bridge decks .
grind one lane at a time .
if the grinding depth exceeds num in .
on highways carrying traffic grind the abutting lane or shoulder on the same day .
grind the abutting lane or shoulder regardless of depth prior to weekends or temporary shutdowns .
otherwise if the grinding depth is num num in .
or less the abutting lane or shoulder may be ground on alternate days .
where uneven pavement joints exist provide adequate advance warning devices in conformance with the contract documents .
furnish an approved num ft straightedge for testing the transverse and longitudinal surface after grinding operations .
correct all areas showing high spots greater than num in .
within num ft by additional grinding at no additional cost to the administration .
straightedge requirements apply to areas across joints and repaired cracks but are not applicable to areas outside the ground area .
after the grinding operation is complete fill all depressions potholes and other irregularities using hma .
construct an hma wedge at existing water valves meters manhole covers etc .
num filling cracks in hot mix asphalt pavements num num measurement and payment .
grinding hot mix asphalt pavement will be measured and paid for at the pertinent contract unit price per square yard .
the square yard measurement will be computed from the actual width and length measurements of the area that has been ground .
the payment will be full compensation for grinding removal and disposal of ground material and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num hot mix asphalt for filling depressions and potholes and for wedging manholes valve boxes inlets or other structures will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num hot mix asphalt patches will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
section num filling cracks in hot mix asphalt pavements num description .
clean and fill cracks num to num in .
wide .
cracks less than num in .
wide do not need to be filled .
repair distressed areas as specified herein .
cracks more than num in .
wide and map edge or alligator cracks requiring major repairs are not included in this work section num .
num materials .
performance graded asphalt binders and hot mix asphalt hma num crack filler num aggregate m num no .
num tack coat m num ensure that all materials for crack filling are inspected tested and approved before incorporating them into the work .
num construction .
all cracks to be filled will be designated by the engineer .
crack cleaning and preparation .
remove existing deteriorated filler using equipment capable of removing the material to the required depth without damaging the sides of the pavement within the crack .
do not use equipment that creates a v shaped groove .
repair damage done to sound pavement resulting from construction operations .
num num filling crack in hot mix asphalt pavement clean cracks by using high pressure water blasting abrasive blasting oil free air blowing a heat lance or a combination thereof as approved .
the engineer may suspend operations when weather conditions might create a hazard to the traveling public .
before filling completely dry the cracks using an approved method .
the engineer will inspect the prepared cracks for debris adherent dust and dryness prior to filling .
reclean and dry cracks as directed .
cracks varying in width up to num in .
shall be divided into segments for repair .
portions of cracks having widths ranging from over num in .
and up to num in .
shall be sawn to the full depth of the crack and num in .
wider than the maximum width of the crack .
clean the crack of all debris as specified above and apply tack coat to the sides of the crack .
repair the crack as specified in section num using an approved surface mix .
select an appropriate asphalt content and mixing temperature .
crack filling .
perform crack filling when the ambient and pavement surface temperatures are least num f and rising unless otherwise recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the engineer .
for cracks from num to num in .
in width heat the hot applied filler material as recommended by the manufacturer in a double boiler indirect heating kettle using oil as a heat transfer medium or other approved equipment .
the kettle shall have a mechanically operated agitator recirculation pumps and a positive thermostatic temperature control .
insulate the applicator wand and all connecting hoses .
do not overheat the filler or apply direct heating .
withdraw and waste all filler that has been overheated heated more than four hours or that remains in the applicator at the end of the days operation .
prior to the start of each days operation withdraw and waste at least num gallon of filler through the applicator wand .
fill prepared and approved cracks until the material is num in .
below or level with the pavement surface .
if after two hours any filled crack is not in conformance with this requirement refill the crack as directed .
num num plain and reinforced pcc pavements if cracks can not be filled due to filler drainage into a large void repair the crack by plugging the void with hma superpave num mm or other approved material .
complete filling the crack as specified above .
remove excess filler from the surface of the pavement .
submit field prepared flow panels of hot applied crack filler to the office of materials technology for the flow test at least twice daily or as directed .
fill cracks the same day they are prepared .
if cracks are not filled on the same day they are prepared reclean and dry them prior to filling .
do not allow traffic on the filled pavement until the crack filler has cured .
filler that pulls loose within num hours after opening the pavement to traffic shall be repaired at no additional cost to the administration .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for furnishing hauling and placing of all materials crack shaping crack filling the removal and disposal of old filler and debris and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
payment will not be made for wasted material .
num filler removal saw cutting crack shaping and crack filler will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num patching material for cracks will be measured and paid for per linear foot regardless of the width or depth of the crack .
section num thru num reserved section num plain and reinforced portland cement concrete pavements num description .
construct plain and reinforced portland cement concrete pavements .
num num plain and reinforced pcc pavements num materials .
portland cement concrete and related products num reinforcement steel num joint materials num portland cement concrete plant num epoxy coating for reinforcement num reinforcement including load transfer assemblies tie bars deformed steel bars and longitudinal tie devices shall meet section num and be epoxy coated .
num construction .
within num days prior to the start of paving operations submit a proposed paving plan for approval .
include the production plants location of the plants with respect to project site equipment proposed material sources and indicate whether the fixed form method or slip form method is proposed .
protect the pavement against damage from all causes .
repair or replace damaged pavement .
mix place and finish concrete when natural light is sufficient or with an approved artificial lighting system .
num equipment .
all equipment including the production plant and paving equipment is subject to approval .
the plant including central mixers batching plant truck mixers and hauling equipment shall meet section num .
have the plant ready for inspection at least num hours prior to the start of construction operations .
have the paving equipment on the job site and ready for inspection at least num hours prior to the start of construction operations .
slip form pavers shall be selfpropelled on crawler tracks .
no other tractive force shall be applied .
the paver shall be capable of being automatically controlled for both alignment and grade .
the equipment and methods used shall provide a means to obtain the prescribed weights within the allowable tolerances to obtain the consistency specified with a minimum amount of water to achieve proper placement of the mixture in a condition of maximum density with no segregation and to finish and cure the pavement as specified herein .
num weather restrictions .
num num plain and reinforced pcc pavements a temperature and surface conditions .
begin concrete placement when the ambient air and surface temperatures are at least num f and rising .
discontinue placement whenever the temperature falls below num f. these requirements may be waived for incidental concrete construction .
do not place concrete on a frozen base .
b precipitation .
have sufficient approved material on hand to cover freshly placed concrete as protection against precipitation .
c wind .
cease placement when the engineer determines that wind conditions may have a detrimental effect on the work .
when weather conditions differ from these limits placement of material en route is at the contractors risk .
if the engineer for any other reason stops placement dispose of enroute material at no additional cost to the administration .
num foundation .
construct the foundation as specified .
construct the total width of the foundation to the width of the pavement plus at least num in .
outside the base of the fixed form or the outermost edge of the slip form paver track or wheel .
no additional payment will be made for the extended width .
ensure that the foundation is approved prior to the installing fixed forms or the use of slip forms .
num forms .
use steel side forms having a thickness of at least num in .
and a depth equal to the edge thickness of the pavement .
forms shall have a base equal to the height a flatflanged tread or top surface not less than num in .
wide and be of sufficient strength to resist all loads applied during the paving process .
do not use built up forms or warped forms .
use form sections that are at least num ft long except for installation along curves with a radius of less than num ft. for a curve radius less than num ft use form sections that are no more than num ft long or use curved forms .
all form sections shall have stake sockets that will accommodate a num in .
diameter steel stake .
sections num ft or greater in length shall have at least three sockets .
sections less than num ft long shall have at least two sockets .
fasten keyways rigidly to the form .
provide holes through both the form and the keyway to accommodate tie bars or dowels .
place the forms to a tolerance of num in .
in num ft for the top and num in .
in num ft for the face .
provide a means for locking the ends of abutting sections .
forms shall be clean and coated with an approved form release compound .
remove or repair forms that are bent deformed or broken .
num num plain and reinforced pcc pavements set grade controls at intervals of no more than num ft. set the forms at least num ft ahead of concrete placement .
when the foundation has been disturbed subsequent to the forms being set to the correct grade make corrections as approved .
check the alignment and grade for conformance with the contract documents .
use an approved device such as a scratchboard and make any necessary corrections prior to concrete placement .
wooden forms may be approved for use in exceptional cases such as for curves of very short radius or when a nonstandard length of straight form is required .
num slip form paving .
unless otherwise approved the minimum width of slip form paving shall be num ft .
the total foundation width shall be graded using machine methods .
set grade controls using string lines at intervals of no more than num ft. construct the foundation as specified in num completed and approved at least num ft ahead of the paver before paving begins .
stop paving whenever the paving machine comes to within num ft from the end of the approved foundation and install a bulkhead construction joint .
when paving adjacent to an existing pavement the portion of the equipment supported by the existing pavement shall have wheels with rubber tires or crawler treads on protective pads .
maintain a clearance of at least num ft from the inner edge of the paver track or wheel to the edge of the existing pavement .
slip forms shall be spaced and braced in a vertical position at a uniform and constant width and of a length sufficient to prevent slumping or sagging of the sides and top edges of the pavement slab .
slip form equipment shall be capable of placing and securing embedded tie bars and keyways in proper position in the plastic concrete before the edge of the pavement slab is free of the slip form .
num reinforcement .
reinforcement shall be as specified .
maintain the reinforcement in a clean condition free from foreign material that may prevent proper bonding of the concrete .
secure all reinforcement to prevent displacement or movement .
a install dowel bars at joints on the approved foundation parallel to the foundation grade sufficiently ahead of the placement of slab reinforcement and concrete .
coat each dowel bar with an approved water insoluble lubricant .
dowel bars may be machine placed or set on approved chairs or prefabricated assemblies .
maintain proper alignment depth and spacing .
num num plain and reinforced pcc pavements b tie bars for longitudinal construction joints may be placed on chairs or machine placed so that upon the initial set of the concrete they are at the proper alignment depth and spacing and at right angles to the center line of the pavement .
prior to use submit chairs and machine placement devices for approval .
c furnish fabric and mat reinforcement in flat sheets .
keep the material flat during placement .
maintain the specified reinforcement clearance .
d when using slip forms the tied reinforcement bars or prefabricated mats may be installed ahead of the placement of concrete by being supported on chairs .
reinforcement installed in this manner shall be in place at least num ft ahead of the paver or a twohour run of the paver before any paving may begin .
stop paving whenever it comes to within num ft of the end of the steel placement and install a bulkhead construction joint .
num concrete placement .
prior to placement of the concrete ensure that the foundation is in a moist condition .
in addition if the concrete is exposed to the direct rays of the sun and the ambient temperature is num f and rising sprinkle the forms and reinforcement with cool water just before placement of the concrete .
once deposited within the forms keep any rehandling to a minimum .
where concrete is to be placed adjoining a previously constructed lane of pavement mechanical spreading and finishing equipment may be operated upon the existing lane of pavement only after the existing concrete has reached a compressive strength of num psi in conformance with num .
wheels that rest on the previously completed concrete shall be flat without flanges at least num in .
wide and located far enough from the edge of the slab to preclude spalling or damage .
perform sampling for control testing at the time of concrete placement and as specified in num .
deposit the total depth of the slab in a single layer except as otherwise specified herein or approved .
for pavement constructed using bar mat or wire fabric reinforcement place the concrete in two layers unless it is demonstrated that the bar mat or wire fabric can be properly supported on approved devices .
single layer placement .
set the reinforcement on chairs capable of maintaining the stability and proper elevation of the reinforcement .
welding of reinforcement to the chairs in lieu of wire ties will be permitted except welding for epoxycoated reinforcement will be permitted only if the epoxy coating is applied after the welding .
repair damage to epoxy coating using materials specified in num .
num num plain and reinforced pcc pavements two layer placement .
place the concrete and bar mats or wire fabric reinforcement in a continuous operation .
first place the concrete to the specified depth of reinforcement .
then place the reinforcement on the freshly deposited concrete follow immediately with the second layer of concrete .
num consolidation of concrete .
fixed form paving .
consolidate the concrete by using immersion type vibrators .
vibrators shall advance with the paving equipment and be set at the spacing and depth necessary to clear reinforcement by num in .
maintain the amplitude required to obtain thorough consolidation within the slab along the faces of the forms and at the joint assemblies .
avoid excessive vibration that results in segregation and any vibrator contact with the side forms joint assemblies or underlying material .
the consolidation system and settings are subject to approval .
slip form paving .
concrete consolidation systems shall be incorporated in the paving equipment .
submit the systems for approval .
num finishing .
machine finishing .
the machine shall be equipped with two transverse screeds with provision for adjustment to ensure that the concrete is at the specified crown and grade .
following the transverse screeds the concrete shall be screeded longitudinally .
the width of the working face of the screeds shall be at least num in .
use a chevron v type nonreciprocating finishing float or other approved type .
the float shall be suspended from a frame that does not ride directly on the forms .
following the finishing float use a long handled scraping straightedge num ft long to bring the pavement to the correct grade .
when the finishing machine is operated over concrete that has partially set make provisions to prevent damage to the concrete by the machine wheels .
hand finishing .
with approval hand finishing may be substituted for machine finishing .
do not use rakes for handling concrete .
num slab surface and thickness checks .
surface check .
after finishing and before texturing of the concrete check the entire surface by using an approved num ft long metal straightedge .
limit the surface deviation from a straight line or vertical curve transversely or longitudinally to num in .
in num ft. thickness check .
after the pavement is placed and before final acceptance cut cores by which the engineer will check the thickness .
perform coring per msmt num .
locate cores every num ft for each lane num num plain and reinforced pcc pavements unless otherwise specified or directed .
fill core holes at no additional cost to the administration .
pavement deficient in thickness by more than num in .
will be unacceptable .
remove and replace the full pavement section .
deficiencies up to num in .
will be subject to reduced payment as specified in num .
num texturing and edging .
texturing .
following concrete finishing and surface check apply a transverse texture to the roadway surface using a device that produces corrugations num in .
wide by num in .
deep and variably spaced between num and num in .
maintain a num in .
space between passes of the texturing device and a num in .
space between the last corrugation and the center line of all transverse joints .
begin texturing when the concrete surface is plastic enough to allow texturing to the depth specified but dry enough to prevent the plastic concrete from flowing back into the grooves .
avoid overlaps and the tearing of the concrete .
on open sections apply texturing uniformly for the full width of pavement .
on closed sections leave the last num in .
of the roadway adjacent to the curb untextured to facilitate drainage .
the completed textured finish shall be uniform in appearance .
edging .
after texturing the surface and when the concrete has taken its initial set edge transverse and longitudinal slabs using a num in .
radius edging tool .
num curing .
following texturing and edging cure the concrete for at least num hours .
whenever the ambient air temperature falls below num f during the curing period use insulated blankets to maintain the concrete temperature above num f. use insulated blankets in addition to any curing material that is used .
provide a sufficient number of highlow thermometers to monitor the temperature of the concrete .
cure the concrete using one of the following methods a liquid membrane forming compound .
use a liquid membrane forming compound that is in conformance with num .
apply the material to the surface as soon as the free water has disappeared .
use an approved spraying machine having drive wheels that straddle the freshly placed concrete .
have standby equipment on site in the event of failure of the spraying machine .
the spraying machine shall be equipped with an adequate wind guard and be capable of producing a fine spray of material that covers the surface with a uniform continuous film .
apply the compound in two applications each at a rate of num galnum ftnum .
maintain the film free of pin holes checks cracks peelings and other imperfections .
correct discontinuities in the film by the application of an additional coat to the affected area num num plain and reinforced pcc pavemets within num minutes of the original coat .
if sprayed surfaces are subjected to damaging rainfall within three hours after the second application respray the surface at no additional cost to the administration .
use rope or other approved masking methods to keep the vertical surfaces of longitudinal and transverse joints free of curing compound .
protect the sprayed surfaces to maintain the continuity of the membrane .
application of compound by hand operated spraying equipment in irregular areas shall be as directed .
b burlap curing .
place burlap conforming to num on the freshly placed concrete as soon as practical without damaging the concrete .
overlap the burlap to provide a double thickness on the entire surface .
saturate the burlap with water before placement and keep it continuously wet during the curing period .
c cotton mat curing .
place cotton mats conforming to num on the freshly placed concrete as soon as practical without damaging the concrete .
saturate the mats with water before placement and keep them continuously wet during the curing period .
d sheet materials .
place sheet materials conforming to num on the freshly placed concrete as soon as practical without damaging the concrete .
overlap the material at least num ft and extend it outside the slab .
secure all laps and edges in place to provide continuous contact of the sheet with the pavement surface .
num form removal of fixed form paving .
unless otherwise directed leave forms in place until the concrete has set at least num hours .
if the sides of the slab show no damage continue curing for the remaining num hours of the num hour curing period .
repair damaged or honeycombed areas and then cure for an additional num hours .
num joints .
construct joints in conformance with the details specified perpendicular to the finished grade of the pavement and sealed as specified in section num .
transverse expansion and contraction joints shall be straight and continuous from edge to edge of the pavement .
a transverse construction joints .
place a transverse construction joint at the end of each days placing operations and at any other points within a paving lane where concrete placement is interrupted for num minutes or longer .
locate these joints at a planned joint except in the case of an equipment breakdown .
when concrete placement can not be continued the transverse construction joint may be located within the slab unit but not less num num plain and reinforced pcc pavements than num ft from a planned transverse joint .
dowel transverse construction joints as specified and saw the joints in conformance with in cnum .
b expansion joints .
form expansion joints by placing a preformed filler material conforming to num .
use approved metal supports to hold the filler securely in position .
leave the metal supports in the pavement .
install a removable metal channel cap bar to hold the parts of the joint in proper position and to protect the filler from damage during concreting operations .
remove the cap bar without damaging the pavement to provide a space for sealing the joint .
fit adjacent sections of filler tightly together and extend them across the full width of the paving lane to prevent concrete from entering the expansion space .
use a joint filler of the specified type thickness and width to form expansion joints around structures and features that project through into or against the pavement .
c contraction joints .
construct longitudinal and transverse contraction joints by sawing .
if gravel aggregate is used tool the joint or form it by using an approved insert .
num sawed joints .
sawcut to the specified depth using a num in .
blade .
base the time of sawing on current and anticipated weather conditions and to prevent uncontrolled cracking of the pavement .
start the sawing operation as soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently to permit cutting the concrete without chipping spalling or tearing .
respray damaged membrane cured surfaces as soon as the surface is dry .
after completion of the curing period widen the upper portion of the groove by sawing to the specified width and depth .
the saw blades may be single or gang type with one or more blades mounted in tandem .
do not sawcut into load transfer devices .
immediately after sawing the joint thoroughly flush the saw cut and adjacent concrete surface with water to remove all waste .
num insert type contraction joints .
construct insert type contraction joints by installing a preformed insert in the plastic concrete to form a weakened plane to induce cracking .
use a machine equipped with a vibratory bar for cutting a groove in the plastic concrete for placement of the insert and for vibrating the insert into place .
arrange vibration units to distribute vibration uniformly throughout the bar .
the intensity of vibration shall be adjustable as necessary to form a groove of proper size for the filler to force the insert into the plastic concrete and to consolidate the concrete around the num num plain and reinforced pcc pavemets insert .
immediately following final machine finishing install the insert at the specified location and required depth for the full width of the paving lane .
ensure that there are no more than two joint spacings between the finishing machine and the inserter .
for concrete placed by slip form pavers support the edges of the plastic concrete to prevent slumping during the vibration and placement of the inserts .
join adjacent sections of the joint inserts within each slab securely together and thoroughly consolidate the concrete against the full depth of the insert .
maintain the insert perpendicular to the finished grade of the pavement and straight in alignment .
keep the top of the insert flush or not more than num in .
below the pavement surface .
following placement of the insert use the vibratory float in lieu of hand floating and troweling .
perform any additional straightedge and texturing operations without disturbing the insert .
after the completion of the curing period remove the top portion of fiberboard fillers or sawable preformed inserts by sawing with a power saw as approved .
num pavement profile .
refer to pavement surface profile requirements specified .
num opening to traffic .
the pavement may be opened to vehicular traffic after having attained a compressive strength of num psi .
field samples will be tested per t num .
num measurement and payment .
plain and reinforced portland cement concrete pavements will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard for the pertinent portland cement concrete pavement item .
the square yard measurement will be computed on the basis of plan width and asbuilt length measured along the pavement center line .
the payment will be full compensation for all concrete forms reinforcement steel chairs epoxy coating finishing curing joints joint construction saw cutting and joint sealing and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num pavement thickness price adjustment .
payment for areas that are accepted at a reduced price for deficient thickness will be adjusted by the factors shown in the following table .
deficiencies will be determined by procedures specified in num .
there will be no additional payment for excess thickness .
num pavement thickness price adjustment deficiency in inches percent of payment contract unit price num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num greater than num see num num num continuously reinforced pcc pavement section num continuously reinforced portland cement concrete pavement num description .
construct continuously reinforced portland cement concrete pavement on a prepared subgrade .
num materials .
refer to num and the following reinforcement .
section num for reinforcement load transfer assemblies tie bars deformed steel bars and longitudinal tie devices except that all materials shall be epoxy coated .
select the type of reinforcement from one of the following a deformed steel bar mats as specified in num .
use no .
num grade num longitudinal bars and no .
num grade num transverse bars .
b loose deformed steel bars as specified in num .
use no .
num grade num longitudinal bars with a length of at least num ft and no .
num grade num transverse bars .
c welded deformed steel wire fabric as specified in num .
num construction .
refer to num except as modified herein .
num num continuously reinforced pcc pavements num placing reinforcement .
preset the reinforcement on chairs or chair bars with the transverse members placed below the longitudinal members .
place the longitudinal bars within the tolerances specified .
before placing the concrete remove rust mud oil or other detrimental coatings .
place the mat and fabric reinforcement flat and free from distortions .
furnish loose steel bars that are free from kinks or bends that prevent them from being properly assembled or installed .
furnish approved chairs or chair bars designed to support the reinforcement in position without deflection or displacement during the placing and consolidation of the concrete .
use chair bases designed with sufficient bearing to prevent overturning or penetration into the subgrade and that will not impede placement of the concrete .
chairs may be welded to the transverse bars prior to epoxy coating .
if the support system does not hold the reinforcement within the specified tolerances increase the number of chairs or take other steps to maintain proper positioning of the steel .
num placing concrete .
place the concrete in one lift vibrated internally over its full width and depth by immersion vibrators mounted at intervals of not more than num in .
center to center across the full width of the slab .
the vibrators shall have variably controlled frequencies .
operate the vibrators at the frequency and amplitude necessary to be perceptible on the surface of the concrete more than num ft in any direction .
mount the vibrators as a group advancing longitudinally with the paving machinery hinge mounted to facilitate riding over obstructions and set to clear the reinforcement by approximately num in .
stop all screeding and vibrating operations immediately whenever forward motion of the paving machinery is stopped .
num joints .
do not place transverse expansion or contraction joints in continuously reinforced portland cement concrete pavement .
construct a transverse bulkhead joint whenever concreting operations are stopped for more than num minutes and at the end of any working period .
form the joints using an approved header board in conformance with the cross section of the pavement placed at right angles to the center line and perpendicular to the surface .
furnish and install additional bars as specified .
finish the pavement flush with the header board without edging .
complete the joints accurately and keep the bulkhead clean .
extend the roadway reinforcement continuously through the joint .
support the reinforcement extending through the joint securely on chairs or wooden sills to prevent deflection .
num portland cement concrete pavement repairs num resume paving operations when the engineer determines that the concrete has sufficiently set .
before resuming concrete placement remove the bulkhead and debris and clean the joint .
seal all joints as specified in section num .
num terminal joints .
construct terminal joints as specified .
num thickness check .
refer to num num pavement profile .
refer to the pavement surface profile requirements in the contract documents .
num measurement and payment .
continuously reinforced portland cement concrete pavement will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
the square yard measurement will conform to num .
the payment will be full compensation for all concrete forms reinforcement steel chairs epoxy coating finishing curing joints joint construction saw cutting and joint sealing and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num pavement thickness price adjustment .
refer to num .
num terminal joints .
terminal joints will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
the payment will be full compensation for all steel beams stiffener plates end plates drilled holes welding cutting styrofoam joint filler concrete reinforcement bond breaker and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num portland cement concrete pavement repairs num description .
repair plain conventionally reinforced or continuously reinforced portland cement concrete pavement .
repairs are either type i num ft to less than num ft in length or type ii num ft and greater in length .
num materials .
refer to num except as follows graded aggregate for base course num crusher run aggregate crnum num high range water reducing admixture num nonshrink grout numc num num portland cement concrete pavement repairs epoxy grout numd epoxy adhesive num num concrete mix design modified mix no .
num .
use mix no .
num concrete as specified in num except with a cement factor of at least num lbydnum a high range water reducing admixture and a compressive strength of at least num psi in num hours .
testing shall be as specified in num except that cylinders shall be left in the molds until tests are conducted .
num field control .
field control will be by compressive strength cement content slump watercement ratio and air entrainment .
acceptance will be based on a minimum compressive strength of num psi in num hours .
if test results fall below the specified value prepare a new mix design as directed .
num polyester grout .
a polyester grout may be used in lieu of epoxy grout providing the grout conforms to numd .
identify cartridge type systems by batch or lot number .
num epoxy adhesives .
refer to num .
use water insensitive materials classified as type iv grade num class b and c. num reinforcement .
section num for reinforcement including load transfer assemblies tie bars deformed steel bars and longitudinal tie devices except all material shall be epoxy coated .
num construction .
the engineer will determine the areas to be repaired and the type of repair .
prior to the start of repairs submit a proposed repair plan including equipment methods and procedures .
protect the repair area against damage from all causes .
repair or replace any part of the repaired pavement that is damaged .
make repairs in only one lane at a time for each roadway .
num equipment .
refer to num .
num weather restrictions .
as specified in num except perform this work only during the months of april through october unless otherwise permitted in writing .
when the range in daily temperature is expected to exceed num f concrete may be placed in the late afternoon after the existing pavement has achieved its maximum expansion unless otherwise directed .
cold weather protection shall conform to num except use insulated blankets when the ambient air temperature is less than num f. num portland cement concrete pavement repairs num num saw cuts and removal of existing pavement .
make all saw cuts perpendicular using a diamond saw blade .
remove concrete slabs by the lift out method in large sections .
no other method of slab removal shall be used unless approved .
complete all repairs within the same working day on which the pavement is removed .
repair adjacent slab damage caused by the removal operations .
perform saw cutting and pavement removal as follows a plain and conventionally reinforced portland cement concrete pavement .
make full depth sawcuts for the full slab width and at least num in .
from and parallel to longitudinal joints .
when the repair is on only one side of an existing transverse joint extend removal into the adjacent slab a sufficient distance to remove existing dowels .
remove the concrete slab within one week after making the saw cuts .
complete the repairs in a continuous operation .
b continuously reinfor ced portland cement concrete pavement .
locate the boundaries of the repair at least num in .
from the nearest transverse tight crack for normally spaced tight cracks and at least num in .
from the nearest transverse crack when they are closely spaced .
make at least a num in .
depth saw cut for the full width of the lane at the boundaries of the repair .
do not cut the steel reinforcement .
make a full depth saw cut across the full width of the slab at least num in .
inside each boundary saw cut .
make additional full depth saw cuts along all longitudinal edges not bounded by construction joints .
remove the concrete to its full depth within the boundaries of the repair area within num hours after making the saw cuts .
do not bend existing reinforcement bars .
use no more than a num lb jackhammer and hand tools to remove concrete in the areas between each num in .
and full depth saw cut .
trim the existing pavement edge neatly and vertical .
leave at least num in .
of reinforcement exposed on each side of the repair .
the engineer will require the removal of any pavement breaking equipment from the project that could damage the adjacent concrete pavement .
when saw cuts close due to temperature make narrowly spaced full depth and full width saw cuts to relieve the pressure .
remove the material between the narrowly spaced saw cuts and between the longitudinal joint and the num in .
minimum offset longitudinal cut using the equipment specified above .
cut tie bars protruding from the longitudinal offset flush with the existing concrete .
remove num num portland cement concrete pavement repairs all waste material immediately from the repair site .
seal any saw cuts that extend into adjacent slabs curbs or gutters as specified in section num .
num base and subgrade preparation .
refer to num except moisten the subgrade for all types of repairs .
num subgrade drains .
if directed construct subgrade drains as specified in section num .
num forms .
use forms conforming to num .
overlap existing pavement at least num ft on each side of the patch and securely fasten to prevent movement .
excavate the adjacent shoulder the width of the form plus num in .
to provide space for the forms .
after removing the form repair the excavated shoulder area using the same type of material as used in the original shoulder .
num reinforcement .
refer to num and as specified herein .
place the doweled joint at the slab face closest to the original doweled joint location .
drill holes num in .
larger than the dowels load transfer tie bars and longitudinal tie devices into the face of the existing slab at mid depth .
blowout the holes and allow to dry .
grout or epoxy the dowels load transfer tie bars and longitudinal tie devices into place .
align reinforcement in the direction of the pavement and parallel to the surface .
place a plastic grout retention disk conforming to the contract documents on each dowel to prevent loss of the bonding material .
for continuously reinforced portland cement concrete pavement use reinforcement steel bars of the same size and spacing as the existing bars .
splice the reinforcement to the existing steel by lapping welding or approved mechanical device .
for lap splices lap at least num in .
and secure using tie wires .
place the longitudinal steel reinforcement bars continuous for the full length of the repair .
place an amount of steel at least equal to the amount of steel in the existing pavement .
support the reinforcement steel bars on chairs or as approved .
for plain and conventionally reinforced pavement coat the protruding ends of the dowel bars with an approved water insoluble lubricant .
num joints .
refer to num .
seal all joints as specified in section num .
num concrete placement .
refer to num .
prior to placing concrete clean the adjacent vertical surfaces .
num portland cement concrete pavement repairs num for weather requirements refer to num .
the temperature of the concrete at placement shall be num to num f. the air temperature shall be at least num f and rising .
when the range in daily temperature is expected to exceed num f concrete may be placed in the late afternoon after the existing pavement has achieved maximum expansion unless otherwise directed .
construct both plain and continuously reinforced concrete pavement repairs in one full depth operation .
construct conventionally reinforced concrete pavement repairs by placing two equal lifts with the wire mesh laid on the surface of the first lift .
vibrate all concrete .
num finishing .
following concrete placement strike off the surface to the finished grade using an adjustable steel or wooden template and float the surface .
screed the repair longitudinally to provide uniformity of ride to adjacent pavement .
match the contour of the existing roadway .
perform surface checks as specified in num .
num curing .
cure the concrete as specified in num except continue curing for num hours after concrete placement or until the repair is put into service .
num emergency filler .
have sufficient crusher run aggregate crnum readily available to fill the void of the repair area .
place and compact the material and cover it with a steel plate .
at the beginning of the next days work completely remove the material using procedures that will not disturb the subgrade dowels load transfer tie bars load transfer assemblies or reinforcement placed previously .
num steel plates .
have an ample supply of num x num ft x num in .
thick steel plates available on the project to cover emergency filler and to protect the patch area until the concrete has developed sufficient strength to carry traffic .
num unacceptable repairs .
remove and replace repairs that are not in conformance with the contract documents and repairs damaged by traffic or other causes .
num measurement and payment .
portland cement concrete pavement repairs will be measured in place and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard for the pertinent type plain portland cement concrete pavement repair conventionally reinforced portland cement concrete pavement repair and continuously reinforced num num joint sealing of pcc pavements portland cement concrete pavement repair item .
the payment will be full compensation for saw cuts furnishing hauling placing of all materials removal and disposal of old concrete grout drilled holes chairs all tie devices reinforcement epoxy coating steel plates emergency filler joint sealing and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
emergency filler and steel plates will remain the property of the contractor at the completion of the project .
num removal of unsuitable material and refill per cubic yard .
the payment will also include excavation and disposal of unsuitable material backfilling with aggregate and compaction .
num subgrade drains will be measured and paid for as specified in the applicable portions of section num .
num shoulder repairs per square yard .
repairs to existing shoulders necessitated by the placement of forms are also included .
section num joint sealing of portland cement concrete pavements num description .
clean and seal portland cement concrete pavement joints .
num materials .
joint sealers num preformed joint fillers num backer rod .
use backer rod that is flexible compressible nonshrinkable has a surface that will not bond with the joint sealer and is capable of uniformly containing the sealer within the desired shape factor .
do not use hard rubber or materials that swell when wet or deform at sealer application temperatures .
num construction .
seal joints the same day they are shaped and prepared and complete the joints prior to opening the roadway to traffic unless otherwise directed .
if joints are not sealed the same working day reclean and dry the joints as specified in num prior to sealing .
num joint construction .
as specified in num .
if the joint is tooled do not use preformed joint fillers .
num num joint sealing of pcc pavements num joint preparation .
clean joints by one of the following methods as approved a high pressure water blasting .
b abrasive blasting .
c oil free air blowing at a minimum of num psi .
ensure that all joint walls and surfaces to which the joint material is to adhere are dry prior to installing the joint filler .
ensure that all prepared joints are inspected and approved prior to sealing .
num sealing .
install preformed joint filler in conformance with the manufacturers recommendations and the contract documents .
insert the backer rod as specified .
install silicone sealer in conformance with the manufacturers recommendations .
backer rods are not required in longitudinal joints .
apply sealer when the ambient air and pavement temperatures are at least num f and rising .
heat hot applied sealer in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations in a kettle or other equipment acceptable to the engineer .
use kettles that have mechanically operated agitators recirculation pumps and positive thermostatic temperature controls .
the applicator wand and all connecting hoses shall be insulated .
do not overheat or apply direct heat to the sealer .
withdraw and waste all filler that has been overheated heated more than four hours or that remains in the applicator at the end of the days operation .
prior to the start of each days operation withdraw and waste at least num gallon of filler through the applicator wand .
fill joints with sufficient material that the final surface of the sealer is recessed num in .
below the pavement surface .
reseal the joint if within two hours after sealing the sealer is recessed more than num in .
below the pavement surface .
num num pavement markings use an approved tool to apply a parabolic shape to the surface of the sealer .
ensure that the deepest point at the center of the joint is num in .
below the pavement surface .
remove any excess sealer from the surface of the pavement .
curing time for silicone material varies with temperature and humidity and may delay opening the pavement to traffic .
traffic is not allowed on the pavement surface until the sealer has cured .
refer to the manufacturers recommendations for curing time .
any sealer that pulls loose from the joint or shows excessive bubbling within one week after opening the pavement to traffic shall be replaced .
num measurement and payment .
joint sealing of portland cement concrete pavement will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot of joint unless otherwise specified .
the payment will be full compensation for cleaning existing joints furnishing hauling placing all materials including preformed joint filler joint sealer backer rod and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
joint construction and sealing will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for the pertinent portland cement concrete pavement item .
section num thru num reserved section num pavement markings num description .
apply durable and nondurable pavement markings line markings letters numbers arrows and symbols to various surfaces at locations and patterns as specified or as directed .
num materials .
durable and nondurable pavement markings refer to contract documents num construction .
num quality controlquality assurance .
at least num days prior to the prestriping meeting submit in writing a proposed quality control plan qcp .
num num pavement markings address procedures for random sampling as specified in msmt num and show how the equipment and material will be controlled to ensure conformance with the specifications .
include the material manufacturers application recommendations personnel certifications inspection and record keeping procedures and minimum frequencies of sampling and testing as specified in msmt num .
detail when and how corrective action will be taken for unsatisfactory construction practices and deviations from the specifications .
any deviation from the qcp shall be cause for immediate suspension of the marking operation .
operations shall not resume without approval .
a placement .
do not begin placement operations until the qcp is approved and a walkthrough has been performed to approve the layout with the engineer contractor and pavement marking foreman .
widths .
the traveled way lane widths and width of longitudinal lines shall be as specified .
lane widths shall be measured from center to center of the lane lines once a control line is established for the lane configuration of the roadway .
when measurements are taken from existing longitudinal lines the point of reference shall be the center of the single line or the center of the space between dual lines .
the traveled way lane widths are in compliance when they have an acceptable appearance and are within num in .
from the proposed lane width .
alignment .
place markings in a straight and uniform manner .
lane lines are in compliance when they have an acceptable appearance and are visually in alignment with no more than a num in .
variation in any num ft section of traveled way .
maintain longitudinal alignment through all intersections and breaks even though the lines themselves may discontinue .
do not apply pavement line markings over longitudinal joints offset the markings num in .
layout markings .
remove layout markings that detract from the overall appearance or function of the final markings as determined by the engineer at no additional cost to the administration .
b certified technicians .
provide administration certified technicians to perform quality control testing and sampling .
the technicians shall demonstrate that they have a thorough knowledge of sampling and testing procedures as specified in msmt num .
perform quality control during the marking operations in conformance with the approved qcp .
identify the location of quality control tests .
should a certified technician be delinquent in any of their duties i.e .
fail to have all the proper test equipment on num num pavement markings the site fail to perform tests fail to submit documents to the engineer at the end of the day report information that varies substantially from the administrations results etc .
then the technicians certification shall become invalid and a recertification shall be required .
all pavement marking operations shall be suspended until the contractor provides a certified replacement technician .
c records .
maintain complete records of quality control inspection results including actions taken to correct problems .
submit a copy of the qc results signed by the certified technician daily .
identify the location of the following quality control tests num ambient temperature .
num pavement surface temperature .
num material temperature .
num material thickness .
num retroreflectivity .
num alignment .
num color .
d quality assurance .
the administration will provide quality assurance by num conducting independent sampling and testing .
num periodically observing testing performed by the contractor .
num directing the contractor to take additional samples and perform additional tests at any time and at any location .
num monitoring contractor conformance with the quality control plan .
num evaluation of quality control results and testing performed by the administration will provide the basis for final acceptance .
the administration will perform independent assurance audits to confirm and assure that both the quality control personnels test methods and quality control test equipment are in reasonable conformity with administration specifications .
num num pavement markings num cleaning pavement surfaces .
pavement surfaces shall be dry and free of oil dirt grease and other contaminants prior to application of pavement markings .
clean nonconforming surfaces to a width num to num in .
wider than the markings .
num quality control test strip .
as specified or as directed place a num to num ft cumulative quality control test strip of pavement marking material that conforms to the contract documents at a location determined by the engineer .
place additional control strips as directed .
authorization to proceed will be given when the quality control test strip conforms to the contract documents .
num marking removal .
remove existing pavement markings that conflict with new or altered traffic patterns .
use an approved method and ensure that the pavement surface in not damaged by the process .
repair or replace damaged pavement at no additional cost to the administration .
refer to num in the contract documents .
num curing .
protect the markings until dry or cured by placing warning devices as specified in the mdmutcd and as approved .
if a vehicle damages uncured markings reapply the markings and remove marks left on the pavement by the vehicle at no additional cost to the administration .
num observation period .
the contractor shall be responsible for any defects in materials and workmanship of the pavement markings for a period of num days for durable and num days for nondurable materials from the date the pavement is opened to traffic .
time charges will not be assessed during the observation period provided all other work on the contract is complete .
at the end of the observation period the engineer will inspect the pavement markings for durability color and retroreflectivity and inform the contractor of pavement markings that have failed and that require corrective action .
pavement markings will be failed for any of the following conditions a more than num percent of the substrate is exposed in any num ft section of longitudinal marking .
b retroreflectance values have dropped below the minimum retroreflectivity specified .
c marking is discolored when compared visually with the color chips .
remove and replace all failed markings within num days of receiving written notification from the engineer .
num num pavement markings num measurement and payment .
the payment for furnishing and applying the pavement marking line markings letters numbers arrows and symbols will be made under the pertinent pavement markings items .
quality control will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the other pertinent items specified .
num removal replacement or corrective actions .
corrective actions for markings unsatisfactorily installed as determined by the engineer or that fail during the observation period shall be at no additional cost including maintenance of traffic to the administration .
in addition the current road user fee will be applied when traffic disruption occurs during corrective actions .
num category num shoulders section num earth shoulders num description .
construct shoulders using earth .
num materials .
section num .
num construction .
refer to num and num .
num measurement and payment .
earth shoulders will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for the pertinent excavation item .
section num curb combination curb and gutter and monolithic median num description .
construct concrete curb concrete combination curb and gutter concrete curb openings concrete monolithic median and hot mix asphalt hma curb .
num materials .
crusher run aggregate crnum num aggregate num size no .
num curing materials num form release compound num concrete mix no .
num num hot mix asphalt num tack coat num reinforcement steel num joint sealer num preformed joint filler num borrow excavation num num construction .
num num combination curb and gutter num concrete curb combination curb and gutter and monolithic median .
a excavation .
excavate to the specified depth and to the width required to install and brace the forms .
compact the subgrade to num percent density per t num method c and trim to the proper shape and required grade .
remove all soft and unsuitable material and replace with approved material .
b forms .
num fixed form method .
ensure that all forms are properly designed and acceptable .
use full depth steel forms that are at least num ft in length .
when installing forms where the radius of the curb face is less than num ft use flexible or curved steel or wooden forms that are no more than num ft in length .
securely fasten and brace forms to prevent buckling warping or any other movement during the placing of concrete .
place the forms to a tolerance in grade and alignment of num in .
in num ft .
thoroughly clean and coat the forms with a form release compound each time they are used .
num slipform method .
refer to numbnum .
c concreting .
mix according to num .
volumetric batching and continuous mixing will be permitted .
before placing concrete moisten the subgrade with as much water as it can absorb .
consolidate the concrete in the forms by spading or other approved method .
remove curb face forms as soon as the concrete will retain its shape .
keep other forms in place for at least num hours .
d depressed curbs .
construct depressed curbs at entrances and sidewalk ramps .
e openings .
provide an outlet for rainspouts and other drainage by constructing insert openings within the curb .
construct curb openings as specified .
f finishing .
strike off the concrete to the specified cross section .
finish float and apply a broom finish .
for matching adjacent num num combination curb and gutter concrete surfaces other methods of finishing may be permitted .
do not use plastering .
use a num in .
radius edging tool on the face edge of the curb .
finish all other exposed edges with a num in .
edging tool .
limit any deviation from grade and alignment of the face and top surface of curbs and medians to no more than num in .
in num ft .
immediately after removal of the forms repair all honeycombed and damaged areas .
g joints .
num fixed form method .
use num ft spacing between joints except where a lesser spacing is necessary for closures and for matching expansion and contraction joints in contiguous concrete pavements .
do not use joint spacings less than num ft. form the joints by using plate steel templates num to num in .
thick that have a width and depth equal to the unit cross section .
do not use intermediate templates or sections of templates .
set the templates perpendicular to the line and grade of the unit .
at stationary structures such as bridges and inlets construct an expansion joint using num in .
preformed expansion joint filler .
construct expansion joints at points of curves tangents at locations coinciding with adjoining pavement joints and as specified or as directed .
extend the expansion joint material to the full depth of the unit cross section .
apply sealer to the entire gutter portion and num in .
up the face of all joints .
in addition seal the entire expansion joint of monolithic medians .
num slipform method .
refer to numb except use numgnum for joint spacing .
h cold weather construction and curing .
refer to num and .num. i backfill .
after curing for at least num hours use approved material to backfill the front and back of the curb combination curb and gutter and median to the required elevations .
complete the backfilling before rolling the adjacent roadway .
num hma curb .
unless otherwise approved use a selfpropelled machine to place hma curb .
the machine shall form curbing that is uniform in texture shape and density and to the specified template .
num num sidewalks place the curb on a clean dry and stable base .
apply tack coat using asphalt of the type and amount as directed .
when required backfill the curb after it has sufficiently hardened to prevent damage .
consolidate the backfill by tamping or rolling .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all concrete hot mix asphalt forms excavation backfill disposal of excess material drainage openings joint sealer tack coat and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the removal and disposal of unsuitable material will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for class num excavation which price includes the cost of using suitable excavation as replacement material .
when borrow or selected backfill is authorized as replacement material payment will be made at the contract unit price bid for the respective items .
when existing curb or combination curb and gutter is removed and replaced with new curb or combination curb and gutter the cost of the removal will be incidental to the contract unit price for the new item .
num curb combination curb and gutter and monolithic median will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
hot mix asphalt curbs concrete curbs and concrete combination curb and gutter will be measured along the front face of the curb .
monolithic concrete median will be measured along the center line of the finished top of median .
num concrete curb opening and curb opening for concrete combination curb and gutter will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
section num sidewalks num description .
construct hot mix asphalt hma or concrete sidewalks and sidewalk ramps .
ensure that the sidewalks and sidewalk ramps are constructed in accordance with the most recent accessibility guidelines of the americans with disabilities act ada .
num sidewalks num num materials .
curing materials num form release compound num concrete mix no .
num num hot mix asphalt hma num welded wire fabric num joint sealer num preformed joint fillers num num construction .
num concrete sidewalks .
a excavation .
refer to numa .
b forms .
num fixed form method .
use full depth steel or wood forms .
use forms that are straight free from warp and of sufficient strength to resist the pressure of the concrete .
brace and stake the forms so that they remain in both horizontal and vertical alignment .
thoroughly clean and coat forms with form release compound each time they are used .
allow the concrete to set for at least num hours before removing the forms .
num slipform method .
refer to numb except use nume for joint construction .
c concreting .
before placing concrete moisten the subgrade with as much water as it can absorb .
mix the concrete according to num .
volumetric batching and continuous mixing will be permitted .
deposit the concrete on the prepared subgrade in successive batches to the full width of the sidewalk .
thoroughly spade along the edges and tamp the entire surface area to eliminate voids .
strike off and screed the concrete to the top of the forms .
d finishing .
float the surface and apply a broom finish .
do not plaster the surface .
use a num in .
edging tool on all outside edges and all joints .
num num sidewalks e joints .
place joints as specified .
tool or saw dummy joints a minimum of num in .
deep .
match adjacent joints in curb or pavement .
place expansion joint material to the full depth of the concrete .
f cold weather protection and curing .
refer to num and .num .
do not allow pedestrian and vehicular traffic during the curing period .
g expansion joint sealing .
prior to sealing clear dirt and other foreign material from the expansion joints .
ensure that joint walls and all surfaces to which the sealing material is to adhere are surface dry for at least three hours prior to sealing .
do not seal the joints until they are acceptable to the engineer .
ensure that the surface of the sealing compound is not more than num in .
below the sidewalk surface .
num hma sidewalks .
a excavation .
co mplete excavation subgrade preparation and form placement when required as specified in numa and b. b placement .
place hma as specified in num .
when the sidewalk is not placed in forms use acceptable backfill material to form an num in .
wide shoulder for the hma or as specified .
c compaction .
use an approved roller .
in areas inaccessible to a roller a vibrating plate compactor or hand tamping may be used .
in any case the hma shall be uniformly compacted .
start compactive effort as soon as the hma can be compacted without displacement and continue until the material is thoroughly compacted and all marks have been removed .
num backfill .
after the forms have been stripped and repairs are satisfactorily completed backfill the spaces in front and back of the sidewalk to the required elevations using approved material .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all excavation backfill disposal of excess or unsuitable material forms reinforcement when specified joints sealer num num concrete traffic barriers compaction curing finishing and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the removal and disposal of unsuitable material will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for class num excavation which price includes the cost of using suitable excavation as replacement material .
when borrow or selected backfill is authorized as replacement material payment will be made at the contract unit price bid for the respective items .
when the existing sidewalk is removed and replaced with a new sidewalk the cost to remove the existing sidewalk will be incidental to the contract unit price for sidewalk .
num concrete sidewalks will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square foot of finished surface including sidewalk ramps .
num hot mix asphalt sidewalks will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per ton for the mixture placed .
section num concrete traffic barriers num description .
construct concrete traffic barriers .
num materials .
crusher run aggregate crnum num aggregate num size no .
num curing materials num form release compound num concrete mix no .
num num concrete mix no .
num num pvc pipe num reinforcement steel num preformed joint fillers num borrow excavation num geotextile num reflective delineators qpl num num concrete traffic barriers use concrete mix no .
num to construct all concrete traffic barriers end transitions and footers unless otherwise specified .
before beginning work construct a sample panel approximately num ft x num ft x num in .
using the proposed concrete mix design .
after num days the concrete shall match federal standard no .
num color num or lighter .
submit the panel and mix design to the office of materials technology for approval .
keep the approved sample panel at the construction site to be used by the engineer to compare the color of the concrete barrier to the sample panel for adjustments and approval .
submit a sample panel for each source of supply .
num construction .
use castinplace construction .
excavate to the required depth and to a width that will permit the installation and bracing of forms where necessary .
remove all soft and unsuitable material and replace it with suitable material .
properly shape the subgrade and compact it as specified in section num .
num concrete barriers .
forming of the footer or concrete barrier may be by either the fixed form or the slipform method .
do not construct the footer and the barrier section monolithically .
a fixed form method .
use steel forms with a tolerance in grade and alignment of num in .
in num ft. for bifurcated and transition sections other forming materials may be used as directed .
thoroughly clean and coat the forms with form release compound each time they are used .
mix and place concrete as specified in num and section num respectively .
volumetric batching and continuous mixing will be permitted .
vibrate concrete using an approved immersion type mechanical vibrator .
saw or form construction and contraction joints at num ft intervals with a minimum of num ft. for saw time requirements refer to num .
numcnum .
place expansion joints where specified or as directed .
ensure that all joints in footers and walls align .
num num concrete traffic barriers finish concrete as specified in num except apply a broom finish to the surface when forms are stripped in less than num hours .
remove the face forms for finishing as soon as the concrete can retain its shape .
after removing the forms immediately repair all honeycombed and damaged areas .
b slipform method .
use approved slipform equipment .
the equipment shall have internal vibrating capability and automatic guidance controls to follow line and grade references .
on vertical and horizontal curves set an additional intermediate support in the field to establish an acceptable reference line .
do not use ski or shoe sensors .
this method shall not be used within num ft. of either side of a utility junction box .
use the fixed form method .
mix concrete as specified in num .
ensure that the consistency of the concrete after extrusion will maintain the shape of the barrier without support .
provide surfaces that are free of pits larger than num in .
diameter and that require no further finishing other than a broomed finish .
whenever a tear occurs during the operation of the slipform equipment repair it immediately or remove and replace as directed .
saw or form construction and contraction joints at num ft intervals in the barrier and footer with a minimum of num ft except in the area of miscellaneous structures num ft will be permitted .
saw the joints num in .
wide and at least num in .
deep .
place expansion joints as specified or as directed .
num curing .
cure and protect concrete as specified in section num .
num finished surface .
finish concrete as specified in section num .
the completed barriers shall be within num in .
in num ft from the specified horizontal and vertical lines .
the barrier shall present a smooth uniform appearance .
num reflective delineators .
install reflective delineators on the concrete traffic barrier as specified .
num num metal traffic barriers num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all test panels excavation removal of existing hot mix asphalt disposal of excess or unsuitable material reinforcement drilled holes drainage appurtenances geotextile no .
num aggregate conduit boxes and fittings backfilling and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the removal and disposal of unsuitable material will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for class num excavation which price includes the cost of using suitable excavation as replacement material .
when borrow or selected backfill is authorized as replacement material payment will be made at the contract unit price for the respective items .
the removal of existing concrete traffic barriers will not be measured unless specified elsewhere in the contract documents .
num concrete traffic barriers will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
measurement will be along the center line of the top of the barrier .
num concrete traffic barrier end transitions will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
num reflective delineators will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
section num metal traffic barriers num description .
construct metal traffic barriers .
num materials .
brown polyester coating num w beam num metal posts num traffic barrier hardware num timber posts num wood offset blocks num wire rope num rub rail a num galvanized a num num num metal traffic barriers thrie beam m num class a type num reflective delineators as approved by the office of traffic and safety recycled composite material offset blocks as specified by the manufacturer num construction .
num post installation .
drive all posts unless otherwise approved .
use a method of driving that will not batter or distort the posts .
if posts are not driven set them in holes of sufficient diameter to allow tamping of the backfill .
backfill with approved material .
place backfill in horizontal layers not exceeding num in .
loose depth and thoroughly compact .
when it is necessary to place posts in existing paving remove all loose material and replace the paving .
prior to installing rail or cable elements properly align the posts to within num in .
of line and grade .
install all posts plumb .
when rock is encountered at a depth less than the specified footing depth drill a num in .
diameter hole num in .
into the rock or to the planned footing depth whichever is less .
if the num in .
depth is reached prior to the planned depth cut the post to the appropriate length .
paint the cut edge with approved galvanizing repair paint .
set the post and backfill with an approved material .
do not use concrete or grout material .
place the backfill in horizontal layers not exceeding num in .
loose depth and thoroughly compact .
num rail assembly .
furnish rail elements as specified .
ensure a smooth continuous installation with laps in the direction of traffic flow .
ensure that all bolts are drawn tight .
num offset blocks .
when installing new traffic barrier w beam use either wood or recycled composite offset blocks .
do not mix different types of manufactured composite blocks or mix composite and wood blocks .
all offset blocks shall be routed or grooved to prevent them from rotating .
when an existing steel offset bracket is damaged replace it with a steel bracket .
num brown polyester coated traffic barrier w beam using num foot post or num foot post .
ensure that all components are padded and handled with nylon slings during loading unloading and installation .
num num metal traffic barriers preserve the integrity of the polyester coating .
if the polyester coating is chipped scratched blistered or otherwise separated from the base metal repair the damaged areas using the manufacturers repair kit .
complete all repairs to the satisfaction of the engineer or replace the damaged material at no additional cost to the administration .
num w beam barrier reflective delineators .
install reflective delineators as specified .
num remove and reset existing traffic barrier .
when removing and resetting an entire run or a portion of a run of traffic barrier replace the metal offset brackets with either wood or recycled composite offset blocks .
when removing and resetting an entire run use num in .
offset blocks .
when removing and resetting only a portion of a run use num in .
offset blocks .
ensure that the holes in the blocks match the holes in the existing posts .
move the posts at least num ft in either direction from the existing location .
when resetting the rail measure the height of the rail to ensure that it conforms to the current height shown on the standards .
unless otherwise directed maintain the existing offset distance from the edge of the roadway .
num remove and reset existing median traffic barrier w beam .
refer to num .
num end treatments .
section num .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all rock excavation restoration of grassed or paved areas drilled post holes and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num traffic barrier w beam using num foot post or num foot post will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
when a bottom w beam panel is specified for the traffic barrier w beam item it will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for traffic barrier w beam panel .
num traffic barrier w beam median barrier will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num traffic barrier thrie beam will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num permanent traffic barrier end treatments num num replacing num or num foot posts installing additional num or num foot posts splice joints and replacing w beam panels will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price as specified in the contract documents .
num removal and disposal of existing traffic barrier w beam will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num remove and reset existing traffic barrier will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
offset blocks will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the item .
num remove and reset existing median traffic barrier w beam will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
offset blocks will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the item .
num traffic barrier w beam median barrier with bottom panel will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num remove and reset existing median traffic barrier w beam with bottom panel will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
num w beam barrier reflective delineators will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
num the application of fusion bonded brown polyester coating to traffic barrier w beam as well as all special handling and touch up will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the item to which the coating is applied .
section num permanent traffic barrier end treatments num description .
furnish and install permanent traffic barrier end treatments .
num materials .
refer to num and the following end treatments and spare parts packages as specified by the qp hazard marker plastic barrels qp manufacturer l l num num permanent traffic barrier end treatments sand num graded aggregate base num bank run gravel base num common borrow num topsoil num concrete mix num and num num num construction .
num end treatments .
a type a system .
bury the ends of the traffic barrier the end anchorage terminal and the rub rail when required in a cut slope .
excavate the slope to install these components .
upon installation backfill the area to match the adjacent slope compact seed mulch and install soil stabilization matting as directed .
for single rail systems use num ft posts throughout the entire end treatment .
for double rail systems use num ft posts except for the last three posts buried in the cut slope .
construct the end anchorage terminal using either option num or num from the standard .
install traffic barrier w beam as specified in num. b type b system .
install according to the manufacturers recommendations .
c type c d e and f. install these systems in a straight line unless otherwise specified by the manufacturer and approved by the engineer .
refer to the manufacturers recommendations for installation methods and procedures .
d nose section .
reflectorize as approved by the office of traffic and safety .
e finish coat .
traffic barrier end treatments shall have the same finish coat as the w beam traffic barrier to which they are attached .
f sand filled plastic barrels sfpb .
provide the components and assemble place in the required configuration and fill each barrel num permanent traffic barrier end treatments num according to the manufacturers recommendations or as specified in the contract documents .
ensure that each sfpb is watertight and separated from other sfpb by a distance of num in .
place the last row of sfpb num in .
from the shielded object .
reflectorize the first barrel of the sfpb configuration as specified .
ensure that all sand is dry and loose .
do not use bags of sand .
add an antifreeze agent to the sand according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num surface adjustment .
when surface adjustment is required for installation of type b c d e and f end treatments use any class of excavation available on the project .
when excavation is not available on the project use crusher run aggregate crnum bank run gravel subbase borrow topsoil or asphalt milling and grindings .
complete the surface adjustment within num hours .
num transitions to existing structures .
when transitions to existing structures or traffic barriers are required perform the work as recommended by the manufacturer .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all excavation removal of the existing end treatment to be replaced fabrication of all component parts transitions to barriers reflectorization backfill compaction restoration of grassed or paved areas seed and mulch soil stabilization matting and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num type a end anchorage terminal either option will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
num type b through h j and k traffic barrier end treatments will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
type l traffic barrier anchorage will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
num surface adjustment for types b c d e and f end treatments will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for the surface adjustment for traffic barrier end treatment item .
the payment will also include full compensation for furnishing adjusting and compacting embankment or aggregate material .
num num chain link fence num permanent crash cushion sand filled plastic barrels will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per barrel .
the payment will also include full compensation for furnishing and placing sand and antifreeze agent .
num repairs .
a traffic barrier end treatment spare parts package furnished and installed will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for the type specified .
the payment will also include full compensation for the clearing and removal of debris and damaged unsalvageable parts .
b when spare parts packages are furnished by the administration repairing traffic barrier end treatments will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for the type specified .
the payment will also include full compensation for all transportation reconnection to fixed objects where necessary and clearing and removal of debris and damaged unsalvageable parts .
c payment will not be made for spare parts packages used for end treatments damaged due to the contractors operations .
num the application of fusion bonded brown polyester coating as well as all special handling will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the item to which the coating is applied .
section num chain link fence num description .
construct chain link fence .
num materials .
concrete mix no .
num num fence fabric num tie wires line post clips tension wires and tension wire clips num num num num posts braces fittings and hardware gates barbed wire num num chain link fence num type .
install the height and type of fence specified .
when the type of fence is not specified one of the following types may be used a galvanized steel and malleable iron components .
b galvanized steel fabric utilizing galvanized steel posts or aluminum line posts .
c aluminum coated steel fabric utilizing galvanized steel line posts .
d aluminum coated steel fabric utilizing aluminum line posts .
e bonded vinyl coated fabric utilizing galvanized steel or galvanized bonded vinyl coated steel line posts and fittings .
f bonded vinyl coated fabric utilizing aluminum line posts .
num construction .
num general requirements .
confine all activities and operations to the area immediately adjacent to the rightofway lines and within the rightofway .
the engineer may grant permission to perform normal construction activities through lands owned by or under control of the administration .
in areas where privately owned fence or other property is within the administrations rightofway remove the items and place them on the owners property as directed by the engineer .
the contractor shall be responsible for any damage to privately owned items removed .
fence lines specified in the contract documents are only a guide .
the exact location of the fence will be determined in the field by the engineer .
install all posts plumb .
maintain as uniform as practicable the spacing specified with a tolerance of minus num ft. use post lengths that accommodate the fabricated width of the fence fabric without stretching or compressing the fabric and that provide the required spacing below the bottom of the fabric .
num num chain link fence install terminal posts at all ends abrupt changes in grade and at changes in horizontal alignment greater than num degrees .
install terminal posts at a spacing not exceeding num ft .
install horizontal brace rails with diagonal truss rods and turn buckles at all terminal posts .
supply sufficient braces to provide complete bracing of each terminal post to the adjacent line posts .
install post caps on all round line terminal and corner posts .
place the bottom of the fabric a approximately num in .
above the groundline .
a maximum clearance of num in .
will be permitted for a maximum horizontal distance of num ft except for special conditions specified in the contract documents .
any excavation or backfill required to comply with the above clearance will require approval .
place fence fabric on the side of the post nearest to the roadway .
for storm water management ponds place the fabric on the side farthest from the pond .
the fence shall be true and taut .
run a tension wire continuously between terminal posts near the top and bottom of the fabric .
attach the wire to the fabric with hog ring fasteners at num in .
intervals .
tie the fabric to the brace rails at intervals not exceeding num ft and to posts at intervals not exceeding num in .
attach stretcher bars to terminal posts by connectors equally spaced at not more than num in .
centers .
place top and bottom connectors as close as possible to the ends of the fabric .
num anchorage for line posts and terminal posts .
where rock is encountered at a depth less than that specified for the footing drill a hole num in .
larger than the greatest dimension of the post to a depth of num in .
or the planned footing depth whichever is less .
after the post has been set fill the remainder of the drilled hole with grout composed of one part portland cement and two parts mortar sand by dry loose volume .
fill the space above the rock with concrete .
do not use the drive anchor method in rock areas .
select the type of anchorage system from the following except use the concrete method in rock areas .
num num chain link fence concrete method .
place posts in the center of concrete footings .
thoroughly compact the concrete around the post by rodding or vibrating .
trowel the top surface to a smooth finish slightly above the groundline and uniformly sloped to drain away from the post .
do not disturb the post within the num hours after the individual post footing is completed .
do not use hand mixed concrete unless approved .
when permitted limit the size of the hand mixed batch to num yd num .
drive anchor blade method .
a drive anchor blade unit consists of two steel blades driven diagonally through galvanized steel fittings attached to opposite sides of the post .
the drive anchor unit shall hold the post rigidly upright .
ensure that the spread of the blades at their full depth is approximately num in .
install the device so that its top is at least num in .
below the finished grade .
the anchor unit device and procedure shall be as approved .
anchor each line post using one of these units .
anchor each terminal post using two units spaced approximately num in .
apart .
at terminal posts drive each anchor blade unit in the direction that offsets the stresses caused by the tension of the fence .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the removal of privately owned fence or other property from within the administrations rightofway will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract lump sum price for clearing and grubbing .
when an item for clearing and grubbing is not specified in the contract documents clearing and grubbing will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for the pertinent chain link fence item .
num chain link fence will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the actual number of linear feet measured to centers of end posts .
num terminal posts end pull and corner post will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for the size and type specified .
num num wheel stops num .
gates will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each as complete units of the size and type specified .
section num wheel stops num description .
furnish and install preformed wheel stops .
num materials .
concrete mix no .
num num reinforcement steel num recycled composite material wheel stops as specified by the manufacturer recycled composite material .
wheel stops manufactured of recycled composite material shall be as specified by the manufacturer and be insect resistant .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum .
num construction .
locate and secure wheel stops in place as specified .
only one type of wheel stop is permitted for each project .
num measurement and payment .
wheel stops will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num shoulder edge drop off grading adjustment num description .
construct the area adjacent to the outside edge of the shoulder to eliminate the shoulder edge drop off .
num materials .
crusher run aggregate crnum num bank run gravel subbase num num num shoulder rumble strips select borrow num common borrow num topsoil num hot mix asphalt millings or grindings size of individual particles shall be less than num in .
as determined visually .
num construction .
when the outside edge of the shoulder is greater than num num in .
above the existing groundline place a wedge of material graded to a slope of num or as directed .
compact the material as specified or as directed .
complete the grading adjustment by the end of the day that the drop off is created and prior to opening to traffic .
the material lines and grades and the cross section shall be as specified .
num measurement and payment .
crusher run aggregate crnum bank run gravel subbase select borrow common borrow topsoil and hot mix asphalt millings or grindings for shoulder edge drop off will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per ton cubic yard or square yard as specified in the contract documents .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num shoulder rumble strips num description .
grind or mill depressions into existing hot mix asphalt or portland cement concrete to form rumble strips .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction .
place rumble strips as specified .
grind or mill the rumble strips into hot mix asphalt hma at a rate of at least num strips per hour .
grind into portland cement concrete at a rate of at least num strips per hour .
equipment .
the equipment shall have rotary type cutting heads with a length of num in .
and an outside diameter not greater than num in .
the cutting heads shall have the cutting tips arranged in a pattern providing a relatively smooth cut approximately num in .
between peaks and valleys .
num num detectable warning surfaces the cutting heads shall be mounted on their own suspension independent of the power unit to allow the tool to selfalign with the slope of the shoulder and any irregularities in the shoulder surface .
the cutting tool shall be equipped with guides to provide consistent alignment of each cut in relation to the roadway and to provide uniformity throughout the project .
the engineer will randomly check the pattern edge alignment .
control strip .
grind a control strip at least num ft. in length to demonstrate that the speed of operation dimensions and texture are acceptable .
clean up .
sweep or vacuum the work area before reopening the roadway to traffic .
do not sweep the material to the side of the road .
num measurement and payment .
rumble strips will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot as measured along the shoulder or center line where the rumble strips are actually placed .
payment will be full compensation for all installation of rumble strips cleaning and disposal of waste material control strips and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num detectable warning surfaces num description .
furnish and install detectable warning surfaces .
ensure that the detectable warning surface is in accordance with the most recent accessibility guidelines of the americans with disabilities act ada .
num materials .
detectable warning surfaces num select the detectable warning surface from the prequalified list maintained by the office of materials technology .
ensure that detectable warning surface materials meet certification requirements prior to use .
submit the proposed source of supply and the specific product for approval .
num num detectable warning surfaces num construction .
the detectable warning system may be either surface applied or cast in place .
however use only type i iii or iv detectable warning systems for new or replacement concrete installations .
install the system according to the manufacturers recommendations .
unless specifically addressed in the manufacturers recommendations remove the existing surface texturing by grinding or other means .
at a minimum prepare the concrete surface in accordance with sspcsp num .
remove all old adhesives and sealants .
the detectable warning surface shall be num in .
wide in the direction of pedestrian travel and installed for the full width of the curb ramp landing or blended transition .
do not bridge or overhang cracks or expansion joints .
ensure that the vertical edges of the installed system are not more than num in .
above the adjacent surfaces .
place a num or flatter bevel on edges that are more than num in .
above the adjacent surface .
the same edge requirements apply to cut material .
num measurement and payment .
detectable warning surfaces will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square foot .
the payment will be full compensation for removal and disposal of old treatments including adhesives and sealants reapplying and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
the sidewalk on which the detectable warning surface is placed will be measured and paid for at the contract price for the pertinent sidewalk item .
num category num landscaping section num topsoil and subsoil num description .
salvage furnish and place topsoil and subsoil .
num materials .
salvaged topsoil num furnished topsoil num salvaged subsoil num furnished subsoil num limestone num sulfur num gypsum num compost num num construction .
num general .
a schedule .
perform topsoil and subsoil operations when soil moisture and weather conditions are suitable .
cease operations when conditions are unsuitable .
b nutrient management plan nmp .
soil testing will be performed and a nmp will be developed by the administration .
apply fertilizer and soil amendments as specified in the nmp .
c nutrient management reporting .
record the fertilizer analy sis the square yards covered and the pounds of fertilizer applied on the nutrient management reporting form .
submit the form within num hours after applying fertilizer .
num salvaging topsoil and subsoil .
a evaluation of weeds .
refer to num .
topsoil and subsoil will be inspected and shall be free of prohibited weeds before salvaging operations .
prevent the spread of these weeds as directed .
num num topsoil and subsoil b removal .
mow or remove vegetation from the areas where soil is to be salvaged .
remove topsoil and subsoil to the depth as specified or directed .
transport soils separately and keep them apart from other materials .
c storage .
construct storage areas on well drained land away from streams drainage areas and floodplains as specified in section num .
install and maintain silt fence around the edge of the stockpile areas as specified in num before placing stockpiles .
maintain topsoil and subsoil separately in neat stockpiles away from other material .
apply temporary mulch or temporary seed immediately after final shaping as specified in section num. d excess .
topsoil and subsoil are administration property .
do not remove soils without written approval .
num placing salvaged topsoil and subsoil .
a reevaluation of weeds .
soils that contain prohibited weeds will be reevaluated .
do not remove surface debris or transport soil from stockpiles before the reevaluation is completed .
b debris removal .
remove grass weeds brush and other objectionable material from the surface of stockpiles before transporting soil .
c site preparation .
ensure the site is uniformly graded true to line and cross section in preparation for placing topsoil or subsoil .
d placing spreading and compacting subsoil .
place spread and compact subsoil in layers up to num in .
thickness to provide a firm and uniform subsoil base .
track slopes num to num with cleated track equipment operated perpendicular to the slope .
check subsoil thickness lines grades and elevations to ensure the completed work is as specified .
remove stones and other debris with a length or width greater than num in .
from the surface of the subsoil before placing and spreading topsoil .
num num topsoil and subsoil e placing and spreading topsoil .
place and spread topsoil over the designated areas to the specified depth .
when topsoil can be blended with the substrate till and mix the topsoil into the substrate .
when topsoil can not be blended with the substrate roughen the surface of the substrate to provide a bond for the topsoil layer .
f grading topsoil .
grade the soil to provide a uniform surface true to depth line cross section and elevation to ensure the completed work is as specified after settlement .
track slopes num to num with cleated track equipment operated perpendicular to the slope .
remove stones and other debris with a length or width greater than num in .
from the surface of the topsoil when grading is completed .
g amending topsoil and subsoil .
apply soil amendments limestone sulfur gypsum compost to salvaged topsoil and salvaged subsoil as specified in the nmp .
num placing furnished topsoil and subsoil .
refer to num .
num and the following a responsibility .
make arrangements and assume responsibility for consents agreements and payments with property owners who provide prepare or transport soils .
b storage .
construct storage areas and maintain stockpiles as specified in numc .
num inspection and acceptance .
submit a request for acceptance when operations are completed .
inspection will be conducted to verify that operations were completed as specified .
acceptance will be granted at that time .
num measurement and payment .
topsoil and subsoil will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for one or more of the specified items .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num num temporary seed and temporary mulch num salvaging topsoil will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for class num excavation .
num salvaging subsoil will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for class num excavation .
num placing salvaged topsoil will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard for the specified depth .
num placing salvaged topsoil for grading adjustment will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price .
num placing salvaged subsoil will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
num placing furnished topsoil will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard for the specified depth .
num placing furnished topsoil for grading adjustment will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price .
num placing furnished subsoil will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
sections num num reserved section num temporary seed and temporary mulch num description .
apply temporary seed and temporary mulch .
num materials .
fertilizer num straw mulch num wood cellulose fiber num seed num sha temporary seed mix num water num num num temporary seed and temporary mulch num construction .
num general .
a schedule .
apply temporary seed and temporary mulch any time of the year to areas that are not ready for permanent stabilization .
b nutrient management plan nmp .
the fertilizer application rate specified in numc shall be the nmp rate for temporary seeding unless the administration develops a substitute nmp .
c nutrient management reporting .
record the fertilizer analy sis the square yards covered and the pounds of fertilizer applied on the nutrient management reporting form .
submit the form within num hours after applying fertilizer .
num temporary seed .
prepare the soil and apply seed fertilizer mulch and wood cellulose fiber to areas that will remain undisturbed for num to num months .
a soil preparation .
co mplete grading and shaping operations as directed .
loosen soil surfaces before seeding .
b application equipment .
refer to num. c application rates .
apply materials according to the following table .
do not apply fertilizer if the area was fertilized within the previous num months .
application rates temporary seed material lb per num ftnum lb per acre sha temporary seed mix num num fertilizer num num num straw mulch num num wood cellulose fiber num num d seeding .
num hydroseeders .
apply seed and fertilizer mixtures within two hours of mixing .
num mechanical seeder .
incorporate seed and fertilizer to a depth of num to num in .
num num temporary seed and temporary mulch num after seeding .
immediately apply straw mulch .
e mulching .
mulch shall cover num percent of the soil surface when applied as follows num blower .
apply mulch to a loose depth of num to num in .
num manually .
apply mulch to a loose depth of num to num in .
f securing mulch .
immediately after applying mulch secure with wood cellulose fiber .
do not displace the mulch .
num temporary mulch .
apply straw mulch and wood cellulose fiber to areas that will be redisturbed in within num months .
a soil preparation .
do not disturb or till soil .
b application equipment .
refer to num. c application rates .
apply materials as follows application rates temporary mulch material lb per num ftnum lb per acre straw mulch num num wood cellulose fiber num num d mulching .
refer to nume .
e securing mulch .
refer to numf .
num repairing defective areas .
repair temporary seed or temporary mulch that is defective .
complete repairs before acceptance .
num acceptance .
submit a request for acceptance when operations are completed .
inspection will be conducted to verify completion .
acceptance will be granted when at least num percent of the soil surface is covered with secured mulch .
num repairs after acceptance .
repair or replace temporary seed or temporary mulch when directed after acceptance at the contract unit price as additional work .
num num turfgrass establishment num measurement and payment .
temporary seed and temporary mulch will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for one or more of the specified items .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num temporary seed will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per pound of seed .
num temporary mulch will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
section num turfgrass establishment num description .
prepare soil and establish turfgrass .
num materials .
limestone num sulfur num gypsum num compost num fertilizer num straw mulch num wood cellulose fiber num soil stabilization matting num fasteners num seed num sha turfgrass seed mix numa sha special purpose seed mix numb sha temporary seed mix numc water num num construction .
num general .
a regional areas .
maryland is divided into regions by counties as follows num num turfgrass establishment region num .
garrett allegany and washington west of clear spring md .
region num .
washington east of clear spring md frederick carroll baltimore harford cecil howard montgomery and baltimore city .
region num .
anne arundel prince georges calvert charles st. marys kent queen annes talbot caroline dorchester wicomico worcester and somerset .
b seeding se asons and seed mixes .
perform turfgrass establishment when the temperature is above num f and the soil is not frozen according to the following schedule seeding seasons and seed mixes region seeding season monthday spring summer fall late fall sha turfgrass seed mix num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num and num plus additive a or b plus additive c plus additive d when seeding areas num ft and greater from the pavement edge slopes num and steeper when seeding areas within num miles of a state airport areas flatter than num use no additives slopes num and steeper use sha special purpose seed mix in lieu of sha turfgrass seed mix additives a weeping lovegrass c sha temporary seed mix b foxtail bristlegrass d sericea lespedeza num num turfgrass establishment c nutrient management plan nmp .
soil testing will be performed and a nmp will be developed by the administration .
replace application rates of num as required by the nmp .
when a nmp is not available num lb .
per acre of num num uf with map sop fertilizer shall be the nmp rate for turfgrass establishment .
d nutrient management reporting .
record the fertilizer analy sis the square yards covered and the pounds of fertilizer applied on the nutrient management reporting form .
submit the form within num hours after applying fertilizer .
num grade repair .
ensure that soil meets specified grades .
repair any gullies washes or disturbed areas that develop before preparing soil or seedbed .
num preparing soil .
loosen the soil as follows a topsoiled areas num in .
thickness and greater .
loosen topsoil immediately before seeding by disking raking or rototilling to a depth of at least num in .
b topsoiled areas num in .
thickness .
loosen topsoil as specified in a to a depth of num in .
c nontopsoiled areas .
loosen subsoil as specified in a to a depth of num in .
d slopes num to num .
refer to numf .
e serrated cut slopes .
do not loosen soil .
num preparing seedbed .
till the seedbed so that it conforms to the specified finished grade and provides a uniform and porous surface that is free of weed and plant growth .
a areas flatter than num .
remove cleat marks and debris from the soil surface as follows num within num ft of pavement edge .
remove clods stones and debris with a length or width greater than num in .
num turfgrass establishment num num near commercial or residential property .
as in num above .
num all other areas .
remove stones and debris with a length or width greater than num in .
b slopes num and steeper .
remove clods stones and debris with a length or width greater than num in .
from the soil surface .
num application equipment .
use hydroseeders spreaders drills mulch blowers or other approved machinery .
calibrate equipment before application .
apply materials accurately and uniformly to avoid misses and overlaps .
hydroseeders shall be equipped with an agitation system able to keep solids in suspension and have a gauge to show fill levels and tank capacity .
operate hydroseeders and spinner spreaders during nonwindy weather .
do not allow materials to blow onto sensitive areas or structures .
direct hydroseeding mixtures so the droplets produce a uniform spray .
do not allow materials to runoff or cause erosion .
mechanical seeders shall be capable of placing seed and other materials at the specified rate .
num application rates .
refer to numb and include seed additives as specified .
apply materials as follows num num turfgrass establishment application rates material lb per num ftnum lb per acre limestone regions num and num limestone region num dolomitic limestone num to num a num to num a num to num a num to num a sulfur all areas num to num a num to num a gypsum all areas except serrated cut slopes num to num a num to num a compost all areas except serrated cut slopes num to num ydnum compost per num ydnum of topsoil a seed mixes sha turfgrass seed mix areas less than num ft from the pavement edge flatter than num and at facilities num num sha turfgrass seed mix sericea lespedeza areas num ft and more from the pavement edge and slopes num and steeper sha turfgrass seed mix sericea lespedeza num num num num sha special purpose seed mix slopes num and steeper within four miles of a state airport num num additive seed a weeping lovegrass b foxtail bristlegrass c sha temporary seed mix d sericea lespedeza num num num num num num num num fertilizer at seeding topsoiled areas num num uf with map sop num uf num sop nontopsoiled areas num num uf with map sop num uf num sop num a num to num ab num to num ab num a num to num ab num to num ab num a num to num ab num to num ab num a num to num ab num to num ab mulch straw mulch secured with wood cellulose fiber wood cellulose fiber num num num num mulch binder wood cellulose fiber num num refertilizing num num uf num num num num note uf ureaform map monoammonium phosphate sop sulfate of potash a the nmp will specify the application rate .
b when application of num is below num lb .
per acre apply num and num per nmp .
num num turfgrass establishment num incorporating soil amendments .
incorporate amendments limestone sulfur gypsum compost into the soil as follows a topsoiled areas flatter than num .
num topsoil depth of num in .
incorporate to a num in .
depth .
num topsoil depth num in .
and greater .
incorporate to num in .
depth .
b topsoiled areas num and steeper .
apply limestone sulfur and gypsum immediately before or after tracking .
incorporate compost into topsoil in a separate operation before spreading topsoil .
c nontopsoiled areas and serrated cut slopes .
apply the amendments to the soil surface after completing soil loosing operations .
fertilizer may be incorporated into the soil with soil amendments .
num fertilizing and seeding .
apply fertilizer and seed to previously prepared areas .
on slopes num and steeper including serrated cut slopes apply seed fertilizer and mulch in num ft maximum vertical increments .
a hydraulic seeding .
ap ply fertilizer and seed mixtures within two hours after mixing .
inoculate sericea lespedeza seed with num times the amount of inoculant specified on the inoculant package label for dry seeding .
apply seed within one hour of inoculation or reinoculate and apply seed within one hour of reinoculation .
b mechanical seeding .
incorporate seed and fertilizer to a depth of num to num in .
below the soil surface .
dampen sericea lespedeza seed with water and add the amount of inoculant specified on the package label before mixing with other seed .
apply seed within num hours of inoculation or reinoculate and apply seed within num hours of reinoculation .
num mulching .
apply mulch immediately after seeding in all seasons except as allowed in b and c. num num turfgrass establishment a mulch cover .
cover at least num percent of the soil surface with mulch as follows num mulch blower .
apply mulch to a loose depth of num to num in .
num by hand .
apply mulch to a loose depth of num to num in .
b wood cellulose fiber .
wood cellulose fiber may be approved as a replacement for straw mulch on slopes num and steeper where straw application equipment is impractical .
apply at least num percent of the wood cellulose fiber mulch after and separately from the seed and fertilizer during the summer seeding season .
c summer seeding season .
in medians flatter than num open to traffic install type a soil stabilization matting in lieu of straw mulch over seed and fertilizer as specified in section num .
keyingin shall not be performed within curbed medians .
num securing mulch .
secure straw immediately after the completion of mulching operations by applying wood cellulose fiber uniformly without displacing the mulch .
num seeding phase acceptance .
submit a request for seeding phase acceptance when operations are completed .
inspection will be conducted to verify completion .
seeding phase acceptance will be granted at that time .
num establishment phase .
the establishment phase will begin upon seeding phase acceptance .
num overseeding and reseeding .
when turfgrass establishment is not acceptable perform overseeding and reseeding as directed .
do not apply additional fertilizer or soil amendments unless directed .
a overseeding thin turf .
overseeding consists of seeding and mulching areas where turfgrass coverage is num to num percent .
num methods .
cut the turfgrass to a height of num to num in .
and remove debris that will interfere with seeding .
do not apply herbicide or till soil .
apply seed mixtures seed additives mulch and secure mulch as specified in num and num thru .num .
num num turfgrass establishment num coverage .
ensure at least num percent of the soil surface is covered with mulch or turfgrass when overseeding is completed .
b reseeding failed turf .
reseeding consists of tilling seeding and mulching areas where turfgrass coverage is less than num percent .
grade prepare soil and seedbed seed mulch and secure as specified in num thru .num .
num final acceptance .
the engineer and the landscape operations division will complete an inspection report of turfgrass height color and percent coverage .
when it is not possible to perform the inspection final acceptance will be delayed until inspection is possible .
the inspection report will be included in the punch list requirements for the project .
complete the punch list requirements as directed .
final acceptance will be granted when the turfgrass seedlings have grown at least num in .
exhibit dark green color and percent coverage as follows turfgrass establishment coverage areas sha turfgrass seed mix or sha special purpose seed mix other desirable vegetation seedling coverage areas flatter than num and slopes num and steeper not tracked with cleated equipment at least num up to num slopes num and steeper tracked with cleated equipment at least num up to num includes coverage of additive seed species when included .
num num turfgrass establishment num mowing .
mow as specified in the integrated vegetation management manual for maryland highways and as follows mowing height areas tractor cutting hand cutting max height before mowing in .
height of cut in .
max height before mowing in .
height of cut in .
general areas num num num num num num in medians or adjacent to commercial or residential areas num num num num num num num refertilizing .
apply num and num uf fertilizer num to num months after seeding as directed .
refertilizing turfgrass areas areas regions number of applications timing topsoiled num and num num april or september nontopsoiled and serrated cut slopes num and num num april or september num num april and september num measurement and payment .
turfgrass establishment will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for one or more of the specified items .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num turfgrass establishment .
turfgrass establishment including preparing soil preparing seed bed applying fertilizer seed mixes seed additives overseeding reseeding mulching securing mulch and repairing unacceptable areas will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
num num turfgrass establishment a payment schedule .
payments will be made according to the following schedule when construction requirements are met payment schedule construction requirements percent of total contract price payment for completed work num thru .num num at seeding phase acceptance num thru .num num at final acceptance total payment num b forfeiture .
failure to complete operations as required in conformance with the payment schedule will result in forfeiture of that percentage of payment .
num applying limestone to salvaged topsoil and nontopsoiled areas per ton .
num applying sulfur to salvaged topsoil and nontopsoiled areas per ton .
num applying gypsum to salvaged topsoil and nontopsoiled areas per ton .
num applying compost to salvaged topsoil and nontopsoiled areas per cubic yard .
num applying num ureaform fertilizer to nontopsoiled areas per pound .
num refertilizing per pound .
num tractor and hand mowing per hour .
num amending furnished topsoil and furnished subsoil will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for placing furnished topsoil and placing furnished subsoil .
num num shrub seeding section num shrub seeding num description .
perform shrub seeding .
num materials .
limestone num sulfur num compost num fertilizer num straw mulch num wood cellulose fiber num meadow forb seed num and numd meadow grass sedge and rush seed num and nume shrub seed num and numg sha special purpose seed mix num and numb sha temporary seed mix num and numc water num num construction .
num general .
a regional areas .
refer to numa .
b seeding seasons .
perform shrub seeding when the temperature is above num f and the soil is not frozen according to the following schedule seeding seasons and seed regions season monthday spring summer fall late fall shrub seed num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num to num num to num num num and num plus additive a and c plus additive a b and c plus additive a and c plus additive a b and c additives a sha special purpose seed mix c upland meadow seed or b sha temporary seed mix lowland meadow seed num num shrub seeding c nutrient management plan nmp .
soil testing will be performed and a nmp will be developed by the administration .
replace application rates of num as required by the nmp .
when a nmp is not available num lb .
per acre of num num uf with map sop fertilizer shall be the nmp rate for shrub seeding .
d nutrient management reporting .
record the fertilizer analy sis the square yards covered and the pounds of fertilizer applied on the sha nutrient management reporting form .
submit the form to the engineer within num hours after applying fertilizer .
num preparing soil .
refer to num .
num seed delivery weighing and mixing .
a delivery .
shrub seed shall be delivered unmixed .
b weighing and mixing .
test seed as sp ecified in num before weighing and mixing .
use a scale with num oz accuracy to verify application rates and quantities of seed .
mix and apply seed separately or with other specified seed .
num application rates .
refer to numb and include seed additives as specified .
apply materials as follows num num shrub seeding table num application rates material lb per num ftnum lb per acre limestone num to num a num to num a sulfur num to num a num to num a compost num to num ydnum compost per num ydnum of topsoil a shrub seed upland shrub seed refer to table num upland shrub seed refer to table num upland shrub seed lowland shrub seed refer to table num lowland shrub seed refer to table num lowland shrub seed additive seed sha special purpose seed mix num num sha temporary seed mix num num upland meadow seed include with upland shrub seed refer to num table num upland meadow seed refer to num table num upland meadow seed lowland meadow seed include with lowland shrub seed refer to num table num lowland meadow seed refer to num table num lowland meadow seed fertilizer at seeding num num uf with map sop num a num a num uf num to num ab num to num ab num map num to num ab num to num ab num sop num to num ab num to num ab mulch straw mulch num num wood cellulose fiber mulch binder num num refertilizing num num uf num num num num note uf ureaform map monoammonium phosphate sop sulfate of potash a the nmp will specify the application rate .
b when application of num is below num lb per acre apply num num and num per nmp .
num num shrub seeding table num upland shrub seed species select num marked x seeding rate region oz per num ftnum lb per acre num num num black chokeberry num num x x x bristly locust num num x chokecherry num num x x fragrant sumac num num x gray dogwood num num x x mapleleaf viburnum num num x x nannyberry num num x x x red elderberry num num x smooth sumac num num x x x spicebush num num x x staghorn sumac num num x x x witch hazel num num x x table num lowland shrub seed species select num marked x seeding rate region oz per num ftnum lb per acre num num num american cranberrybush num num x x american black elderberry num num x x x common buttonbush num num x x x common winterberry num num x x desert false indigo num num x x inkberry num num x x ninebark num num x x red chokeberry num num x x x redosier dogwood num num x x silky dogwood num num x x southern arrowwood num num x x x steeplebush num num x x swamp rose num num x x apply seed with inoculant labeled for use with the species .
num num shrub seeding num application equipment .
refer to num .
num fertilizing and seeding .
apply seed and fertilizer only to previously prepared sites .
apply up to num pounds per acre of wood cellulose fiber mulch binder with seed and fertilizer mixtures .
apply fertilizer and seed mixtures within two hours after mixing .
inoculate bristly locust and desert false indigo with num times the quantity of inoculant required for dry seeding .
apply seed within one hour of inoculation or reinoculate and apply seed within one hour of reinoculation .
on slopes num and steeper including serrated cut slopes apply seed fertilizer and mulch in num ft maximum vertical increments .
num mulching .
refer to num .
num securing mulch .
secure straw mulch immediately after application by applying wood cellulose fiber uniformly without displacing the mulch .
num seeding phase acceptance .
submit a request for seeding phase acceptance when operations are completed .
inspection will be conducted to verify completion .
seeding phase acceptance will be granted at that time .
num establishment phase .
the establishment phase will begin upon seeding phase acceptance .
num final acceptance .
the engineer and the landscape operations division will complete an inspection report of seedling height color and percent coverage .
when it is not possible to perform the inspection final acceptance will be delayed until inspection is possible .
the inspection report will be included in the punch list requirements for the project .
complete the punch list requirements as directed .
final acceptance will be granted when the seedlings have grown at least num in .
exhibit dark green color and percent coverage as follows num num shrub seeding shrub seeding coverage areas sha special purpose seed mix sha temporary seed mix shrub seed and meadow seed total vegetation cover seedling coverage areas flatter than num and slopes num and steeper not tracked with bulldozer at least num at least num slopes num and steeper tracked with bulldozer at least num at least num num refertilizing .
apply num and num uf fertilizer num to num months after seeding as directed .
num measurement and payment .
shrub seeding will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for one or more of the specified items .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num upland shrub seeding .
upland shrub seeding including preparing soil applying fertilizer shrub seed additive seed mulch and securing mulch will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment schedule .
payments will be made according to the following schedule when construction requirements are met payment schedule construction requirements percent of total contract price payment for completed work num thru .num seeding phase num at seeding phase acceptance num and .num establishment phase and final acceptance num at final acceptance total payment num forfeiture .
failure to complete operations as required or directed in conformance with the payment schedule will result in forfeiture of that percentage of payment .
num num meadow establishment wildflower seeding num lowland shrub seeding .
lowland shrub seeding including preparing soil applying fertilizer shrub seed additive seed mulch and securing mulch will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment schedule .
refer to num .
forfeiture .
refer to num .
num applying limestone to salvaged topsoil and nontopsoiled areas per ton .
num applying sulfur to salvaged topsoil and nontopsoiled areas per ton .
num applying compost to salvaged topsoil and nontopsoiled areas per cubic yard .
num refertilizing per pound .
num amending furnished topsoil and furnished subsoil will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for placing furnished topsoil and placing furnished subsoil .
section num meadow establishment and wildflower seeding num description .
perform meadow establishment and wildflower seeding .
num materials .
limestone num sulfur num compost num fertilizer num straw mulch num wood cellulose fiber num meadow forb seed num and numd meadow grass sedge and rush seed num and nume wildflower seed num and numf sha special purpose seed mix num and numb num meadow establishment wildflower seeding num water numseed carrier num pesticides num num construction .
complete num thru .num when performing meadow establishment .
complete num thru .num when performing wildflower seeding .
num meadow establishment general .
a regional areas .
refer to num. b seeding seasons .
perform seeding when the temperature is above num f and the soil is not frozen according to the following schedule seeding seasons monthday region spring fall num num to num num to num num num to num num to num num num to num num to num c pesticide application .
refer to numc .
d pesticide application reporting .
refer to numd .
e nutrient management plan nmp .
soil testing will be performed and a nmp will be developed by the administration .
replace application rates of num as required by the nmp .
when a nmp is not available num lb .
per acre of num num uf with map sop fertilizer shall be the nmp rate for meadow establishment .
f nutrient management reporting .
record the fertilizer analysis the square yards covered and the pounds of fertilizer applied on the nutrient management reporting form .
submit the form within num hours after applying fertilizer .
num submittals .
submit the following items a seeding schedule .
develop a schedule that provides dates for completing major operations of the contract including nonselective herbicide application mowing tilling and seeding .
num num meadow establishment wildflower seeding submit the written schedule at least num days before beginning operations .
the schedule will be reviewed by the engineer and landscape operations division for completeness and feasibility and will be approved or returned for correction .
b ipm program and establishment schedule .
develop an ipm program that includes methods of pest monitoring for weed control pesticide selection application rates and scheduling .
the establishment schedule shall include dates for meadow maintenance operations such as mowing .
submit the ipm program and establishment schedule when seeding operations are completed .
the program and schedule will be forwarded to the landscape operations division for review and comment before approval is granted .
num marking .
mark areas to be seeded and obtain approval before applying herbicide mowing or beginning seeding operations .
num nonselective herbicide application .
apply nonselective herbicide to eliminate undesirable vegetation when directed .
apply herbicide in water with wetting agent and dye in conformance with the ipm program at least num days before seeding as follows nonselective herbicide application material rate per acre glyphosate herbicide num lb of active ingredient marking dye num to num oz water num to num gal num mowing .
mow vegetation to a height less than num in .
before seeding when directed by the engineer .
do not perform mowing within num days of nonselective herbicide application .
disperse or dispose of excessive clippings prior to seeding .
num preparing soil before seeding .
a broadcast seeding .
rototill the soil to a depth of num in .
and remove stones and other debris with a length or width greater than num in .
from the soil surface .
b drill seeding .
when using a drill seeder no soil preparation is required .
num meadow establishment wildflower seeding num num seed delivery weighing and mixing .
a delivery .
seed shall be delivered unmixed .
b weighing and mixing .
test seed as sp ecified in num before weighing and mixing .
use a scale with num oz accuracy to verify application rates and quantities of seed .
mix and apply seed separately or with other specified seed .
num application rates .
apply materials as follows table num meadow establishmentapplication rates material lb per num ftnum lb per acre limestone num to num a num to num a sulfur num to num a num to num a compost num ydnum compost per num ydnum of topsoil a upland meadow seed refer to table num upland meadow seed refer to table num upland meadow seed lowland meadow seed refer to table num lowland meadow seed refer to table num lowland meadow seed wet meadow seed refer to table num wet meadow seed refer to table num wet meadow seed sha special purpose seed mix include with upland lowland meadow seed num num seed carrier num to num num to num fertilizer num num uf with map sop num a num a num uf num to num ab num to num ab num map num to num ab num to num ab num sop num to num ab num to num ab mulch straw mulch num num wood cellulose fiber mulch binder num num note uf ureaform map monoammonium phosphate sop sulfate of potash a the nmp will specify the application rate .
b when application of num is below num lb per acre apply num num and num per nmp .
num num meadow establishment wildflower seeding table num upland meadow seed forbs pure live seed grasses pure live seed oz per num ftnum lb per acre oz per num ftnum lb per acre select num include all blackeyed susan num num broomsedge num num browneyed susan num num deertongue num num eastern purple coneflower num num little bluestem num num gray goldenrod num num purpletop num num lanceleaf tickseed num num note seed upland meadow seed with sha special purpose seed mix seeding rates shall be calculated on the basis of pure live seed per num ftnum or acre .
maryland senna num num partridge pea num num smooth blue aster num num sundial lupine num num talus slope penstemon num num wild bergamot num num table num lowland meadow seed forbs pure live seed grasses pure live seed oz per num ftnum lb per acre oz per num ftnum lb per acre select num include all common boneset num num big bluestem num num eastern purple coneflower num num gamagrass num num evening primrose num num indiangrass num num lanceleaf tickseed num num switchgrass num num maximilian sunflower num num note seed lowland meadow seed with sha special purpose seed mix seeding rates shall be calculated on the basis of pure live seed per num ftnum or acre .
new england aster num num new york ironweed num num showy tickseed num num stiff goldenrod num num swamp verbena num num trumpetweed or spotted trumpetweed num num num meadow establishment wildflower seeding num table num wet meadow seed forbs pure live seed grasses sedges and rushes pure live seed oz per num ftnum lb per acre oz per num ftnum lb per acre select num include all allegheny monkeyflower num num common rush num num crimsoneyed rose mallow num num fox sedge num num flattop goldenrod num num longhair sedge num num king of the meadow num num rattlesnake mannagrass num num new york aster num num shallow sedge num num new york ironweed num num woolgrass num num seedbox num num seeding rates shall be calculated on the basis of pure live seed per num ftnum or acre .
swamp milkweed num num swamp sunflower num num swamp verbena num num trumpetweed or spotted trumpetweed num num num seeding equipment .
use approved drill seeders equipped with num seed boxes or broadcast seeders .
num seeding methods .
operate seeders as follows a drill seeding .
mix and place s eed in the seed boxes a small seed b medium seed or c fluffy seed as recommended by the seeder manufacturer or as specified or directed .
seed carrier may be mixed with seed .
drill seed into the soil to a num in .
depth .
when soil is disturbed to a greater depth or is not in a firm condition at the time of seeding firm the soil with a roller .
rollers shall weigh approximately num lb per ft of width .
b broadcast seeding .
uniform ly mix seed with seed carrier .
spread seed and carrier in two directions at right angles and then lightly rake or drag seed into the soil to a num in .
depth before firming the soil with a roller as described above .
num mulching .
immediately after seeding apply mulch over bare soil to cover at least num percent of the surface .
do not apply mulch after operating a drill seeder through dead vegetation .
apply mulch as follows num num meadow establishment wildflower seeding a mulch blower .
apply mulch to a loose depth of num to num in .
b by hand .
apply mulch to a loose depth of num to num in .
num securing mulch .
secure mulch immediately after application by applying wood cellulose fiber uniformly without displacing the mulch .
num seeding phase acceptance .
submit a request for seeding phase acceptance when operations are completed and provide the ipm program and establishment phase schedule as specified in numa .
inspection will be conducted to verify completion .
seeding phase acceptance will be granted at that time .
num establishment phase .
the establishment phase begins upon seeding phase acceptance as follows a period of maintenance .
maintain meadows for num months after seeding .
b weed control .
monitor and promptly implement the ipm program to control weeds in conformance with the ipm program or when notified of problems in consultation with the landscape operations division .
remove dead weeds over num in .
tall .
c inspection .
meadow establishment will be inspected by the engineer on or about the numth of january march may july september and november .
num final acceptance .
the engineer and the landscape operations division will complete an inspection report of seedling height color and percent coverage .
when it is not possible to perform the inspection final acceptance will be delayed until inspection is possible .
the inspection report will be included in the punch list requirements for the project .
complete the punch list requirements as directed .
final acceptance will be granted when the seedlings have grown at least num in .
exhibit dark green color and percent coverage as follows num meadow establishment wildflower seeding num meadow establishment coverage areas sha special purpose seed mix sha temporary seed mix and meadow seed total vegetation cover seedling coverage areas flatter than num and slopes num and steeper not tracked with bulldozer at least num at least num slopes num and steeper tracked with bulldozer at least num at least num num wildflower seeding .
a regional areas .
refer to numa .
b seeding seasons .
refer to numb .
c pesticide application .
refer to numc .
d pesticide application reporting .
refer to numd .
e nutrient management plan nmp .
refer to nume .
f nutrient management reporting .
refer to numf .
num seeding schedule .
develop a schedule that provides dates for completing major operations of the contract including nonselective herbicide application and seeding .
submit the proposed schedule at least num days before beginning operations .
the schedule will be reviewed by the engineer and landscape operations division for completeness and feasibility and will be approved or returned for correction .
num marking .
mark areas to be seeded and obtain approval before applying herbicide mowing or beginning seeding operations .
num nonselective herbicide application .
refer tonum .
num mowing .
refer to num .
num seed delivery weighing and mixing .
num num meadow establishment wildflower seeding a delivery .
wildflower seed shall be delivered unmixed .
b weighing and mixing .
r efer to num table num .
test seed as specified in num before weighing and mixing .
weigh wildflower seed before uniformly premixing and placing it into the seed boxes of the seeder .
use a scale with num oz accuracy to verify application rates and quantities of seed .
mix and apply seed separately or with other specified seed .
num application rates .
apply materials as follows table num wildflower seeding application rates material lb per num ftnum lb per acre limestone num to num a num to num a sulfur num to num a num to num a compost num to num ydnum compost per num ydnum of topsoil a wildflower seed refer to table num wildflower seed refer to table num wildflower seed seed carrier num to num num to num fertilizer num num uf with map sop num to num a num to num a num uf num to num b num to num b num map num to num b num to num b num sop num to num b num to num b mulch wood cellulose fiber mulch binder num num note uf ureaform map monoammonium phosphate sop sulfate of potash a the nmp will specify the application rate .
b when application of num is below num lb .
per acre apply num num and num per nmp .
num meadow establishment wildflower seeding num table num wildflower seed species include all num small seed medium seed fluffy seed oz per num ftnum lb per acre oz per num ftnum lb per acre oz per num ftnum lb per acre blackeyed susan num num corn poppy num num golden tickseed num num lemon beebalm num num moroccan toadflax num num siberian wallflower num num doubtful knightsspur num num garden cornflower num num garden cosmos sensation num num sulphur cosmos bright lights num num firewheel num num num seeding equipment .
use approved drill seeders equipped with num seed boxes .
num seeding methods .
refer to numa .
num mulching and securing mulch .
refer to num and .num .
num seeding phase acceptance .
submit a request for seeding phase acceptance when operations are completed .
inspection will be conducted to verify completion .
seeding phase acceptance will be granted at that time .
num establishment phase .
the establishment phase will begin upon seeding phase acceptance .
num final acceptance .
the engineer and the landscape operations division will complete an inspection report of seedling color and percent coverage at num to num days after seeding .
when it is not possible to perform the inspection final acceptance will be delayed until inspection is possible .
the inspection report will be included in the punch list requirements for the project .
complete the punch list requirements as directed .
num num meadow establishment wildflower seeding final acceptance will be granted when the seedlings exhibit dark green color and percent coverage as follows wildflower seeding coverage areas wildflower species total vegetation cover seedling coverage areas flatter than num and slopes num and steeper not tracked with bulldozer at least num at least num slopes num and steeper tracked with bulldozer at least num at least num num mowing .
mow meadow or wildflower foliage to a height of num to num in .
when directed by the engineer in consultation with the landscape operations division .
num measurement and payment .
meadow establishment and wildflower seeding will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for one or more of the specified items .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num upland meadow establishment .
upland meadow establishment including preparing soil applying fertilizer meadow seed sha special purpose seed mix mulch and securing mulch will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
a payment schedule .
payments will be made according to the following schedule when construction requirements are met num meadow establishment wildflower seeding num meadow establishment payment schedule construction requirements percent of total contract price payment for completed work num thru .num seeding phase and seeding acceptance num at seeding phase acceptance num and .num establishment phase weed control and final acceptance num prorated at each bimonthly inspection and final acceptance total payment num b forfeiture .
failure to complete operations as required in conformance with the payment schedule will result in forfeiture of that percentage of payment .
num lowland meadow establishment .
lowland meadow establishment including preparing soil applying fertilizer meadow seed sha special purpose seed mix mulch and securing mulch will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment schedule .
refer to numa .
forfeiture .
refer to numb .
num wet meadow establishment .
wet meadow establishment including preparing soil applying fertilizer meadow seed mulch and securing mulch will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment schedule .
refer to numa .
forfeiture .
refer to numb .
num wildflower seeding .
wildflower seeding including applying fertilizer wildflower seed and mulch will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
payment will be made according to the payment schedule when construction requirements are met .
payment schedule .
payments will be made according to the following schedule when construction requirements are met num num turfgrass sod establishment wildflower seeding payment schedule construction requirements percent of total contract price payment for completed work num thru .num seeding phase and seeding acceptance num at seeding phase acceptance num thru .num establishment phase and final acceptance num at final acceptance total payment num forfeiture .
refer to numb .
num non selective herbicide application per square yard .
num tractor and hand mowing per hour .
num selective grass herbicide application per square yard .
num selective broadleaf herbicide application per square yard .
num applying limestone to salvaged topsoil and nontopsoiled areas per ton .
num applying sulfur to salvaged topsoil and nontopsoiled areas per ton .
num applying compost to salvaged topsoil and nontopsoiled areas per cubic yard .
num amending furnished topsoil and furnished subsoil will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for placing furnished topsoil and placing furnished subsoil .
section num turfgrass sod establishment num description .
prepare soil and establish turfgrass sod .
num num turfgrass sod establishment num materials .
limestone num sulfur num gypsum num compost num fertilizer num turfgrass sod num fasteners num water num num construction .
num general .
a regional areas .
refer to numa .
b installing season and sod species .
install sod from august num to may num when the sod is not frozen .
install tall fescue sod in region num and region num .
install tall fescue or bermudagrass sod in region num as specified .
c nutrient management plan nmp .
soil testing will be performed and a nmp will be developed by the administration .
replace application rates of num as required by the nmp .
when a nmp is not available num lb .
per acre of num num uf with map sop fertilizer shall be the nmp rate for turfgrass establishment .
d nutrient management reporting .
record the fertilizer analy sis the square yards covered and the pounds of fertilizer applied on the nutrient management reporting form .
submit the form within num hours after applying fertilizer .
num grade repair .
ensure that soil meets specified grades .
repair any gullies washes or disturbed areas that develop before preparing soil incorporating soil amendments or placing turfgrass sod .
num preparing soil .
immediately before installing turfgrass sod loosen the soil with rototillers disks rakes or other approved equipment to a depth of num in .
amendments may be incorporated into the soil during this operation .
num num turfgrass sod establishment when soil preparation is completed remove clods stones and debris with a length or width greater than num in .
and ensure the soil provides a uniform and porous surface conforms to the specified grade and is free of weed and plant growth .
num application equipment .
use spreaders or other approved machinery that is calibrated before application .
apply materials accurately and uniformly to avoid misses and overlaps .
operate spinner spreaders during nonwindy weather .
do not allow materials to blow onto sensitive areas or structures .
num application rates .
application rates material lb per num ftnum lb per acre limestone num to num a num to num a sulfur num to num a num to num a gypsum num to num a num to num a compost num to num ydnum compost per num ydnum of topsoil a fertilizer num num uf with map sop num a num a num uf num to num ab num to num ab num sop num to num ab num to num ab note uf ureaform map monoammonium phosphate sop sulfate of potash a the nmp will specify the application rate .
b when application of num is below num lb per acre apply num and num per nmp .
num incorporating soil amendments .
mix soil amendments into the upper num in .
of soil after application .
num transporting and handling .
transport and install turfgrass sod within num hours after harvest .
handle sod without excessive breaking tearing or loss of soil .
num placing .
place turfgrass sod with closed joints .
do not overlap or leave gaps between strips .
a slopes num and steeper .
place sod strips with the long edges following the contour not up and down the slope .
begin at the bottom of the slope and stagger the joints between strips .
num num turfgrass sod establishment b ditches .
place sod strips with the long edges following the flow of water not across the ditch .
center the lowest strip on the centerline of the ditch .
num securing .
secure turfgrass sod in ditches and slopes num and steeper with at least two fasteners per strip spaced no more than num ft apart .
drive the fasteners through the sod and firmly into the soil below so there is no gap at the top of the fastener .
num firming .
tamp or roll turfgrass sod after placing and stapling to tighten the joints between the sod strips and to press the sod firmly into the soil .
hand tampers shall weigh approximately num lb with a flat surface of approximately num innum .
rollers shall weigh approximately num lb per ft of width .
num initial watering .
perform the first watering within four hours after placing turfgrass sod .
wet the soil to a depth at least num in .
below the sod .
num installation acceptance .
submit a request for installation phase acceptance when operations are completed .
inspection will be conducted to verify completion .
installation phase acceptance will be granted at that time .
num establishment phase .
the establishment phase will begin upon installation phase acceptance .
monitor the soil moisture and water needs of the sod .
promptly provide water when needed or when directed .
num final acceptance .
the engineer and the landscape operations division will complete an inspection report of turfgrass sod height color and coverage .
when it is not possible to perform the inspection final acceptance will be delayed until inspection is possible .
the inspection report will be included in the punch list requirements for the project .
complete the punch list requirements as directed .
final acceptance will be granted when the turfgrass sod has grown at least num in .
exhibits dark green color has at least num percent coverage and is firmly rooted into the soil .
num measurement and payment .
turfgrass sod establishment will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for num num turfgrass sod establishment one or more of the specified items .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num turfgrass sod establishment .
turfgrass sod establishment including preparing soil applying fertilizer placing sod and fasteners and initial watering will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
a payment schedule .
payments will be made according to the following schedule when construction requirements are met payment schedule construction requirements percent of total contract price payment for completed work num thru num num at installation phase acceptance num and num num at final acceptance total payment num b forfeiture .
failure to complete operations as required or directed in conformance with the payment schedule will result in forfeiture of that percentage of payment .
num applying limestone to salvaged topsoil and nontopsoiled areas per ton .
num applying sulfur to salvaged topsoil and nontopsoiled areas per ton .
num applying gypsum to salvaged topsoil and nontopsoiled areas per ton .
num applying compost to salvaged topsoil and nontopsoiled areas per cubic yard .
num amending furnished topsoil and furnished subsoil will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for placing furnished topsoil and placing furnished subsoil .
num num soil stabilization matting section num soil stabilization matting num description .
install soil stabilization matting ssm in conjunction with seeding .
num materials .
topsoil num soil stabilization matting num fasteners num water num num construction .
num soil preparation and seeding .
perform operations for the ssm type as follows a type a and b .
prepare soil and perform turfgrass establishment as specified in section num but do not apply mulch .
install ssm immediately after seeding as specified in num thru .num. b type c. install type c ssm as specified in num thru .num .
infill with soil and immediately perform turfgrass establishment as specified in section num but do not till or apply mulch .
complete matting installation over seeded area as specified in num. c type d. prepare soil and perform seeding as specified .
install type d ssm immediately after seeding as specified in num thru .num .
num unrolling .
unroll ssm in the direction of the flow of water .
lay matting smoothly in firm uniform contact with the soil surface without stretching or tenting .
num overlapping .
overlap ssm with the upslope portion on top .
overlap edges at least num in .
and ends at least num in .
num keyingin .
keyingin consists of the following operations num num soil stabilization matting a trenching .
trench into the soil perpendicular to the flow of water to at least num in .
depth .
areas of matting to keyin matting type area of matting a b uppermost or leadingedge .
a b edges adjacent to catch basins and structures .
b lowermost or toeedge .
c d all edges c folds of matting perpendicular to water flow every num ft. b fastening .
install fasteners through ssm into the bottom of the trench .
c backfilling .
backfill the trench with firmly tamped soil .
num fastening .
refer to num and secure ssm with fasteners driven perpendicular to the soil grade and flush with the surface of the matting as follows a fastener selection .
use fasteners of the shape and length approved for the matting type as follows fastener selection matting type fastener shape approved fasteners num in .
length num in .
length num in .
length num in .
length a ushaped staple x x circletop pin x x round head pin x x thead pin x wood peg x b c d ushaped staple x x fabric pin x x b placement of fasteners .
install fasteners at the specified distance apart as required for the area of matting and the matting type as follows num num soil stabilization matting fastener placement area of matting matting type maximum distance between fasteners in .
uppermost or leadingedge of matting a b c d num overlapping edges of matting a b c d num center of ditch a b c d num lowermost or toeedge of matting a b c d num throughout matting a b c d num in folds every num to num ft c num num infilling and seeding type c ssm .
perform the following operations after installing type c ssm .
a infilling .
infill the matting with topsoil to provide a depth equal to twice the thickness of the matting and sufficient for a graded num in .
tapered area beyond the outside edges of the matting .
b seeding .
firm the soil with a roller as specified in num and perform turfgrass establishment over the infilled matting and tapered area .
c covering .
install type b ssm immediately after seeding to cover the seeded area .
secure the matting with num in .
ushaped staples or num in .
or num in .
fabric pins .
num watering .
gently water ssm with a sprinkler or water breaker nozzle within num hours of installation to bond the matting to the soil .
apply water at the rate of num gal per num ftnum to wet the soil to a minimum num in .
depth below the matting .
num installation phase acceptance .
inspection will be conducted to verify that operations were completed as specified .
installation phase acceptance will be granted at that time .
num establishment phase .
the establishment phase will begin upon installation phase acceptance .
num final acceptance .
final acceptance will be granted when the ssm is secure and the turfgrass or other vegetation seedlings have grown at least num in .
exhibit dark green color and minimum percent coverage .
num num soil stabilization matting turfgrass establishment will be accepted as specified in num .
other vegetation seeding will be accepted as specified .
when turfgrass establishment or other vegetation seeding is not acceptable remove type a b or d ssm .
remove type c matting when directed .
prepare soil reseed and install new matting unless the original matting is approved for reuse .
apply additional fertilizer or soil amendments as directed .
num measurement and payment .
soil stabilization matting will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard for one or more of the specified items .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
a payment schedule .
payments will be made according to the following schedule when construction requirements are met payment schedule construction requirements percent of total contract price payment for completed work num thru .num num at installation phase acceptance num and .num num at final acceptance total payment num b forfeiture .
failure to complete operations as required in accordance with the payment schedule will result in forfeiture of that percentage of payment .
num type a soil stabilization matting per square yard .
num type b soil stabilization matting per square yard .
num type c soil stabilization matting per square yard .
num type d soil stabilization matting per square yard .
num num tree shrub and perennial installation section num tree shrub and perennial installation and establishment num description .
install and establish trees shrubs perennials vines and grasses .
num materials .
limestone num sulfur num iron sulfate num compost num fertilizer num shredded hardwood bark shb mulch num plant materials num marking and staking materials num water num pesticides num marking dye num spray adjuvant and wetting agent num num construction .
num general .
a planting seasons .
install plants during the following planting seasons unless a modification request is approved planting seasons season deciduous trees shrubs vines evergreen trees shrubs vines perennials grasses balled burlapped bare root container grown balled burlapped container grown container grown spring num num num num num num num num num num fall num num num num num num num num num num b modification request .
submit a written modification request to perform installation outof season or to install plants of different species cultivars sizes growth habits or planting stock type .
num num tree shrub and perennial installation the engineer and landscape operations division will evaluate the request .
if granted a notice of approved modification will be returned within num days afterwards .
c pesticide application .
apply pesticides in conformance with the maryland pesticide applicators law the administrations integrated vegetation management manual for maryland highways and the manufacturers recommendations .
the contractor shall possess a maryland department of agriculture commercial pesticide business license and a pesticide applicator certificate for the pertinent pesticide application category num forest numa ornamental plant exterior numc turf num aquatic num rightofway and weed .
pesticides shall be applied by a maryland certified pesticide applicator or by a registered pesticide applicator under the supervision of a certified pesticide applicator .
d pesticide application reporting .
record the location acreage treated pesticide name and quantity applied on the pesticide application reporting form .
submit the form within num hours after applying pesticide .
e nutrient management plan nmp .
the specified application rates of num num and num fertilizers shall be the nmp rates unless the administration develops a substitute nmp .
replace application rates of num and .num as required by the nmp .
f nutrient management reporting .
record the fertilizer analy sis the square yards covered and the pounds of fertilizer applied on the nutrient management reporting form .
submit the form within num hours after applying fertilizer .
g plant storage and handling .
refer to num .
num submittals and inspection .
submit the following items a breakdown list of contract prices .
refer to num and develop a breakdown list of contract prices for each plant in the contract .
include the cost of all installation and establishment operations in the per plant price .
num submit the written breakdown list within num days after award of contract .
the breakdown list will be reviewed by the engineer and landscape operations division for completeness and balance and will be approved or returned for correction .
b installation phase schedule .
develop a schedule with dates for completing num thru .num including operations in installation phase schedule num layout utilities review and marking .
num undesirable vegetation removal and herbicide application .
num planting pit excavation soil preparation and plant installation .
num planting beds rototilling and soil preparation applying shredded hardwood bark shb mulch and plant installation .
num applying fertilizer solution after installation and cleanup .
submit the written schedule at least num days before beginning landscape work .
the schedule will be reviewed by the engineer and landscape operations division for completeness and feasibility and will be approved or returned for correction .
c plant material inspection and approval .
the inspection will be conducted by the landscape operations division as specified in num. d establishment phase schedule ipm program .
develop a schedule with dates for completing num .
include an integrated pest management ipm plan with methods of pest monitoring weeds diseases insects mammals etc .
pesticide selection application rates and scheduling .
submit the written establishment phase schedule ipm program at the installation phase inspection .
the schedule will be reviewed by the engineer and the landscape operations division and will be approved or returned for correction .
num utilities marking layout and inspection .
refer to section num when included in the contract documents .
num tree shrub and perennial installation num num tree shrub and perennial installation a utilities marking .
contact miss utility or another approved service to identify and mark utilities in the rightsofway .
contact the district utilities engineer to mark utilities on administration property .
b conflicts .
notify the administration of conflicts that may involve design changes .
conflicts will be reviewed by the landscape operations division and resolved within num days after notice .
c planting layout .
provide the necessary materials and lay out the locations of planting pits and planting beds specified in the contract documents or as adjusted by the landscape operations division .
d inspection .
at least num days notice will be required to schedule each stage of a layout inspection in consultation with the landscape operations division .
proceed with operations after layout approval .
num preparing planting pits .
perform the following operations when preparing planting pits for individual plants a undesirable vegetation .
elim inate undesirable vegetation as follows num nonselective herbicide .
apply nonselective herbicide in water with wetting agent and dye at least num days before plant installation as follows nonselective herbicide application material rate per acre glyphosate herbicide num lb of active ingredient marking dye num to num oz water num to num gal cut and remove dead vegetation or debris that interferes with soil preparation plant installation or future maintenance .
num manual vegetation removal .
remove undesirable vegetation within bioretention facilities manually without the use of herbicides .
b excavation .
excavate planting pits to the depth required for the placement of root collars as specified in numc .
retain the num num tree shrub and perennial installation excavated soil for preparation as backfill soil .
remove excess soil from the site or spread it as directed .
c pit diameter compost and water .
use the following table to determine the diameter of the planting pit based upon the container or root ball diameter the volume of compost or peat moss to be mixed into the backfill soil and the amount of water to be used per watering event .
preparing planting pits and backfill soil container or root ball diameter in .
ansi znum container size planting pit diameter in .
compost or peat moss ft.num num granular fertilizer oz .
num tablet fertilizer each water per event gal .
num spnum num num num num num spnum num num num num num spnum or num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num container grown cg and balled and burlapped bb .
add num or num fertilizer to each planting pit during installation unless other rates are specified in the nmp .
num bare root br .
excavate planting pits to accommodate roots when spread in natural position .
add num fertilizer to each planting pit during installation based upon the pit diameter unless other rates are specified in the nmp .
d compost or peat moss .
mix compost into the backfill soil as specified in numc when installing all plants except ericaceous species which shall be amended with the same volume of peat moss .
num num tree shrub and perennial installation e ph adjust ment .
adjust soil ph to ph num to num for all plants except ericaceous species which shall be adjusted to ph num to num .
use limestone to raise soil ph and iron sulfate to lower soil ph as specified in the nmp .
f fertilizer .
at the time of installation mix num fertilizer into the backfill soil of trees shrubs vines perennials and grasses or place num fertilizer into the backfill soil near the midpoint depth of the planting pit of trees shrubs and vines in lieu of num num fertilizer .
use a scale with num oz accuracy to calibrate measures and verify application rates of num fertilizer .
num preparing planting beds .
perform the following operations when preparing planting beds a undesirable vegetation .
eliminate undesirable vegetation as specified in numa .
cut or mow dead vegetation to a height of num in .
and remove the debris .
b fertilizer and soil amendments .
uni formly apply fertilizer and soil amendments limestone iron sulfate compost peat moss at rates specified in numc unless other rates are specified in the nmp .
mix num fertilizer or place num fertilizer into the backfill soil of each planting pit within the planting bed .
refer to numf and the following num areas flatter than num .
apply compost to the soil surface of the bed to a num in .
depth .
num slopes num and steeper .
mix compost or peat moss into the backfill soil of each planting pit within the bed .
c rototilling .
rototill the soil of the bed as follows num areas flatter than num .
rototill to a depth of num in .
to thoroughly mix compost and specified fertilizer or soil amendments into the soil .
num slopes num and steeper .
do not rototill .
num bioretention soil mixture .
do not rototill .
num num tree shrub and perennial installation d debris removal .
remove debris stones and soil clods with a length or width greater than num in .
that are uncovered during rototilling .
e leveling .
level the soil surface after rototilling and leave it in a condition ready for shredded hardwood bark shb mulching and plant installation .
num plant acclimation .
ensure that container grown plants are acclimated to prevailing weather conditions before installing .
install bare root plants while dormant when soil and air temperatures are above freezing .
num plant care .
begin plant care at the time each plant is installed and continue until installation phase acceptance is granted .
num pruning .
prune to preserve the natural appearance of trees and shrubs .
remove water sprouts manually with pruners .
remove damaged or undesirable wood of deciduous trees taller than num ft before installation .
prune deciduous trees and shrubs num ft or shorter at the time of installation .
num installing .
install plants vertically in planting pits and beds prepared as specified in num and .num and as follows a removing containers burlap wire baskets .
remove synthetic fabric plastic and metal containers before installing plants .
remove twine and natural burlap from the tops of root balls to a depth at least num in .
below the surface of the backfilled planting pit .
cut and remove the tops of wire baskets from the upper half of the rootball .
b preparing roots .
carefully remove the containers of container grown plants and loosen the soil mass to eliminate girdling roots .
spread the roots of bare root plants in a natural position and work amended soil around the roots .
c placing root collar .
place the root collar of plants at or above the average soil surface grade outside the planting pit as follows num num tree shrub and perennial installation root collar placement soil conditions height of root collar normal well drained place collar at same level to num in .
above average surface grade .
compacted place collar at num to num in .
above average surface grade .
poorly drained or wet place collar as needed to ensure num of root mass is above average surface grade .
d backfilling .
remove clods stones and other foreign material with a length or width greater than num in .
from soil used for backfilling .
place backfill soil that has been fertilized and amended as specified in num and .num under and around roots to stabilize plants in upright position and restore the grade .
lightly compact backfill soil to reduce air pockets .
avoid excessive compaction of bioretention soil mixture bsm .
num soil berming .
form a num in .
high berm of backfill soil around planting pits and planting beds as follows a planting pits .
on areas flatter than num form the berm around the entire planting pit .
on slopes num and steeper take soil from the upslope rim of the pit and place it on the downslope rim to form the berm .
b planting beds .
on slopes num and steeper form the berm as a shoulder at the lower edge of the bed .
berm individual trees and shrubs installed within beds on slopes num and steeper as described in a above .
num edging .
cut edging at a steep angle into the mulched area to a num in .
depth into the soil .
on slopes num and steeper cut edging outside of the bermed area on the lower edge of berm .
remove and discard excess soil .
a planting pits .
edge entirely around all planting pits except planting pits within planting beds .
b planting beds .
smoothly cut edging around all planting beds to the shapes specified .
num num tree shrub and perennial installation num staking and guying .
stake and guy trees the same day they are installed .
a installation .
when two or three stakes are specified for trees install two stakes parallel to the direction of traffic or as directed .
drive stakes vertically to a depth of num in .
below the bottom of the pit and num to num in .
away from roots as follows staking and guying tree type caliper in .
height ft support no .
of stakes length ft shade under num num and num num num num to num num num num to num num num num and over num guy wires attached to tree anchors flowering num to num num num num and over num guy wires attached to tree anchors evergreen num and num num num num num and num num num num and over num guy wires attached to tree anchors b maintenance .
promptly straighten trees that become crooked after installation .
repair or replace stakes guys and other support materials as needed .
num mulching .
spread shb mulch uniformly over the soil surface to a num in .
depth .
promptly repair damage caused by washouts or construction activities .
a planting pits .
spread shb mulch the same day that plants are installed .
mulch around the base of each plant to cover the soil of the planting pit to its outside edge including the soil berm .
do not allow mulch to touch the bark or main stem of the plant .
b planting beds .
shb mulch may be spread before or after installing plants .
spread mulch over the entire bed and rake it to an even surface including berms and shoulders .
ensure that mulch does not cover plants .
num rototilled beds .
spread mulch the same day after rototilling .
num num tree shrub and perennial installation num nonrototilled beds .
spread mulch within num days after plant installation .
when installation is completed ensure that mulch uniformly covers the soil to a uniform num in .
depth .
num fertilizing and watering after installation .
a application equipment .
fertilizer and watering equipment shall consist of sprinklers or hoses equipped with water breaker nozzles so the materials are applied with care to prevent damage to plants and minimize disturbance to shb mulch .
b fertilizer solution .
fertilizer solution shall consist of num lb of num water soluble fertilizer per num gal of water applied as follows num planting pits .
apply fertilizer solution as specified in numc to each installed plant .
num planting beds .
apply num gal of fertilizer solution per num ftnum to the entire bed area .
c nutrient management reporting .
refer to numf .
d followup watering .
monitor and apply water during the installation phase to supply plant needs .
do not mix fertilizer with the irrigation water during the installation phase after the initial watering unless directed .
num cleanup .
remove growers tape plant stakes pot markers field tags and similar materials at the time of installation .
ensure that the administrations material inspection approval seals and plant tags remain on trees and shrubs until the end of the establishment phase .
keep turfgrass areas paved surfaces and sidewalks clean .
promptly remove excess and waste materials .
take precautions to avoid damage to existing structures plants and turfgrass .
repair damage caused to surrounding areas during installation and fill ruts and reestablish turfgrass as necessary .
num relocating plants .
begin plant relocation operations within num days after notice to relocate and continue until work is completed .
num num tree shrub and perennial installation remove plants installed in undesirable locations as directed by the engineer and reinstall these plants as specified in herein .
num abandoned planting pits .
backfill abandoned planting pits when directed with excavated soil or approved backfill .
compact the backfill in num in .
layers to the finished grade .
establish turfgrass as specified in section num .
num unacceptable plants and replacement plants .
promptly remove and replace plants that are unacceptable at any time during the installation phase as specified in num or when requested .
plants that are determined to be missing dead dying damaged diseased deformed underdeveloped damaged by pesticides or not true to species cultivar size or quality shall be replaced .
refer to gpnum regarding removal of defective work and materials and gpnum regarding contractor responsibility for work theft damage and loss .
a criteria .
the following criteria will be used to identify unacceptable plants criteria for unacceptable plants item plant type condition unacceptable num tree shrub vine perennial grass death or absence any dead or missing plant any cause .
num tree shrub vine perennial grass defoliation more than num of leaf area dead lost or dropped .
num tree shrub vine bark wound more than num of bark circumference or num in .
length .
num shrub or vine height dieback more than num of the shrub or vine height .
num tree leader dieback more than num of tree height .
num tree branch dieback more than num in .
on num of branches .
b replacement plants .
replacement plants shall be true to species cultivar size and quality as specified in the contract documents unless a substitution request is approved .
install replacement plants as soon as feasible during the current planting season or if between planting seasons during the next planting season .
num num tree shrub and perennial installation promptly submit a modification request as specified in numb when it is not possible to obtain plants that meet specifications .
replacement plants shall meet the specifications of num and be installed and established as specified in section num for num months until final acceptance .
num installation phase inspection .
submit a request for installation phase inspection when operations are completed and provide the establishment phase schedule as specified in numd .
the installation phase inspection will be scheduled by the engineer at the project with the contractor and the landscape operations division to verify completion .
at least num days notice will be provided before the scheduled inspection so that it may be completed in the company of the contractor .
num installation phase punch list .
the engineer in consultation with the contractor and the landscape operations division will develop the installation phase punch list and list of plants to be replaced .
complete the punch list requirements and replace plants as required .
num installation phase acceptance .
reinspection will be performed as needed .
installation phase acceptance will be granted when the punch list and all installation phase requirements are completed .
the following list includes key installation phase requirements num num tree shrub and perennial installation requirements for installation phase acceptance item requirement section a submittals are accepted and inspections are completed .
numb num num b damaging pests are controlled .
numc c layouts are inspected and approved .
num d fertilizer and soil amendments are applied .
num and num e planting pits and planting beds are weed free .
numa and numa f trees and shrubs are pruned .
num g trees are installed vertically and straightened .
num h planting pits and beds are bermed and edged .
num and num i staking and guying are repaired or replaced .
num j shb mulch is uniformly spread to the specified depth .
num k washouts in planting pits and beds are repaired .
num l plants are watered and fertilized .
num and num m clean up is completed plant tags and ribbons are removed .
num n plants are relocated to approved locations .
num o abandoned planting pits are filled and seeded .
num p unacceptable plants are replaced .
num q damage repairs and installation punch list is completed .
num r pesticide application and nutrient management reporting forms are completed .
numd and f s plants are properly installed and successfully transplanted .
num thru .num t establishment phase schedule ipm program is accepted .
num e and num num establishment phase .
the establishment phase begins upon installation phase acceptance .
maintain plants as specified in num thru num and as follows a period of maintenance .
maintain plants for num months after installation until final acceptance .
b plant watering .
monitor the soil moisture and water needs of plants .
promptly apply water as specified in numc to planting pits and num gal of water per num ftnum to planting beds when needed or when directed .
c pest management .
monitor and prom ptly control weeds insects and other pests in conformance with the ipm program or when requested .
control weeds in mulched areas in preparation for inspection on or about the numth of each month from march numth to november numth .
remove dead weeds taller than num in .
refer to num num tree shrub and perennial installation numd and complete the pesticide application reporting form .
d unacceptable plants and replacement plants .
refer to num .
promptly remove and replace plants that have become unacceptable during the establishment phase as needed or as directed .
e endofseason foliage removal .
remove the aboveground parts of perennials and grasses that have declined during the months of november and march respectively or as directed .
f refertilizing .
apply num fertilizer solution as specified in num in the final num days of the establishment phase .
g removing supports and seals .
remove tree supports hoses wires guys and material inspection approval seals in the final num days of the establishment phase .
pull stakes from the soil or cut them to ground level .
h establishment phase inspection and punch list .
num and .num .
the inspection will be scheduled and the establishment phase punch list will be developed .
perform repairs replacements and other work as specified in the contract documents and punch list .
num final acceptance .
refer to num .
final acceptance will be granted when the punch list and all establishment phase requirements are completed .
num num tree shrub and perennial installation the following list includes key establishment requirements requirements for establishment phase final acceptance item requirement section num water sprouts are manually pruned and removed .
num num trees are straightened .
num num staking and guying are repaired or replaced .
num num washouts in planting pits and beds are repaired .
num num plants are relocated to approved locations .
num num abandoned planting pits are filled and seeded .
num num plants are successfully established for num months .
numa and b num damaging pests are controlled .
numc num planting pits and planting beds are weed free .
numc num unacceptable plants are replaced .
numd num annual foliage dieback of perennials and grasses is cut and removed .
nume num plants are refertilized .
numf num pesticide application and nutrient management reporting forms are completed .
numd and f num staking guying and material inspection seals are removed .
numg num damage repairs and establishment punch list are completed .
numh num measurement and payment .
tree shrub and perennial installation and establishment will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for one or more of the specified items .
the payment will be full compensation for all plants material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num tree shrub and perennial installation and establishment .
tree shrub and perennial installation and establishment shall include the cost of trees shrubs perennials vines and grasses layout marking pruning planting pit excavation fertilizer soil amendments backfilling staking guying berming edging watering pest management plant maintenance and all operations related to the installation and establishment phases of each plant until final acceptance .
tree shrub and perennial installation and establishment will be paid for in monthly prorated payments based upon the approved breakdown list of contract prices .
refer to numa .
in the event of change in the quantities required payment adjustments will be based on the approved breakdown list of contract prices .
num num tree shrub and perennial installation a payment schedule .
payments will be made according to the following schedule when construction requirements are met payment schedule installation and establishment phase completion percent of total contract price prorated monthly for completed work num thru .num installation phase num duration of installation phase numa thru d establishment phase care maintenance num at each monthly inspection nume thru h establishment phase removal replacement and final acceptance num at final acceptance total payment num b forfeiture .
failure to complete operations as required or directed in conformance with the payment schedule will result in forfeiture of that percentage of payment based upon the breakdown list of contract prices .
num constructing planting beds .
constructing planting beds will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
the price shall include the cost of layout marking fertilizer soil amendments rototilling berming edging applying num in .
of shb mulch and all operations related to construction of the planting bed .
mulching individual planting pits of trees shrubs perennials vines and grasses within planting beds will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to num .
num relocating plants .
relocating plants will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic foot of planting pit volume excavated as specified in numc .
num relocating plants pit diameter pit pit diameter pit volume in .
volume in .
ftnum ftnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num refer to the following table to determine planting pit volume based upon planting pit diameter num abandoned planting pits .
abandoned planting pits will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic foot of excavated planting pit as specified in to num .
num additional mulching .
additional mulching will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard of num in .
depth of shredded hardwood bark shb mulch over designated areas .
num composted wood chip mulch .
composted wood chip cwc mulch will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard at num in .
depth over designated areas .
section num annuals and bulbs installation and establishment num description .
install and establish annuals and bulbs .
num materials .
limestone num sulfur num iron sulfate num compost num fertilizer num shredded hardwood bark shb mulch num plant materials num marking and staking materials num annuals bulbs installation establishment num num water num pesticides num num construction .
num general .
a regional areas .
refer to numa .
b planting seasons .
install plants during the following planting seasons unless a modification request is approved planting seasons installation date season plants region num region num region num container grown spring num num num num num num summer annuals container grown num num num num num num winter annuals fall spring num num num num num num flowering bulbs c modification request .
numb .
d pesticide application .
numc .
e pesticide application reporting .
numd .
f nutrient management plan nmp .
nume .
g nutrient management reporting .
numf .
h plant storage and handling .
num .
num submittals and inspection .
submit the following items as indicated a breakdown list of contract prices .
refer to numa .
b installation phase schedule .
refer to numb and submit the schedule with dates for completing num thru .num .
num annuals bulbs installation establishment num annuals bulbs installation establishment num c plant material inspection and approval .
the inspection will be conducted by the landscape operations division as specified in num. d establishment phase schedule ipm program .
refer to numd and submit the schedule with dates for completing num .
num utilities marking layout and inspection .
refer to num .
num preparing planting beds and planting areas .
a planting beds .
refer to num for preparing beds and planting holes for container grown annuals and bulbs .
dig holes for bulbs to the depth and width recommended for the species or variety by the grower .
b planting areas for naturalized daffodils .
dig planting holes to num diameter and to a num in .
depth .
mix num oz of num fertilizer into the backfill soil of each bulb or as specified in the nmp .
firmly cover each bulb with backfill soil to the level of the surrounding grade .
omit num thru .num when installing naturalized daffodils .
num soil berming .
refer to num .
num edging .
refer to num .
num mulching .
refer to num .
num plant acclimation .
refer to num .
num plant care .
refer to num .
num installing .
handle annuals and bulbs with care to avoid damage or bruising .
refer to num and the following a foliage removal .
remove dead foliage of annuals and other unwanted vegetation from the previous season without damaging or disturbing perennials or other desirable vegetation .
num num annuals bulbs installation establishment b mulch .
remove and conserve shb mulch at sites where annuals or bulbs will be installed before digging the planting hole .
replace mulch to a depth of num in .
over bulbs and around the stems of annuals .
num fertilizing and watering after installation .
a application equipment .
refer to numa .
b fertilizer solution .
refer to numb .
c nutrient management reporting .
refer to numf .
d followup watering .
refer to numd .
num cleanup .
refer to num .
num unacceptable plants and replacement plants .
refer to num num and replace unacceptable plants as specified in section num for the remainder of the growing season until final acceptance .
num installation phase inspection .
refer to num .
num installation phase punch list .
refer to num .
num installation phase acceptance .
refer to num and provide the establishment phase schedule as specified in nume .
installation phase acceptance will be granted when the punch list and all installation phase requirements are completed .
num annuals bulbs installation establishment num the following list includes key installation phase requirements requirements for installation phase acceptance item requirement section a submittals are accepted and inspections are completed .
numb num num b dead foliage in existing beds is removed .
numa c fertilizer and soil amendments are applied .
num d planting pits and planting beds are bermed and edged .
num and num e shb mulch is uniformly spread to the specified depth .
num and numc f plants are watered and fertilized .
num and num g damaging pests are controlled .
numc h cleanup is completed plant tags and ribbons are removed .
num i washouts in and around planting beds are repaired .
num j unacceptable plants are replaced as needed or required .
num k damage repairs and installation punch list are completed .
num l sha pesticide application and nutrient management reporting forms are completed .
numd and f m plants are properly installed and successfully transplanted .
num thru .num n establishment phase schedule ipm program is accepted .
nume and num num establishment phase .
the establishment phase for annuals and bulbs planted in beds begins upon installation phase acceptance .
maintain all plants except naturalized daffodils as specified in num thru num and as follows a period of maintenance .
plants shall be maintained for one planting season until final acceptance .
b plant watering .
refer to numb .
c pest management .
refer to numc .
d unacceptable plants and replacement plants .
refer to num .
promptly remove and replace plants that have become unacceptable during the establishment phase as needed or at the request of the engineer .
e endofseason foliage removal .
remove the foliage of annuals that have declined in late summer or fall as directed by the engineer .
remove the foliage and flower stems of bulbs planted in beds after they have declined at the end of their growing season in june .
num num annuals bulbs installation establishment f establishment phase inspection and punch list .
refer to num and .num .
the inspection will be scheduled and the establishment phase punch list will be developed .
perform repairs replacements and other work as specified in the contract documents and punch list .
g final acceptance .
refer to num .
final acceptance will be granted when the punch list and all establishment phase requirements are completed .
the following list includes key establishment requirements requirements for establishment phase final acceptance item requirement section num washouts in and around planting beds are repaired .
num num plants are watered as needed and refertilized as requested .
numd and numb num damaging pests are controlled .
numc num planting beds are weed free .
numc num pesticide reporting and nutrient management fertilizer reporting forms are completed .
numd and f num unacceptable plants are replaced as requested .
numd num endofseason foliage removal is completed .
nume num damage repairs and establishment punch list are completed .
numf num measurement and payment .
annuals and bulbs installation and establishment installation and establishment will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for one or more of the specified items .
the payment will be full compensation for all plants material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num annuals and bulbs installation and establishment .
annuals and bulbs installation and establishment shall include the cost of plants layout marking pruning planting pit excavation fertilizer soil amendments backfilling berming edging watering pest management plant maintenance and all operations related to the installation and establishment phases of each plant until final acceptance .
annuals and bulbs installation and establishment will be paid for in monthly prorated payments based upon the approved breakdown list of contract prices and the following payment schedule .
num annuals bulbs installation establishment num refer to numa .
in the event of change in the quantities required payment adjustments will be based on the approved breakdown list of contract prices .
a payment schedule .
payments will be made according to the following schedule when construction requirements are met payment schedule installation and establishment phase completion percent of total contract price prorated monthly for completed work annuals in beds bulbs in beds naturalized bulbs num thru .num installation phase num num num duration of installation phase numa thru d establishment phase inseason maintenance num num _ at each monthly inspection nume thru g endofseason maintenance removal replacement and final acceptance num num _ at final acceptance total payment num num num b forfeiture .
failure to complete operations as required or directed in conformance with the payment schedule will result in forfeiture of that percentage of payment based upon the breakdown list of contract prices .
num constructing planting beds .
refer to num num refertilizing .
refertilization authorized after the engineer grants installation phase acceptance will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per num gallons .
num additional mulching .
refer to num .
num num tree branch pruning section num tree branch pruning num description .
prune tree branches .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction .
num general .
a permits .
obtain a roadside tree permit from the maryland department of natural resources forest service .
b tree preservation program tpp .
adhere to the requirements of the tpp when developed by the administration .
num breakdown list of contract prices .
refer to num and develop a breakdown list of contract prices for each tree in the contract .
include costs for pruning and completing all operations per tree .
submit the written breakdown list within num days after notice of award .
the breakdown list will be reviewed by the engineer and landscape operations division for completeness and balance and will be approved or returned for correction .
num maryland licensed tree expert lte .
a lte shall perform or directly supervise the operations in conformance with the maryland roadside tree law the forest conservation act and accepted arboricultural practices .
num meetings .
meet with the engineer the lte and the lod to review areas operations and the approved breakdown list of contract prices before beginning operations .
num marking .
identify trees to be pruned and obtain approval before beginning operations .
num equipment .
equipment and tools shall conform to accepted arboricultural practices .
num notice .
notify the engineer at least num days before beginning operations .
num num tree branch pruning num operations .
the contract documents will indicate the trees to be selectively pruned or the dimensions or goals to be achieved by pruning .
meet ansi anum standards for tree care operations .
tree branch pruning shall conform to one or more of the following operations as specified a cleaning .
to remove dead diseased and broken branches .
b thinning .
to reduce the density of live branches .
c raising .
to provide verti cal clearance to a height of num ft or as specified in the contract documents .
d reducing .
to decrease the height or spread .
e specialty pruning .
to meet the needs of young trees at planting once established pollarding for restoration to maintain vistas or to accommodate utilities .
num wood chipping .
chip wood and disperse or dispose of chips as directed .
num cleanup and restoration .
promptly disperse or remove and dispose of wood debris and other waste materials as directed .
avoid damage to existing structures plants and turfgrass .
keep turfgrass areas paved surfaces and sidewalks clean .
restore ruts and damaged turfgrass areas by seeding as specified in section num before beginning any new landscape operations .
num damage repair .
do not injure vegetation to be preserved .
injuries to bark trunks or limbs shall be repaired by cutting smoothing and tracing the bark in accordance with ansi anum standards for tree care operations .
num damage compensation .
monetary compensation for damage or loss of trees will be calculated and assessed in conformance with the guide for plant appraisal of the council of tree landscape appraisers .
num num brush removal num measurement and payment .
tree branch pruning will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price based upon the breakdown list of contract prices .
the payment will be full compensation for all labor material equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
if the administration requests a change the units and payment will be adjusted on the basis of the approved breakdown list of contract prices .
section num brush removal num description .
remove brush as specified .
num materials .
herbicide numa marking dye num num construction .
num general .
a permits .
obtain a roadside tree permit from the maryland department of natural resources forest service .
b tree preservation program tpp .
adhere to the requirements of the tpp when developed by the administration .
c pesticide application .
refer to numc .
d pesticide application reporting .
refer to numd .
num maryland licensed tree expert lte .
a lte shall perform or directly supervise the operations in conformance with the maryland roadside tree law the forest conservation act and accepted arboricultural practices .
num meetings .
meet with the engineer the lte and the landscape operations division to review areas and operations before beginning operations .
num num brush removal num marking .
mark areas where brush is to be removed .
identify trees and shrubs to be preserved and protected .
ensure that marking and identification is completed and approved before beginning operations .
num equipment .
equipment and tools shall conform to accepted arboricultural practices .
num notice .
notify the engineer at least num days before beginning operations .
num operations .
brush removal shall involve cutting herbicide treatment and debris removal of areas of living or dead vegetation .
do not injure vegetation identified for preservation .
one or more of the following operations will be specified a operation num brush removal .
cut vegetation to a height of no more than num in .
above the soil surface .
remove wood debris .
b operation num brush removal with stump treatment .
cut vegetation as in operation num .
immediately treat the cambium layer and exposed bark of live stumps with an approved herbicide solution and marking dye .
remove wood debris .
num wood chipping .
chip wood and disperse or dispose of chips as directed .
num cleanup and restoration .
promptly remove disperse or dispose of wood debris and other waste materials as directed .
avoid damage to existing structures plants and turfgrass .
keep turfgrass areas paved surfaces and sidewalks clean .
restore ruts and damaged turfgrass areas by seeding as specified in section num before beginning any new landscape operations .
num damage repair .
do not injure vegetation to be preserved .
injuries to bark trunks or limbs shall be repaired by cutting smoothing and tracing the bark in accordance with ansi anum standards for tree care operations .
num damage compensation .
monetary compensation for damage num num tree felling or loss of trees will be calculated and assessed in conformance with the guide for plant appraisal of the council of tree landscape appraisers .
num measurement and payment .
brush removal will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square yard as specified .
the payment will be full compensation for all labor material equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num tree felling num description .
fell trees as specified .
num materials .
furnished topsoil num herbicide numa marking dye num num construction .
num general .
a permits .
obtain a roadside tree permit from the maryland department of natural resources forest service .
b tree preservation program tpp .
adhere to the requirements of the tpp when developed by the administration .
c pesticide application .
refer to numc .
d pesticide application reporting .
refer to numd .
num breakdown list of contract prices .
refer to num and develop a breakdown list of contract prices for each tree in the contract .
include costs for felling and completing all operations per tree .
submit the written breakdown list within num days after notice of award .
the breakdown list will be reviewed by the engineer and landscape operations division for completeness and balance and will be approved or returned for correction .
num num tree felling num maryland licensed tree expert lte .
a lte shall perform or directly supervise the operations in conformance with the maryland roadside tree law the forest conservation act and accepted arboricultural practices .
num meetings .
meet with the engineer the lte and the lod to review areas operations and the breakdown list of contract prices before beginning operations .
num utilities and tree marking .
refer to section num when included in the contract documents .
a utilities marking .
contact miss utility or another approved service to identify and mark utilities in the rightsofway .
contact the district utilities engineer to mark utilities on administration property .
b tree marking .
mark trees to be felled .
obtain approval before beginning operations .
num equipment .
equipment and tools shall conform to accepted arboricultural practices .
num notice .
notify the engineer at least num days before beginning operations .
num operations .
tree felling shall involve cutting stump removal stump grinding herbicide treatment and debris removal of selected living or dead trees .
when trees can not be felled as a unit without danger to traffic or injury to other plants or property remove the top sections until the tree can be safely felled .
one or more of the following operations will be specified a operation num felling and stump removal .
fell trees and remove the stumps or grind them to a depth at least num in .
below the soil surface .
remove wood debris and stump grindings .
within num hours after removal or grinding backfill the stump holes with topsoil to the surrounding soil level .
seed as specified in section num. b operation num felling and stump treatment .
fell trees and num num tree felling remove wood debris .
cut stumps to a height of no more than num in .
above the soil surface .
treat with herbicide as specified in numb .
c operation num felling and removal .
fell trees and remove wood debris .
cut stumps to a height of no more than num in .
above the soil surface .
d operation num felling and delimbing .
f ell trees and cut stumps to a height of no more than num in .
above the soil surface .
branches of felled trees that extend higher than num ft above the soil surface shall be cut or delimbed to a height of no more than num ft above the soil surface .
do not remove wood debris .
num wood chipping .
chip wood and disperse or dispose of chips as directed .
num cleanup and restoration .
promptly remove disperse or dispose of wood debris and other waste materials as directed .
avoid damage to existing structures plants and turfgrass .
keep turfgrass areas paved surfaces and sidewalks clean .
restore ruts and damaged turfgrass areas by seeding as specified in section num before beginning any new landscape operations .
num damage repair .
do not injure vegetation to be preserved .
injuries to bark trunks or limbs shall be repaired by cutting smoothing and tracing the bark in accordance with ansi anum standards for tree care operations .
num damage compensation .
monetary compensation for damage or loss of trees will be calculated and assessed in conformance with the guide for plant appraisal of the council of tree landscape appraisers .
num measurement and payment .
tree felling will not be measured but will be paid for at the contract lump sum price based upon the tree felling size classes and the breakdown list of contract prices specified in num .
the payment will be full compensation for all labor material equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
felled trees shall be classed according to the following table of tree felling num num tree root pruning size classes and be paid as per their size class tree felling size classes tree diameter at breast height in .
tree pay class tree diameter at breast height in .
tree pay class under num a num to num f num to num b num to num g num to num c num to num h num to num d num to num i num to num e over num j if the administration requests a change the units and payment will be adjusted on the basis of the tree felling size classes and the breakdown list of contract prices .
section num tree root pruning num description .
prune tree roots as specified .
num materials .
salvaged topsoil num furnished topsoil num num construction .
num general .
a permits .
obtain a roadside tree permit from the maryland department of natural resources forest service .
b tree preservation program tpp .
adhere to the requirements of the tpp when developed by the administration .
num maryland licensed tree expert lte .
a lte shall perform or directly supervise the operations in conformance with the maryland roadside tree law the forest conservation act and accepted arboricultural practices .
num meetings .
meet with the engineer the lte and the landscape operations division before beginning operations .
num num tree root pruning num utilities marking and conflicts .
refer to section num when included in the contract documents .
a utilities marking .
contact miss utility or another approved service to identify and mark utilities in the rightsofway .
contact the district utilities engineer to mark utilities on administration property .
b conflicts .
notify the administration of conflicts that may affect operations .
conflicts will be reviewed by the landscape operations division and resolved within num days after notice .
num marking .
mark areas to be root pruned and obtain approval before beginning operations .
num equipment .
use a vibratory knife or other equipment and tools that conform to accepted arboricultural practices .
num notice .
notify the engineer at least num days before beginning operations .
num operations .
meet ansi anum standards for tree care operations .
cleanly cut tree roots to a depth of num in .
along the approved line and immediately backfill trenches with excavated soil .
num cleanup and restoration .
promptly remove disperse or dispose of wood debris and other waste materials as directed .
avoid damage to existing structures plants and turfgrass .
keep turfgrass areas paved surfaces and sidewalks clean .
restore ruts and damaged turfgrass areas by seeding as specified in section num before beginning any new landscape operations .
num damage repair .
do not injure vegetation to be preserved .
injuries to bark trunks or limbs shall be repaired by cutting smoothing and tracing the bark in accordance with ansi anum standards for tree care operations .
num damage compensation .
monetary compensation for damage or loss of trees will be calculated and assessed in conformance with the guide for plant appraisal of the council of tree landscape appraisers .
num num tree fertilizing num measurement and payment .
tree root pruning will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
the payment will be full compensation for all labor material equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num tree fertilizing num description .
fertilize trees as specified .
num materials .
fertilizer num and as specified in the tpp .
num construction .
num general .
a permits .
obtain a roadside tree permit from the maryland department of natural resources forest service .
b tree preservation program tpp .
adhere to the requirements of the tpp when developed by the administration .
c nutrient management reporting .
record the fertilizer analy sis the square yards covered and the pounds of fertilizer applied on the nutrient management reporting form .
submit the form within num hours after applying fertilizer .
num maryland licensed tree expert lte .
a lte shall perform or directly supervise the operations in conformance with the maryland roadside tree law the forest conservation act and accepted arboricultural practices .
num meetings .
meet with the engineer the lte and the landscape operations division before beginning operations .
num marking .
identify trees to be fertilized and obtain approval before beginning operations .
num equipment .
equipment and tools shall conform to accepted arboricultural practices .
num num tree fertilizing num notice .
notify the engineer at least num days before beginning operations .
num operations .
meet ansi anum standards for tree care operations .
one or more of the following operations will be specified a operation num broadcast fertilizing .
appl y fertilizer uniformly over the soil surface .
b operation num injection fertilizing .
inject fertilizer solution through a pressurized probe at points num to num ft apart to a depth of num to num in .
c operation num drill fertilizing .
place fertilizer int o num to num in .
diameter drilled holes at points num to num ft apart to a depth of num to num in .
num cleanup and restoration .
avoid damage to existing structures plants and turfgrass .
keep turfgrass areas paved surfaces and sidewalks clean .
restore ruts and damaged turfgrass areas by seeding as specified in section num before beginning any new landscape operations .
num damage repair .
do not injure vegetation to be preserved .
injuries to bark trunks or limbs shall be repaired by cutting smoothing and tracing the bark in accordance with ansi anum standards for tree care operations .
num damage compensation .
monetary compensation for damage or loss of trees will be calculated and assessed in conformance with the guide for plant appraisal of the council of tree landscape appraisers .
num measurement and payment .
tree fertilizing will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for one or more of the specified items .
the payment will be full compensation for all labor material equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num tree broadcast fertilizing per square yard .
num tree injection fertilizing per square yard .
num tree drill fertilizing per square yard .
num category num traffic section num concrete foundations num description .
construct concrete foundations for installing traffic signals highway lighting and signs .
num materials .
curing materials num concrete mix no .
num num corrugated metal pipe num reinforcement steel num anchor bolts num conduit num galvanizing for hardware a num num construction .
num excavation .
excavate to the dimensions specified .
ensure that all excavation work is inspected and approved before proceeding with construction .
num galvanized parts that have been cut or chipped to bare metal shall be repaired per a num .
num concrete placement .
place concrete against undisturbed earth wherever possible .
however where the existing ground shows a tendency to cave in or otherwise will not retain its shape during or after excavation provide install and leave in place a corrugated steel pipe .
mix place and test concrete as specified in section num .
construct footings including reinforcement and bolt circle data as specified in the contract documents and in conformance with the approved working drawings .
use suitable and accurately placed templates to set the anchor bolts plumb .
leave the templates in place until the concrete attains initial set .
apply a level trowel finish to the top of the foundation .
apply a liquid membrane forming compound to all exposed surfaces .
num unusual soil conditions .
when unexpected subsurface conditions are encountered modify the excavation depth as directed .
if num num galvanized steel beam sign posts rock or boulders can not be removed by ordinary means remove them to the levels and dimensions specified or to a depth necessary to obtain the required stability .
num backfill .
use material that is free of topsoil organic frozen and other undesirable materials .
keep spaces to be backfilled free of trash .
clean the space before placing backfill .
use suitable material from the excavation or other sources conforming to section num .
place in layers not more than num in .
loose thickness .
use mechanical or vibratory compaction equipment to obtain at least num percent of maximum density at a moisture content within num percent of the optimum per t num method c. num measurement and payment .
concrete foundations for installing traffic signals highway lighting and signs will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for the pertinent concrete foundation item .
the payment will be full compensation for all concrete excavation corrugated metal pipe or forms reinforcement steel anchor bolts backfill and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
where concrete barrier transitions grounding and conduit are required they will be measured and paid for as specified in sections num num and num respectively .
section num galvanized steel beam sign posts num description .
furnish and install galvanized steel beam sign posts .
num materials .
bolts nuts and washers num galvanizing for beams a num galvanizing for hardware a num steel beams a num num construction .
stake each location for approval .
upon approval submit working drawings .
show the highest elevation of the traveled roadway and the shoulder elevation at each post location .
upon approval of the working drawings materials may be ordered .
galvanized parts that have been cut or chipped to bare metal shall be repaired per a num .
num num overhead sign structures install posts plumb and to the lateral orientation specified .
num measurement and payment .
galvanized steel beam sign posts will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the various sizes of posts specified .
the payment will be full compensation for stakeout and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
breakaway base support systems will be measured and paid for as specified in section num .
section num overhead sign structures num description .
furnish and install overhead sign structures and appurtenances .
sign panels electrical work luminaires and foundations are excluded .
num materials .
bolts nuts and washers num overhead sign structures num num construction .
do all fabrication in the shop as specified in section num except do welding in accordance with ansiaws dnum tubular structures .
design and manufacture all assemblies and tubular members as specified in a num to permit hot dip galvanizing .
make all holes required in the supports before galvanizing .
protect the surfaces during transportation and handling .
the structure shall be free from sharp edges irregularities misfits and structural deficiencies .
after installation and before final acceptance repair or replace all damaged surfaces .
stake each location for approval by the engineer .
upon approval submit working drawings .
show the highest elevation of the traveled roadway and the shoulder elevation at each support location .
upon approval of the working drawings materials may be ordered .
num num grounding num measurement and payment .
overhead sign structures will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
the payment will be full compensation for all stakeouts sign and luminaire supports nuts and washers and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num grounding num description .
furnish and install grounding systems .
num materials .
ground wire and rods num num construction .
the grounding system shall conform to the latest editions of the nec and nesc .
grounding of overhead communication cable messenger cable attached to a utility company owned pole shall also conform to the utility companys requirements .
num equipment grounding system .
this system shall consist of the ground wire electrically continuous metallic conduit system span wire steel poles grounding conductors communications cable steel spans ground rods steel span wire back guying steel span wire pole to pole guying and steel span wire slack spans and terminations .
grounding for overhead communications cable shall be to all of the following when present at the telephone and catv cables support span wires at the ground wire of a multigrounded system at the neutral wire of a multigrounded system and at the ground of a secondary circuit with approved span wire grounding clamps .
grounding to the overhead communication cable support span at utility company owned poles shall be with a vise type body clamp equipped with jaws having teeth to pierce the insulation without stripping the jacket on the overhead communications cable span wire and operated by a single hexagonal head bolt .
num grounding conductors .
furnish and install grounding conductors of the size and type specified .
num ground rods .
install ground rods as specified .
measure the ground resistance of each rod before connecting the rod to the grounding conductor .
if the measured resistance exceeds num ohms exothermically weld a num ft extension rod to the top of the first rod and drive to its full depth .
measure the earth resistance again .
if it still exceeds num ohms contact the engineer for instructions .
num grounding num where rock is encountered and acceptable earth grounds can not be accomplished by driving as described above the engineer may direct the use of a grounding grid .
in a grounding grid direct buried rods are exothermically welded end to end to bond lighting standards and structures in continuous series to some point where an acceptable earth ground can be obtained .
num continuity .
maintain continuity of the equipment grounding system throughout the project .
num terminations .
connection to equipment grounding system shall be made with suitable lugs at all grounding bushings specified in section num and at the ground lugs in lighting structure access holes or in a breakaway base .
make connections to ground rods as specified in the contract documents .
connections to neutral grounding systems shall be made with lugs as specified in section num .
overhead communication cable shall be made with connectors installed at the first attachment on a utility company owned pole in the following method at the last attachment on the pole at every fifth attachment between the first and last attachment on the pole at each attachment where power catv and telephone cables continue onto differing poles at each attachment where power catv and telephone cables converge onto the same pole at attachments on poles equal to num mile or more and at where more than one separate attachment or guy is on the same pole .
grounding connectors shall be installed to the overhead communications cable to the telephone and catv cables support span wires when present to the ground wire of a multigrounded system to the neutral wire of a multigrounded system and to the ground of a secondary circuit .
the ground wire between clamps shall be stapled every num in .
num testing .
section num .
num measurement and payment .
ground rods will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each num ft length .
the payment will be full compensation for lugs and welding excavation backfill and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
ground wire will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num num electrical conduit and fittings section num electrical conduit and fittings num description .
furnish and install electrical conduit and fittings .
num materials .
concrete num metallic conduit and fittings num nonmetallic conduit and fittings num flexible conduit and fittings num pvc coated metallic conduit and fittings num num construction .
num bends .
unless otherwise specified use manufactured bends or field bends to make changes in direction .
maintain an num in .
trade radius .
num connections .
make conduit runs with as few couplings as standard length will permit .
rigid steel conduit connections shall be threaded .
paint field cut threads of galvanized conduit with approved galvanizing repair paint prior to assembly .
connect nonmetallic conduit using a solvent welding process .
use watertight cast ferrous compression type fittings for electrical metallic tubing emt .
num conduit terminations .
use pull boxes or conduit bodies at conduit terminations .
conduits terminating in cast iron junction boxes shall be threaded into hubs with bonding screws furnished and installed on the interior of the box .
conduits terminating in junction boxes without hubs shall be secured with two lock nuts with an insulated grounding bushing installed .
conduits terminating at concrete foundations manholes or hand holes shall be secured as specified in the contract documents .
cap all ends of unused conduit .
num cleaning and capping .
prior to installing conductors remove all obstructions and debris by pulling a mandrel type device through each conduit run and all fittings in the presence of the engineer .
cap conduit ends by using a manufactured cap or plug .
prior to the installation of wiring remove manufactured caps or plugs and install an insulated bonding bushing on galvanized rigid conduit install bell end fittings on pvc conduit .
num pull wire .
install a pull wire or cord in all conduits left empty .
pull wire and cord shall be corrosion resistant material with a breaking strength of at least num lb .
num num electrical conduit and fittings num exposed conduit .
exposed conduit runs shall be parallel or at right angles to walls slabs girders etc .
locate conduit to minimize accumulation of dirt and to provide accessibility for painting .
attach conduit to steel concrete masonry or timber using straps clamps or hangers of an approved type made of stainless steel or galvanized malleable iron .
space the attachments as specified .
when specified paint all exposed rigid steel conduit surfaces to match the color of adjacent material .
prepare all galvanized surfaces as specified in section num before the application of approved paint .
num expansion joints .
where conduits cross expansion joints in the structure or where otherwise specified use expansion fittings of a type that ensures electrical continuity across the joint .
num buried conduit trenched .
conduits shall be sloped to drain and have a cover of at least num in .
num encased conduit slotted or trenched .
place the conduit accurately and secure it rigidly to maintain position during concrete placement .
num conduit installation under existing paved areas bored .
do not cause any disturbance to the existing roadway .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all excavation backfill encasement concrete hot mix asphalt paint pull wires and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num electrical conduit and electrical conduit attached to bridges will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot measured along the center line of the conduit from end to end .
num electrical hand holes manholes pull and junction boxes will be measured and paid for as specified in section num .
num electrical conduit fittings and junction boxes constructed into concrete structures will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the pertinent concrete traffic barrier concrete parapet or other pertinent concrete items specified in the contract documents .
num num luminaires and lamps section num luminaires and lamps num description .
furnish and install luminaires and lamps .
num materials .
luminaires and lamps num photoelectric controls num num construction .
attach a safety cable to access doors that face downward and that support the weight of all or part of the ballast .
the safety cable shall restrict the amount the door may swing open to num degrees .
the cable shall be attached to the door by spring clips that can be removed without the use of tools to allow the door to be easily removed .
num arm mounted luminaires .
adjust socket positions to provide the required photometric performance .
provide an individual photocell on each luminaire when specified .
num bridge underpass luminaires .
adjust socket positions to provide the required photometric performance .
num cleaning .
prior to the numday performance test clean refractors and reflectors with a product approved by the manufacturer .
num installation .
furnish and install all luminaires and lamps in conformance with the manufacturers recommendations or as specified in the contract documents .
num luminaire photometric data and calculations .
submit the following data with the catalog cut for the luminaire .
a photometric data .
a photometric file for the luminaire selected in standard ies electronic format .
clearly indicate the name of the file on the catalog cut .
b photometric calculations .
printouts of the predicted lighting levels for the areas indicated in the contract documents .
if no areas are indicated select a typical section of the project for each type of luminaire .
assume a maintenance factor of num for the calculations .
calculations for roadway luminaires shall show predicted horizontal footcandle values and veiling luminance ratios for the section selected .
num num luminaires and lamps for pedestrian luminaires show calculations for a typical section of walkway .
if any of the walkway is adjacent to a roadway select a section adjacent to the roadway .
the printouts shall show predicted horizontal footcandles for the section of walkway selected and horizontal footcandles and veiling luminance ratios for the roadways adjacent to the walkway .
if roadway lighting also illuminates the adjacent walkway include the roadway lighting luminaires in the calculations .
for proposed changes to luminaire models during the course of the contract or if the manufacturer changes specifications for the luminaire during the contract submit photometric calculations and diskette for each change .
all calculated lighting levels for roadway lighting shall be at least the levels specified in the contract documents .
when no levels are specified the calculated lighting levels shall be at least those specified in ies rpnum american standard practice for roadway lighting .
all calculated lighting levels on pedestrian walkways lighting shall be at least the levels specified in the contract documents .
when no levels are specified the calculated levels shall conform to iesn.a .
in all cases the maximum calculated veiling luminance ratios on the traveled roadway adjacent to the walkway shall not exceed num .
all roadway and pedestrian luminaires shall conform to the following criteria a fixed aim luminaires .
fixed aim luminaires such as cobra head or post top luminaires shall have an ies type num distribution pattern or as specified in the contract documents .
the luminous intensity shall not exceed num candelas per num lamp lumens for any point num degrees or higher above nadir .
b adjustable aim luminaires .
adjustable aim luminaires such as floodlights shall have an ies type num distribution pattern or as specified in the contract documents .
the luminous intensity shall not exceed num candelas per num lamp lumens for any point num degrees or higher above nadir or exceed num candelas per num lamp lumens for any point num degrees or higher above nadir when the aiming point is nadir .
num num electrical service equipment c high mast luminaires .
high m ast luminaires shall have an iesn.a .
type num distribution pattern or as specified in the contract documents .
the luminous intensity shall not exceed num candelas per num lamp lumens for any point num degrees or higher above nadir or exceed num candelas per num lamp lumens for any point num degrees or higher above nadir .
testing .
submittal and approval of photometric data and calculations shall not remove the responsibility to perform the photometric testing required by section num or to correct or replace lighting where field measurements do not conform to administration or ies requirements .
num measurement and payment .
luminaires will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
the payment will be full compensation for photocell when required and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num photometric calculations and photometric data will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items included in the contract documents .
section num electrical service equipment num description .
furnish and install electrical service equipment necessary for the utility company to connect the electrical power supply .
this work includes coordinating the connection with the local utility company .
num materials .
control and distribution equipment num num construction .
electrical service equipment consists of the equipment necessary to connect a utility company service to a traffic signal controller cabinet lighting control cabinet traffic monitoring station cabinet or other traffic control device cabinet .
provide electrical service equipment at the phasing and amperage specified in the contract documents .
num embedded metered service pedestal .
install a galvanized steel post including a num amp double pole main circuit breaker for service disconnect branch circuit breakers and integral meter socket .
num num electrical service equipment the post shall be designed for embedment into the soil at least num in .
and have a stabilizer shoe .
pour a concrete collar around the post as shown in the contract documents .
the post and meter socket shall meet nema numr .
provide the means to padlock the post closed and to install a utility company seal on the meter .
provide branch circuit breakers as specified .
embedded metered service pedestals shall be ul listed suitable for service equipment and be acceptable to the local utility companies for use as a service connection .
num base mounted metered service pedestal .
install a base mounted aluminum pedestal including a num amp double pole main circuit breaker for service disconnect branch circuit breakers and integral meter socket .
the pedestal shall have the option of being ordered with the meter socket facing to the front or back as shown in the contract documents .
extend all conduit stubouts num in .
beyond the edge of the foundation and arranged as shown in the contract documents .
the pedestal shall be designed for pad mounting using num in .
anchor bolts .
the pedestal shall measure num in .
wide num in .
deep and num in .
tall and meet nema numr .
provide a means to padlock the customer service side door closed and to install a utility company seal on the meter .
the meter shall be protected by a hinged hood .
main circuit breakers shall consist of an industrial grade fframe style circuit breaker .
branch circuit breakers shall consist of industrial grade qcstyle circuit breakers mounted on nonenergized clips .
internal cables between the terminal block and the breakers shall be no .
num awg thhn .
provide branch circuit breakers as specified .
base mounted metered service pedestals shall be ulnum listed suitable for service equipment and be acceptable to the local utility companies for use as a service connection .
num electrical service distribution cabinet .
where an electrical service distribution cabinet is specified furnish and install an equipment enclosure meter socket disconnect switch panel boards transformers circuit breakers thermostats fans lightning arresters conduit wiring and wiring devices and all other equipment necessary to provide a complete functioning electrical service distribution cabinet .
protect all electrical outlets with ground fault circuit interrupters gfci .
num num electrical service equipment num meter sockets .
provide either ringed or ringless type meter sockets as required by the utility company .
if a meter is not required provide a ringless socket with suitable shunts and a metallic cover plate .
provide hardware for attaching the meter socket to a cabinet wood post or other structure .
num disconnect switch .
include all hardware for attaching the disconnect switch to a cabinet wood post or other structure .
num service cable .
electric service cable for traffic signals intersection control beacons hazard identification beacons and luminaires mounted on traffic signal structures shall have three individual type thwn wires .
each wire shall be at least num strands .
electric service cable color identification by spray paint tape heat shrink tubing or any other postmanufacturing method is prohibited .
num utility connection .
before any control equipment or material is ordered arrange a meeting with the utility company representatives traffic operations division representatives the engineer and the district utility engineer to establish a schedule for utility connections .
do not disconnect deenergize reconnect tamper with or otherwise handle any of the utility companys facilities .
make the utility service connection to the point of service supplied by the utility company .
make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies to ensure having needed utilities available at the time of turn on .
delays due to utility energization connection or disconnection will not be a basis for time extension .
report any difficulties in securing utility company services to the engineer as soon as possible .
num measurement and payment .
num electrical utility service equipment will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each at the phasing and amperage specified .
the payment will be full compensation for the disconnect switch meter socket meter shunts cover plate lightning arresters wiring conduit risers wiring trough conduit nipples and adapters and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num embedded metered service pedestal will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
the payment will be full compensation for all enclosures panel boards circuit breakers internal wiring wiring devices concrete collar meter sockets meter shunts cover plates wiring and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num num electrical service equipment num base mounted metered service pedestal will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
the payment will be full compensation for all enclosures concrete foundation panel boards circuit breakers internal wiring wiring devices meter sockets meter shunts cover plates wiring and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num electrical service distribution cabinet will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
the payment will be full compensation for all enclosures concrete foundation disconnect switches lightning arresters panel boards circuit breakers internal wiring ground fault interrupter outlets conduits wiring devices meter sockets meter shunts cover plates wiring and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num meter socket will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
the payment will be full compensation for attachment hardware meter shunts cover plate and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
when an item for this work is not included in the contract documents this work will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items .
num disconnect switch will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
the payment will be full compensation for attachment hardware fuses switch and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
when an item for this work is not included in the contract documents this work will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items .
num underground conduit will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num service lateral cable will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num utility connection coordination with the utility company will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to other pertinent items .
num utility company energization connection and disconnection costs will be the responsibility of the administration .
num num lighting structures section num lighting structures num description .
furnish and install steel and aluminum lighting poles bracket arms and fittings .
num materials .
cast iron num hardware num conduit num lighting structures num galvanization a num stainless steel hardware a num type num aluminum castings b num or b num alloy numtnum anchor base plate for aluminum structures b num num series alloy num construction .
refer to section num for concrete foundations .
perform all fabrication and welding as specified in section num .
after forming and welding the pole shall have a smooth finish with only one longitudinal weld and no transverse welds .
when fully assembled install each lighting structure so that the pole is plumb .
use a metallic arc consumable electrode inert gas shielded process for all welding for aluminum poles .
after welding the entire assembly shall be precipitation heat treated to the tnum temper by an approved method and rotary sand finished .
all aluminum poles shall be furnished with internal vibration dampening devices .
bracket arms .
secure bracket arms to the poles as specified in the manufacturers recommendations .
install each bracket arm perpendicular to the travel lane unless otherwise specified .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num lighting structures will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each pole height bracket arm length and material type .
num num trenching and backfilling num concrete foundations will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num breakaway base support systems when specified in the contract documents will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num bracket arms for signal structures or wood poles will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for the pertinent bracket arm item .
section num trenching and backfilling num description .
excavate trenches for the installation of underground conduit wire or duct cable for traffic control devices .
num materials .
backfill num conduit detection tape num num construction .
excavate trenches as specified .
in areas where conduit or cable is trenched place a detector tape num in .
below the finished grade .
the tape shall be red and imprinted with a continuous warning message that reads caution electrical line buried below repeated every num in .
the tape shall be inductively and conductively traceable using a standard pipe and cable locating device .
cable treatment .
bed the duct cable and direct buried wires into the special backfill material as specified .
backfill .
backfill and compact the trench as specified in num and restore to its original condition .
replace topsoil reseed and resod where directed .
num measurement and payment .
trenching and backfilling will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for the installation of the pertinent conduit wire or duct cable .
num num electrical cable wire and connectors section num electrical cable wire and connectors num description .
furnish and install loop detector wires and leads electrical cable cable ducts wire microloop probe sets communication cable and associated connectors .
num materials .
microloop probe qpl sealer for loop detector num conduit num electrical cable and wire num communication cable num cable and wire connectors num num construction .
all conductors shall be copper .
unless specified no cable splicing will be permitted .
when specified lighting cable splices and loop detector lead in cable splices will be permitted only in pull and junction boxes manholes and hand holes .
do not install cable until the entire related raceway including manhole hand hole and foundation system is in place .
provide num ft of cable slack neatly tied coiled and positioned in the bottom of manholes hand holes and cabinets .
provide num in .
drip loops at all overhead entrance points into structures .
install insulated spade type terminal ends on all wiring placed on terminal blocks .
num direct burial cable .
install to the depth of cover specified .
install backfill as specified in num .
num cable in conduits .
install by method in a manner to prevent harmful stretching of the conductor injury to the insulation or damage to the other protective covering .
seal the ends of all cables until ready for connection .
when installing more than one wire or cable in a single duct or conduit pull them into the conduit by hand or power winch with the use of cable grips or pulling eyes .
pulling tension shall be governed by recommended standard procedures for straight pulls or bends .
use a lubricant compatible with the cable insulation .
num preassembled cable duct .
prior to installation pay out the cable duct while moving the reel alongside and parallel to the trench .
do not pull cable duct off a reel located in a stationary position .
install the cable using a cable grip in a manner that will not stress or damage conductors insulation or sheath wall .
num num electrical cable wire and connectors after backfilling demonstrate that the conductors move freely within the duct by pulling the conductors out at least num ft .
pulling tensions shall conform to num .
then pull the cable back to its original position .
completely seal cable duct ends using a waterproof removable sealing compound a molded plastic device or a rubber device .
num cable in lighting structures .
support the cable at each luminaire with a suitable clamp as an integral part of the luminaire or a device approved by the engineer for the application .
num identification tags .
furnish and install circuit wiring identification tags in all manholes hand holes junction boxes and control cabinet and service pedestals .
use a nylon selfclinching type nonconductive band with an adequate sized tab for labeling .
mark each band using num in .
minimum lettering dies engraving device or other approved permanent marking process .
indicate the circuit number the terminal block position for loop detector cables and the traffic signal phase for all other signal cables .
num loop detector wire and loop detector leadin .
prior to the installation of loop wires the saw cut area shall be dry and free of saw cut debris .
twist the loop detector wire five turns per foot from the loop itself to the terminal point .
use a blunt instrument to seat the loop detector wire at the bottom of the saw cut .
splice the loop detector wire to the loop detector leadin as specified .
num grounding wire .
section num .
num connector kits .
furnish and install connector kits as required for the types of cables specified in the contract documents and in conformance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num microloop probes .
furnish and install microloop probe sets as specified .
terminate all leads in the controller cabinet .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all overhead communication cable attachments trench excavation backfill and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num electrical cable cable ducts loop detector wire loop detector leadin cable grounding wire and communication cable will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the type and sizes specified .
num connector kits will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each type .
num num electrical hand holes and manholes num microloop probe sets will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each set .
the payment will be full compensation for all sealant pvc conduit hole drilling installation of leadin cable and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
saw cuts for loop detector wire and microloop probe sets will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
section num electrical hand holes manholes pull and junction boxes num description .
furnish and install electrical hand holes manholes pull and junction boxes .
num materials .
num hand holes .
no .
num coarse aggregate num concrete mix no .
num num brick num bolts a num type num frames and covers aisc num steel precast concrete m num num manholes .
no .
num coarse aggregate num reinforced concrete pipe num cast iron manhole covers num polyethylene pe num precast concrete m num num pull and junction boxes .
steel plate num cast iron num num construction .
num hand holes and manholes .
install hand holes and manholes flush to drain with the finished grade .
mix place and test concrete as specified in section num .
install aggregate drain as specified .
excavate and backfill in accordance with section num .
when installing hand holes num num wood sign supports and manholes in sidewalks remove and reinstall the sidewalk to the nearest joint .
fill or patch spaces between conduit and the hand hole and manhole wall with concrete or other sealer as directed .
set hand hole and manhole frames in a mortar or concrete bed as shown in the contract documents .
num pull and junction boxes .
the conduit entrance shall have a hub or boss of sufficient thickness that five full threads of the conduit engage the threaded holes in the box .
num measurement and payment .
electrical hand holes manholes pull and junction boxes will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each unless otherwise specified in the contract documents .
the payment will be full compensation for all excavation aggregate drain concrete bolts bricks pipes backfill sealer frames and covers and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num wood sign supports num description .
furnish and install wood sign supports .
num materials .
wood num preservatives num wood supports shall be no .
num dense grade .
num construction .
auger or dig holes using methods approved by the engineer .
place supports in a plumb position and to the specified depth and lateral orientation .
backfill using suitable excavation material and compact in place .
do not drive or hammer supports into undisturbed earth .
when specified wood sign supports shall have drilled holes conforming to the breakaway requirements specified in aashto specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals or as shown in the contract documents .
num measurement and payment .
wood sign supports will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the length and size specified .
the payment will be full compensation for all excavation backfill drilled holes and for all num num signs material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num signs num description .
furnish and install signs as specified .
refer to sections num num and num for sign supports .
num materials .
sign panel supports and hardware num num num num a num a num and a num reflective and nonreflective sheeting num sign materials num provide all hardware not provided by the administration .
hardware shall be stainless steel .
the administration will supply traffic signal related signs and their mounting hardware for span wire mast arm and signal pole mounted applications .
num construction .
use demountable copy or direct applied copy on extruded aluminum .
use direct applied or silk screen copy on sheet aluminum .
the signs will be inspected after sign installation is complete .
if specular reflection is apparent on any sign reposition the sign as directed .
inspect each new sign location to determine if clearing is required to provide for good sight distance .
complete all clearing and disposal as specified in section num .
remove any tree limbs protruding within the limits of clearing as specified in section num .
the limits of clearing for each location will be as specified .
num measurement and payment .
num signs will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square foot of area of the vertical front face of the completed sign with no deduction for required shaping .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num administration furnished signs and mounting hardware will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square foot for the num num signal heads completed sign installed .
the payment will be full compensation for all transportation drilling holes as specified installation and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num clearing for signing will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for furnishing and installing the signs .
section num signal heads num description .
furnish and install vehicle traffic control signal heads and pedestrian traffic control signal heads .
num materials .
traffic signal heads num num construction .
aiming .
aim signal heads to be visible in conformance with the minimum requirements of the mdmutcd .
num measurement and payment .
aluminum polycarbonate and optically programmed signal heads and pedestrian signal heads furnished and installed will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each section of signal head type and size as specified in the contract documents .
the payment will be full compensation for all lenses mounting hardware assembly and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num saw cuts for traffic control devices num description .
saw cut and seal the saw cuts for traffic control devices .
num materials .
sealer num num num traffic control device cabinets equipment num construction .
num saw cut .
prior to sawcutting drill holes at all turns .
saw cut using a water quenched process .
do not saw cut curbs and gutter .
maintain the specified saw cut width .
num saw cut sealing .
sealing shall not be performed until the electrical testing is completed as specified in section num .
apply sealer as specified in the manufacturers recommendations into washed cleaned and dried saw cuts .
sealer shall not be poured when the roadway surface temperature is below num f or during any precipitation .
num measurement and payment .
saw cuts for traffic control devices will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot .
the payment will be full compensation for all drilled holes sealing and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num traffic control device cabinets and equipment num description .
install administration furnished traffic signal controllers and cabinets furnish and install traffic signal controllers and cabinets furnish and install intelligent transportations systems control cabinets and furnish and install lighting control cabinets for highway and sign lighting .
num materials .
conduit num num num and num control and distribution equipment num anchor bolts hardware cabinets and controllers furnished by or as approved by the office of traffic and safety all materials equipment and installations shall be new ul listed or labeled and meet nec nesc nema ies and local codes and ordinances applicable to the installation .
num traffic control device cabinets equipment num num construction .
num base mounted traffic signal cabinets .
mount cabinets on concrete foundations conforming to section num .
furnish and install conduit as specified in section num .
num pole mounted traffic signal cabinets .
install cabinets as specified .
furnish and install conduit as specified in section num .
num base mounted lighting cabinets .
furnish and install the equipment enclosure panel boards transformers circuit breakers lighting contactor relay photoelectric controls thermostats selector switches fans lightning arresters conduit wiring and wiring devices and all other equipment necessary to provide a complete functioning lighting cabinet as specified .
protect all electrical outlets with ground fault circuit interrupters gfci .
num pole mounted lighting cabinets .
furnish and install a nema numx stainless enclosure with hardware for attaching the unit to a utility pole wood post or traffic control device structure .
include a num amp double pole main circuit breaker a num amp double pole electrically held lighting contactor four double pole circuit breakers at the amperage specified in the contract documents photoelectric control lightning arrester and all incidentals necessary to provide a complete lighting control unit .
num measurement and payment .
num installing administration furnished signal controllers and cabinets will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for the pertinent install traffic signal controllers and cabinets item .
installing contractor furnished traffic signal controllers and cabinets will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for the pertinent traffic signal controllers and cabinets item .
the payment will be full compensation for pickup transportation and installation of the controller or cabinet when applicable furnishing and installing the controller or cabinet when applicable and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num concrete foundations will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num conduit will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num ground rods will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
num num push buttons and push button signs num lighting control cabinets will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each of the type and size specified .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num push buttons and push button signs num description .
furnish and install pedestrian push button assemblies and push button signs .
num materials .
retroreflective sheeting type ii num push button sign num push buttons a num the push button assembly shall be weathertight and tamper proof .
the assembly shall be designed to prevent an electrical shock under any weather condition and have provisions for grounding in conformance with the nec .
a the push button assembly shall be fabricated from aluminum ingot and have an anodized finish .
b the push button plunger shall be chrome plated num in .
diameter and have a spring with operative force not to exceed num lb .
c the push button switch shall have singlepole momentary normallyopen singlethrow contacts and spadetype terminals .
d the switch assembly shall have an operating force of approximately num lb but not more than num lb .
e the switch assembly shall be ul approved and electrically rated to carry num amps at num volts ac .
num construction .
locate push buttons in positions that clearly indicate to the pedestrian which crosswalks are actuated by each push button .
furnish all mounting hardware and drill holes to provide cable and wire entrances .
num num signal structures num measurement and payment .
push buttons and push button signs will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for the pertinent push button and sign item .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num signal structures num description .
pickup and install administration furnished signal structures .
the grommets and miscellaneous hardware will be furnished by the administration .
num materials .
signal structures hardware furnished by the administration num construction .
install the signal structure on a concrete foundation conforming to section num .
breakaway base support systems when specified shall conform to section num .
repair any finish on the signal structures and mounting hardware damaged during transportation and installation to match the original finish as approved by the engineer at no additional cost to the administration .
num measurement and payment .
num installation of administration furnished signal structures will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for the type and size specified .
the payment will be full compensation for the pickup transportation and installation of all steel poles mast arms twin mast arms triple mast arms strain poles and pedestal poles breakaway base support systems and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num concrete foundations will be measured and paid for as specified in num .
section num steel span wire num description .
furnish and install steel span wire for signal head or sign mountings interconnect runs and for tethering purposes .
num num general electrical work and testing num materials .
steel span wire num galvanizing a num steel messenger rings shall be the specified size and be mechanically or hot dip galvanized after fabrication .
num construction .
attach the span wire to poles by wrapping two full turns of the span wire around the pole at the specified height leaving a free end of num ft .
secure the free end to the traversing span wire using a threebolt clamp and serving sleeve as specified .
space messenger rings num in .
apart .
num measurement and payment .
steel span wire will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the size of wire installed .
the payment will be full compensation for all hardware material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num general electrical work and testing num description .
test all electrical items referred to in category num .
num materials .
all materials and equipment installed as part of the permanent installation shall be new ul listed or labeled and meet nec nesc nema ies and local codes applicable to the area of installation .
num construction .
num general .
all installations shall meet nec nesc local utility company requirements and state and local laws and ordinances governing the work .
all electrical work shall be under the direct supervision of a master electrician licensed in the state of maryland or in the county where the work is performed .
all work done under sections num num num num num except loop wire num num num num and num shall be performed by a journeyman electrician .
obtain and pay for all permits licenses and inspection fees .
num num general electrical work and testing num testing .
supply all personnel and equipment required to perform the following tests .
furnish four certified copies of the complete test reports to the engineer .
at least num days prior to the commencement of each test submit the types styles or catalog numbers of all required testing equipment .
include a written certification stating when the testing equipment was last calibrated by an administration approved testing agency .
the calibration date shall be within num days of the date when the tests are to be performed .
perform all tests in the presence of the engineer .
immediately repair or replace any defects found in the completed installation .
a ground resistance testing .
use a megger ground tester using the null balance fall of potential method .
corrected readings greater than num ohms will not be accepted .
b circuit testing .
deter mine the insulation resistance on all cables of every circuit except those installed in lighting structures .
cable insulation resistance shall be at least num megohms at num volts d.c. except loop detector wire and loop detector lead in shall be at least num megohms at num volts d.c .
demonstrate to the engineer that all conductors are continuous free from short circuits and unspecified grounds and that all circuits are properly connected .
c performance testing .
conduct a performance test using the design power source .
operate the electrical system including automatic control equipment for num consecutive days .
if any component fails replace it immediately and continue the test .
record each fault the method and date of correction of each and the beginning and end of the numday test period .
if more than num percent of any component fails during the test replace the component and restart the numday test cycle for the entire system .
d illumination testing .
conduct an illumination test conforming to procedures approved by the administration to determine the illumination characteristics of the roadway lighting installation .
num traffic signal testing .
conduct testing without causing a hazard to the traveling public .
maintain all new materials until satisfactorily tested and their operation is accepted by the engineer .
num num breakaway base support systems signal heads and signs that are in place but not in use shall be entirely covered with opaque burlap .
after completion testing and acceptance place new traffic signals on flashing operation for a num hour period prior to placing the signals on full color operation .
existing full color and flashing signals shall not flash but shall be kept in operation until the new signal is completed satisfactorily tested and approved .
remove stop signs at new full color signals at the end of the num hour flashing period .
provide a log of the date and time of removal to the engineer .
upon acceptance and placement of the new traffic control device into operation remove unnecessary signal heads signs spans and mast arms .
new traffic signals exclusive of signal system interconnect installation may be placed into operation when testing is completed and upon acceptance by the engineer .
upon completion of the signal system interconnect installation the signal system interconnect shall also be satisfactorily tested and approved by the engineer .
num measurement and payment .
general electrical work and testing and the asbuilt drawings will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the other pertinent items specified in the contract documents .
section num breakaway base support systems num description .
furnish and install breakaway base support systems or install administration furnished breakaway base support systems if applicable .
num materials .
breakaway base support systems shall conform to the breakaway requirements specified in aashto specification for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
brakeaway base support systems qpl num construction .
install breakaway base support systems for signals lighting and signing including post hinge assembly units for sign structures as specified in the contract documents and in conformance with the manufacturers recommendations .
grade the num num remove and relocate existing signs ground adjacent to the breakaway base as specified in the contract documents .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all excavation backfill grading and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
breakaway base support systems will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for breakaway support systems furnished and installed as specified in the contract documents .
pick up delivery and installation of administration supplied breakaway base support systems will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each for the pertinent install breakaway base item .
section num remove and relocate existing signs and sign structures num description .
remove and relocate existing signs and sign structures .
num materials .
not applicable .
num construction .
make all existing cable safe in accordance with the appropriate electrical codes .
num removing existing signs .
existing signs may be relocated during construction .
remove existing and relocated signs when the new signing system is complete .
all new signs in a particular sequence giving similar directions shall be installed before existing signs are removed .
after removing the sign structure remove the remaining concrete foundations as specified in num .
holes left after sign removal shall be backfilled compacted and restored to conditions similar to the surrounding area .
num relocating existing signs .
relocate existing signs as specified in the contract documents and as part of the new signing system .
for removal and backfill of remaining concrete foundations refer to num .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for removing and relocating existing signs and sign structures removing existing concrete foundations backfilling and num num remove and relocate existing signs compacting existing holes left after foundation removal and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num remove existing ground mounted signs and supports will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square foot area of the sign .
removal of sign supports and concrete foundations will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for removing the signs .
num remove signs from existing overhead structure will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square foot area of the sign .
removal of sign supports sign luminaire supports luminaires conduit and cable will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for removing the signs .
num relocate existing ground mounted signs will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square foot area of the sign .
removal and disposal or removal and relocation of the sign support will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for relocating the signs .
num relocate signs from existing overhead structure will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square foot area of the sign .
removal and relocation of sign supports luminaires and luminaire supports will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for relocating the signs .
num remove existing cantilever or overhead sign structure and signs and supports will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each structure .
disconnecting the electrical service and removal of concrete foundations will not be measured but the cost will be incidental to the contract unit price for removing the structure .
num if required for new sign supports concrete for sign foundations galvanized steel beam sign posts wood sign supports and breakaway base support systems for steel beams will be paid for as specified in the applicable portions of sections num num num and num respectively .
num num remove and relocate lighting structures section num remove and relocate or remove and dispose of roadway lighting structures num description .
remove and relocate or remove and dispose of roadway lighting structures .
num materials .
hardware num conduit num num construction .
remove concrete foundations and place backfill as specified in num .
lighting structures removed and not reused shall become the property of the contractor .
remove and store lighting structures scheduled to be reused on the same project in accordance with gpnum .
make all existing cable safe in conformance with the appropriate electrical codes .
num measurement and payment .
remove and dispose of roadway lighting will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
the payment will be full compensation for the removal and disposal of the lighting structure removal of existing concrete foundation and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
remove and relocate roadway lighting structure will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
the payment will be full compensation for the removal storage reinstallation connection to existing lighting circuits removal of existing concrete foundations and for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section num modify existing sign messages num description .
remove existing and add new sign copy shields and arrows for existing signs or overlay existing sign messages .
num num cutting and capping mast arms and poles num materials .
reflective and nonreflective sheeting and copy num sign materials num num construction .
num modifying signs with demountable copy .
remove existing copy or shields carefully .
prior to installing the new material clean the sign background material thoroughly using mild detergent and water .
when specified cover existing demountable copy with sheet aluminum at least num in .
thick .
the overlay shall have the same background and copy as the sign .
num modifying signs with direct applied copy .
when specified cover existing copy with sheet aluminum at least num in .
thick .
the overlay shall have the same background and copy as the sign .
direct applied overlays may be used for minor modifications to sign messages in conformance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num measurement and payment .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num modify message on existing ground mounted or overhead signs will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each removed or each installed character for the type of sign installation specified .
characters include shields arrows and sign copy .
num overlay existing ground mounted or overhead signs will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per square foot removed or installed for the type of sign specified .
section num cutting and capping mast arms and poles num description .
cut clean galvanize and cap mast arms mast arm poles pedestal poles and strain poles .
num num cutting and capping mast arms and poles num materials .
cold galvanizing compound a num num construction .
galvanized parts that have been cut or chipped to bare metal shall be repaired per a num .
saw cut the pole or mast arm to the required length .
clean the area inside and outside with a wire brush .
spray cold galvanizing compound on the affected area .
place an end cap of matching size .
num measurement and payment .
cutting and capping of mast arms and poles will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price per each .
the payment will be full compensation for all material labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
num category num materials num general .
sample test and inspect all materials included in this category as specified in the most recently published cited standards .
the specification limits for each material are established and deviations from these limits are prohibited except when in the judgment of the engineer the deviation will not be detrimental to the work .
in these cases refer to the appropriate specification governing price adjustments for nonconformance .
within num days after receipt of notification of award of the contract submit in writing to the office of materials technology omt the proposed sources of all materials to be incorporated into the project .
update and submit all nursery stock sources to omt num days prior to the planting season in which the planting is to begin .
do not introduce material into the work until sources are approved .
the administration reserves the right to completely or partially test any material for specification compliance .
sample according to the administrations sample testing and frequency guide unless otherwise directed .
all source approvals are made subject to continuing production of materials conforming to these specifications .
material sources may be rejected where it is evident that the material tends to be of marginal quality when compared to the specification limits in any of its specified properties .
num technician qualification requirements .
technicians performing quality assurancequality control sampling and testing shall be qualified through the certification program provided by the administration .
private laboratories performing testing shall be in the aashto accreditation program or approved by the administration .
technicians include those who work for inspection agencies contractors consultants producers private laboratories and state and local government employees .
section num aggregates num this section includes the material details quality requirements and test methods applicable to aggregates .
grading requirements are outlined in tables num a and num c physical properties in num b and num d. force drying may be used in the preparation of samples for grading tests conducted in the field .
num num num num table aggregate grading requirements material sieve size num num num num num num crusher run aggregate cr num fg num num num bank run gravel subbase num num num graded aggregate base design range a num num num tolerance b num num num bank run gravel base num num num coarse aggregate portland cement concrete num and underdrain h num num num num num num num num fine aggregate portland cement concrete underdrain and pneumatic mortar d coarse aggregate lightweight portland cement concrete num num fine aggregate lightweight portland cement concrete d fine aggregatesand mortar and epoxies d mineral filler crushed glass e num num aggregates a to establish target values for design .
b production tolerance .
c num for field grading omitting t num. d fine aggregate includes natural or manufactured sand .
e crushed glass shall not contain more than one percent contaminants by weight .
f not to be used in the structural part of any administration project .
g recycled asphalt pavement may be used as a component not to exceed num percent and is not subject to aggregate physical property requirements in table num b. h when this material is used for drainage applications recycled concrete is prohibited .
num num a test method t num sieve size num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num numc num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num aggregates a to establish target values for design .
b production tolerance .
c num for field grading .
omitting t num d fine aggregate includes natural or manufactured sand .
e crushed glass shall not contain more than one percent contaminants by weight .
f not to be used in the structural part of any administration product .
g recycled asphalt pavement may be used as a component not to exceed num percent and is not subject to aggregate physical property requirements in table num b h when this material is used for drainage applications recycled concrete is prohibited .
num table aggregate physical material type i test method s p e c i f i c a t i o n t num t num t num t num pi max sodium sulfate soundness max clay lumps and friable particles max chert less than num sp gr max crusher run aggregate crnum d num h num num bank run gravel subbase d num num num graded aggregate base d num num num bank run gravel base d num num num coarse aggregate pcc b m num class a num num num fine aggregate pcc bd m num class b num num coarse aggregate lightweight pcc m num num fine aggregate lightweight pcc f m num num fine aggregatesand mortar and epoxies m num num num mineral filler g m num np crushed glass m num num num aggregates a dimensional ratio of calipers shall be num. b test coarse and fine aggregate for pcc for alkali silica reactivity asr per msmt num. c num if material passing no .
num sieve is dust of fracture free of clay or shale .
d in areas exposed to traffic manufactured sand shall have a minimum ultimate polish value of num based on the parent rock .
e num for concrete not subject to surface abrasion .
f fine aggregate meeting m num may be used if the lightweight concrete does not exceed the maximum unit weight specified in the contract documents .
g fly ash shall not exceed num percent loss on ignition .
h other approved inert materials of similar characteristics may be used provided they meet these provisions .
when crushed reclaimed concrete is used the soundness loss by five cycles of the magnesium sulfate test shall not exceed num percent when tested as specified in t num .
num max num num num num b property requirements test method t num and t num t num t num d num a t num t num sum of clay lumps friable particles and chert material finer than no .
num sieve coal and lignite flat and elongated los angeles abrasion organic impurities max max max max max num num num num num num num numc num num num nume num num num num num aggregates num num table asphalt aggregate grading requirements passing material sieve size num mm num mm num mm hot mix asphalt superpave nummm num gap graded hot mix asphalt nummm num num num gap graded hot mix asphalt nummm num num num gap graded hot mix asphalt nummm num num num max material sieve size numin .
numin .
numin .
slurry seal ss and latex modified slurry seal lmss mix ii num mix iii num chip seal surface treatment num num num num num num num aggregates note hma superpave num mm shall be designed with esal ranges of num to less than num million .
num num c mixes for mix design test method t num sieve size num mm num mm num mm num m num m num m num m num num num num num num num num num num num num sieve size no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num aggregates num table aggregate physical property test method s t num t num t num t num p e c pi sodium clay chert i sulfate lumps and less m a t e r i a l f soundness friable than i particles num c sp gr a t i o n max max max max hot mix asphalt superpave nummm mnum np num num num hot mix asphalt superpave num num and nummm high esal mnum np num num num hot mix asphalt superpave num num and nummm low esal mnum np num num num hot mix asphalt superpavenum num and nummm numpv mnum np num num num hot mix asphalt superpave num and nummm mnum np num num num gap graded hot mix asphalt superpave num num and nummm mnum np num num num slurry seal ss and latex modified slurry seal lmss np num chip seal surface m num treatment class a num num crushed glass m num num a dimensional ratio of calipers shall be num. b polish value pv shall be num when any aggregate being blended has a pv less than num .
pv shall be num when the aggregate from each source has a pv num or greater .
aggregate from no more than two sources may be blended .
determine proportions of blended aggregate under msmt num .
not applicable for gap graded surface mixes or any other surface mix requiring high polish aggregate .
c pv and british pendulum number bpn determined on parent rock .
when recycled asphalt pavement rap is used the pv shall be num. d num for samples taken at the point of production .
samples taken at any point after shipment shall not have more than num percent finer than no .
num sieve .
e pv shall be num when any aggregate being blended has a pv less than num .
pv shall be num when the aggregates from each source has a pv of num or greater .
when carbonate rock is used it shall have a minimum of num percent insoluble residue retained on the no .
num sieve .
f no blending allowed .
g dimensional ratio of calipers shall be num. h the test for flat and elongated particles maxmin shall be conducted on the blend .
i test conducted on particles retained on the no .
num sieve .
num aggregates num num d requirements for asphalt mixes test method t num and t num t num t num d num a t num msmt num t num sum of clay lumps friable particles and chert material finer than no .
num sieve coal and lignite flat and elongated h los angeles abrasion la pv c bpn c max max max max max min min num num num num num b num num num num num b num num num num num b num num num num num e num num num num num num num gi num num e num f num num num d num num num num aggregates num steel slag .
steel slag may be used for chip seal surface treatment but not for any other aggregate .
num stone for riprap channels ditches slopes and gabions .
use field or quarry stone of approved quality .
stone may be certified from a source previously approved .
ensure that maximum dimension does not exceed four times the minimum dimension .
num stone for riprap .
ensure that stone for riprap is uniformly graded from the smallest to the largest pieces as specified in the contract documents .
the stone will be accepted upon visual inspection at the point of usage as follows num num aggregates class of riprap size percent of total by weight num heavier than num lb heavier than num lb less than num lb num num num max i heavier than num lb heavier than num lb less than num lb num num num max ii heavier than num lb heavier than num lb less than num lb num num num max iii heavier than num lb heavier than num lb less than num lb num num num max note optimum gradation is num percent of the stone being above and num percent below the midsize .
reasonable visual tolerances will apply .
num stone for channels and ditches .
meet the size requirements of class i riprap and the following quality requirements test and method specification limits apparent specific gravity t num min num absorption t num max num sodium sulphate soundness num cycles num to num in .
aggregate t num loss max num num stone for slopes .
m num size number num omitting t num .
the stone shall also meet the quality requirements specified in num .
num stone for gabions .
meet the quality requirements specified in num and the following except that the loss by sodium sulfate shall be greater than num percent num num portland cement concrete depth of basket in .
size of individual pieces in .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num size of pieces are determined visually .
section num portland cement concrete and related products num material storage .
store material as specified or as directed .
num certification of portland cement and blended hydraulic cement .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum .
the certification shall also include a the mill shall report its quality control procedures and submit a new report whenever there is a procedural change .
b the mills control laboratory shall be inspected by the cement and concrete reference laboratory of the national institute of standards and technology on their regularly scheduled visits .
the engineer shall be provided with copies of the reports of these inspections along with an account of the action taken to correct cited deficiencies .
c records of data accumulated by the quality control procedures shall be produced upon request .
d a certified document shall accompany each shipment stating that the contents conform to all applicable requirements .
additionally the document shall show the producers name mill location carrier number date loaded weight contained in carrier silo number consignee destination contract number and type of cement .
the signature and title of the signer shall be shown on the document .
num num portland cement concrete e the mill shall upon request supply certified chemical and physical test values that can be associated with any sample representing cement drawn from a particular silo on a given date .
f acceptance of cement by certification will be terminated if test results differ from mill results by more than the precision limits given in the test method .
the acceptance procedure will then revert to storage testing and approval prior to shipment .
num portland cement .
m num with the fineness and the time of setting determined using t num and t num respectively .
num blended hydraulic cement .
m num type i pm or a type ip containing num to num percent pozzolan by weight of cement .
maximum loss on ignition is num percent .
do not use ground iron blast furnace slag for blending .
the requirement for a manufacturers written statement of the chemical composition is waived .
num masonry cement .
c num except the water retention and staining tests are waived .
num concrete admixtures .
do not use concrete admixtures that contribute more than num ppm of chlorides based on the cement content when tested per msmt num .
use only prequalified admixtures .
do not use pozzolan and type i pm or type ip cement in the same mix .
since the strength gains are delayed with these materials a longer period of time may be required for curing and form removal .
num air entraining admixtures .
m num .
num chemical admixtures .
m num type a d or nonchloride c. num high range water reducing admixtures .
m num except that it shall be a liquid the water content shall be a maximum of num percent of that of the control and the durability factor shall be at least num .
use type f for early strength which shall produce a numhour compressive strength of at least num percent of the control .
use type g when early strength is not specified .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum .
the certification shall include curves indicating the fluid ounces of admixture per num lb of cement as related to water reduction and strength gain for num hours when used with a minimum cement factor of num lb .
num num portland cement concrete num pozzolans .
the use of pozzolans may be requested to control alkali silica reactivity or for other reasons .
when a pozzolan is used determine the minimum cement factor and watercement ratio on the basis of the combined weight of cement and pozzolan .
see table num b for percentage of fly ash ground iron blast furnace slag and microsilica .
a fly ash .
m num pozzolan class c or f except that the maximum permissible moisture content is num percent and when used in concrete mix nos .
num and num the maximum loss on ignition is num percent .
b ground iron blast furnace slag .
m num grade num or num. c microsilica .
c num except that the oversize requirement is waived .
num ground iron blast furnace slag .
m num grade num or num .
a request may be submitted to substitute a maximum of num percent of the weight of cement with ground iron blast furnace slag .
when ground iron blast furnace slag is used determine the minimum cement factor and watercement ratio on the basis of the combined weight of the cement and ground iron blast furnace slag .
num synthetic fibers .
c num type iii .
when specified fibers shall be num to num in .
long .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum .
use the fiber manufacturers recommendations for the quantity of fibers used and their point of introduction into the mix .
num portland cement concrete curing materials .
use burlap cloth sheet materials liquid membrane forming compounds or cotton mats .
num burlap .
m num class num num or num .
num sheet materials .
m num with the following exceptions a white opaque burlap polyethylene sheeting .
tensile strength and elongation requirements are waived .
use sheeting having a finished product weight of not less than num ozydnum .
b white opaque polyethylene backed nonwoven fabric .
numa with the thickness requirement waived .
use material having a finished product weight of at least num ozydnum .
c white opaque polyethylene film .
tensile strength and elongation requirements are waived .
num num portland cement concrete num liquid membrane .
m num .
field control testing of the white pigmented curing compounds shall be on the basis of weight per gallon .
the samples shall not deviate more than num lbgal from the original source sample .
num cotton mats .
cotton mats consist of a filling material of cotton bats or bats covered with unsized cloth and tufted or stitched to maintain the shape and stability of the unit when handling and under job conditions .
use coverings consisting of cotton cloth burlap or jute having the following properties a cotton cloth covering shall weigh at least num ozydnum and have an average of at least num threadsin .
of warp and at least num threadsin .
of filling .
use raw cotton cotton comber waste cotton card strip waste or combinations thereof as the raw material used in the manufacture of the cotton cloth .
b burlap or jute covering for cotton mats shall weigh at least num ozydnum and have at least num threadsin .
of warp and at least num threadsin .
of filling .
use the grade known commercially as firsts and they shall be free from avoidable imperfections in manufacture and from defects or blemishes affecting the serviceability .
use a cotton bat or bats made of raw cotton cotton waste cotton linters or combinations thereof as the filling material for the mats .
mats shall weigh at least num ozydnum .
num form release compounds .
use form release compounds that effectively prevent the bond of the concrete to the forms .
form release compounds shall not cause discoloration of the concrete or adversely affect the quality or rate of hardening at the interface of the forms .
the flash point of the form release compound shall be at least num f when tested per t num .
num paraffin wax .
use clear paraffin wax for use as a bond breaker for concrete .
the flash point shall be at least num f when tested under d num .
num portland cement concrete .
section num and as specified herein .
num num portland cement concrete num proportioning .
prior to the start of construction submit to the omt the source and proportions of materials to be used for each concrete mix .
the mixture shall meet num .
the concrete with the exception of water and chemical admixtures shall be proportioned by weight .
water and chemical admixtures may be proportioned by volume or weight .
the mix shall be uniform and workable .
num materials .
coarse aggregate num fine aggregate num cement num and num concrete admixtures num water num num portland cement concrete mixtures .
the concrete mixes shall meet the following num table portland cement num day mix no .
specified standard critical min compressive deviation value cement strength factor psi psi psi lbydnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num portland cement concrete note num when concrete is exposed to water exceeding num num ppm sodium chloride content type ii cement shall be used .
in lieu of a type ii cement a type i cement may be used in combined form with an amount of up to num percent replacement with ground iron blast furnace slag or an amount of up to num percent replacement with class f fly ash .
submit the proposed mix proportions and satisfactory test results per c num showing a sulfate resistance expansion not exceeding num percent at num days .
note num the temperature of mix no .
num when used for other than superstructure work as defined in tcnum shall be num num f. note num type a or d admixture shall be added to bridge box culvert and retaining wall concrete .
note num nonchloride type c admixtures may be used when approved .
note num other slump requirements a when a high range water reducing admixture type f or type g is specified the slump shall be num to num in .
b when synthetic fibers are specified the slump shall be num in .
maximum .
c when concrete is to be placed by the slip form method the slump shall be num in .
maximum .
num num a concrete mixtures coarse aggregate size max water cement ratio slump range total air content concrete temperature m num by wt in .
f num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num na num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num portland cement concrete num num portland cement concrete coarse and fine aggregate having an expansion up to num percent when tested for alkali silica reactivity asr per msmt num may be used without restriction .
aggregates having an expansion greater than num but less than num percent are considered reactive and may only be used when one of the options in table numb are employed .
those having an expansion of num percent and greater are prohibited .
table num b option alkali content of cement max replace cement with specification material by weight num num class f fly ash num num m num num num ground iron blast furnace slag num num m num grade num or num num num microsilica num num c num num blended cement a num m num num num b low alkali cement num m num a pozzolan content of num to num percent by weight of cement .
b for mixes mix num modified num hour patch mix used for portland cement concrete pavement repairs the maximum allowable percentage of alkalies in portland cement is num .
when reactive aggregate is used designate which option will be used to control the formation of the asr gel .
if an option other than option num in table num b is chosen conduct tests per msmt num using the reactive aggregate and the proposed cementitious material .
the expansion test results shall not be greater than num percent .
when more than one reactive aggregate is used in a concrete mix each shall be tested individually and the maximum amount of pozzolan required to reduce the expansion of all the aggregates to num percent or less shall be used .
submit the aggregate source test results and the percent and type of replacement cement .
the engineer may withhold source approval pending verification testing .
num trial batch .
a trial batch shall be prepared to certify that each mix meets num and .num .
approval will be given when the test results meet the minimum required average strength .
make arrangements with omt at least two weeks in advance to have an authorized representative present during the batching and testing .
each trial batch shall consist of at least num ydnum of concrete .
supply all materials equipment and labor required to produce the trial batches and conduct the required tests at no additional cost to the administration .
num num portland cement concrete omt may waive the requirement for a trial batch when past performance records show that the required average strength requirement has been met .
num design required average strength .
the required average strength fcr will be the larger of fcr fc num x s or fcr fc num x s num where fc the num day specified compressive strength .
s the standard deviation as specified in num .
a test is defined as the average strength of two companion cylinders .
num standard deviation .
a when past performance records are available a standard deviation will be established from documented performance records of the producer consisting of a minimum of num consecutive num day compressive strength tests obtained within the last num months .
the standard deviation will be established as the product of the calculated standard deviation and multiplier .
number of tests multiplier for standard deviation num num num num num num num or more num note interpolate for intermediate number of tests .
b when past performance records are not available the required average strength shall meet the following num num portland cement concrete specified compressive strength fc psi required average compressive strength fcr psi less than num fc num num num fc num num num fc num over num fc num num standard of control .
the average of all sets of three consecutive strength tests shall equal or exceed the critical value as specified in num which is computed using the following formula critical value fc num x s num failure to conform to this criteria will be cause for immediate investigation and remedial action up to and including suspension of production .
use a design standard deviation equal to num percent of the specified strength for calculation until at least num test results are obtained .
compute the actual average strength and standard deviation upon the availability of num day strength data comprising of at least num tests .
should this determination indicate an excessive margin of safety the concrete mix may be modified to produce lower average strength as approved .
if these calculations indicate a coefficient of variation greater than num the quality of the concrete and testing will be evaluated .
num num portland cement concrete num testing .
sample per t num .
test as follows test method minimum test frequency responsibility temperature e t num num per num ydnum or fraction thereof project engineer slump ae t num num per num ydnum or fraction thereof project engineer air content ae t num t num num per num ydnum or fraction thereof project engineer compression bcd t num num per num ydnum or fraction thereof project engineer compression bcd mix no .
num only t num num per day project engineer a a second test will be made when the first slump or air content test fails .
acceptance or rejection will be based on the results of the second test .
b compressive strength tests are defined as the average of two companion cylinders .
c the contractor shall be responsible for the making of all early break cylinders and furnishing the molds stripping curingdelivery of all cylinders including num day cylinders to the testing laboratory .
d the project engineer shall be responsible for making numbering and signing the num day cylinders .
e when constructing plain and reinforced concrete pavements the testing frequency for slump air content and temperature shall be num per num ydnum or fraction thereof .
num acceptance .
concrete will be acceptable if both of the following requirements are met a the average of all sets of three consecutive strength tests equal or exceed the specified design strength .
b no individual strength test average of two companion cylinders falls below the specified design strength by more than num psi .
num price adjustment .
a price adjustment will be based on the contract unit price per cubic yard of concrete .
if the unit is a lump sum item the price per cubic yard for the concrete will be determined by dividing the cubic yards into the contract lump sum price .
a test results more than num psi below specified design strength .
failing strength tests will be considered individually with a price adjustment being applied on the percentage basis as shown below .
price per ydnum x quantity of ydnum represented by the failing concrete strength x percent of failure .
example num num portland cement concrete num per ydnum x num ydnum x num psi num no payment will be allowed when the test results fall below num percent of the specified design strength for structural concrete or num percent for incidental concrete .
the engineer will determine when the strength of the concrete represented by the failing tests is sufficient to remain in place or whether it shall be removed and replaced with specification concrete .
b test results num psi or less below specified design strength .
strength failures num psi or less than the specified design strength will be averaged with the next two consecutive tests .
if those two tests include a failure greater than num psi those tests will be evaluated as in numa and replaced with the next consecutive test .
if the resulting average falls below the specified design strength a price adjustment will be applied as specified in the table below .
any failure will only be included in one grouping .
strength below specified avg of num tests design level psi adjustment factor mix no .
num thru mix no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num adjustment price equals price per ydnum x quantity of ydnum represented by the failing cylinders x the adjustment factor .
example num per ydnum x num ydnum x num num num .
lightweight concrete mix num .
use two companion cylinders as control testing for compression test and density of cured concrete for each num ydnum or fraction thereof according to m num and c num respectively .
num num portland cement concrete lightweight concrete shall have compressive strength of at least num psi .
it shall be composed of type i portland cement an approved air entraining admixture type a or d chemical admixture water lightweight coarse aggregate and fine aggregates .
proportion the mix as specified in num of the acis recommended practices for selection proportions for structural lightweight concrete .
fly ash or ground iron blast furnace slag may be substituted for portland cement per num .
provide concrete meeting the following requirements property limit remarks cement content num lbydnum max average density of cured concrete num lbftnum max air entrainment entrapped plus entrained num num volumetric method t num slump when coarse aggregate absorption num when coarse aggregate absorption num num in .
max num num in .
t num water added to mix using saturated aggregates net including absorbed water num max num max watercement ratio watercement ratio num mortar for grout .
mortar used for grouting anchor bolts pipe handrail posts and miscellaneous items shall be composed in accordance with one of the following a one part portland cement or blended hydraulic cement and one part mortar sand by dry loose volume .
b prepared bag mixes consisting of portland cement or blended hydraulic cement and mortar sand .
the prepared mixes shall produce a mortar meeting the strength requirements specified .
c use nonshrink grout when specified .
the grout shall have a minimum compressive strength of num psi in seven days when tested per t num except that the cube molds shall remain intact with a top firmly attached throughout the curing period .
the nonshrink grout shall have a minimum expansion of num percent after seven days when tested per t num. d epoxy grout shall consist of sand and epoxy mixed by volume per the manufacturers recommendations .
the grout shall be capable of developing a minimum compressive strength of num psi in num hours when tested per msmt num .
sand for epoxy grout shall be as specified in num .
num num portland cement concrete e an epoxy or polyester anchoring system may be used when approved in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
strength values shall be as specified .
num linseed oil .
a num mixture by volume of boiled linseed oil meeting federal specification ttlnum and kerosene per d num .
num latex modified concrete lmc .
portland cement concrete containing prequalified laboratory approved styrene butadiene latex emulsion .
latex emulsion shall have a minimum of num percent of the nonvolatiles as styrene butadiene polymers .
the latex emulsion shall conform to table num a .
the material shall be stored in suitable containers and be protected from freezing and exposure to temperatures in excess of num f. lmc shall be proportioned using volumetric mixing and designed as follows latex modified concrete material specification limits portland cement cwtydnum min num latex emulsioncement ratio num num watercement ratio max num entrained air num num slump in .
num num the physical properties of lmc shall conform to table num b. furnish the necessary num x num in .
molds per m num to be used for the fabrication of compressive strength cylinders .
control and acceptance sampling .
a submit a sample of at least num qt of the styrene butadiene latex emulsion to omt for each lot of material used in a days production .
b a batch for lmc is defined as the capacity of the equipment being used on the project .
slump and air samples shall be taken and tested before the placement of a batch is permitted .
the slump shall be measured four to five minutes after discharge from the mixer .
the test material shall be deposited off the deck and not be num num portland cement concrete disturbed during this waiting period .
one additional sample for slump and air shall be taken randomly during the placement of each batch .
for seven day compressive strength two tests each per batch are required .
a test is defined as consisting of two companion cylinders .
the samples for these tests will be taken at random while the placement is in progress .
table num a requirements for chemical properties of latex emulsion materials property specifications quality assurance tests limits tolerance prequalification tests control and acceptance color white x x ph num num x x weight lbgal num num x x solids content num num x x butadiene content of polymer num num viscosity num rpmcps match original num x x surface tension dynescm max num mean particle size polymer  num num coagulum max num x x freezethaw stability coagulum max num x x infrared spectra of latex film match original x x infrared of alcohol soluble portion of latex match original x x shelf life min num yr x note num quality assurance tests shall be conducted per msmt num except those denoted by an shall be conducted per fhwa rd num .
note num the original or prequalification sample shall be accompanied by the producers certification on all of the tests and properties noted above and as specified in tcnum .
the certification shall contain actual test values of the product and the infrared spectrograph .
note num a separate certification is required for each lot of material .
the certification shall note the date of manufacture lot size and whether or not the material is identical to the formulation of the original sample .
num num portland cement concrete table num b latex modified concrete physical properties test property test values quality assurance tests prequalified tests control and acceptance num day compressive strength psi min num x x num day compressive strength psi min num x num day compressive strength psi min num x num day flexural strength psi min num x num day flexural strength psi min num x num day shear bond strength psi min num x durability factor num cycles min num x chloride permeability ppm max num x scaling resistance num cycles max num x note num quality assurance tests shall be conducted per msmt num .
note num seven day compressive strength test will be used for control and acceptance of the material .
the minimum specified design strength is num psi at seven days .
the mix design approval and acceptance will be based on a coefficient of variation of num percent with a probability of num in num tests falling below the specified strength .
only test values num or greater than the specified strength will be accepted .
num rapid hardening cementitious materials for concrete pavement repairs .
materials shall be a dry packaged cementitious mortar having less than num percent by weight of aggregate retained on the num in .
sieve and meet the following requirements num num portland cement concrete classification .
class i for use at ambient temperatures below num f. class ii for use at ambient temperatures of num to num f. class iii for use at ambient temperatures above num f. chemical requirements .
c num except the material shall not contain organic compounds such as epoxy resins or polyesters as the principal binder .
physical requirements .
meet the following when tested per msmt num compressive strength psi min classification num hr num hr num hr num days type i slow num num type ii rapid num num type iii very rapid num num test results test property limits bond strength num days psi min num length change increase after num days in water based on length at num hr max num length change decrease after num days max num freeze thaw loss after num cycles in num caclnum solution max num initial setting time minutes min num marking .
all packages delivered to the project shall be marked with the following information a date material was packaged .
b approximate setting time .
c recommended dosage of water or liquid component .
d mixing instructions .
num num masonry products e class or temperature range .
certification .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum showing the actual test results for each class and type of material submitted to the laboratory .
section num masonry products num sewer brick .
m num grade sm with a standard size of num x num x num in .
num manhole brick .
m num grade ms. num building brick .
m num grade sw. num hollow concrete masonry block .
c num grade n type i normal weight .
num solid concrete masonry block .
c num .
num mortar for masonry .
composed in accordance with one of the following a one part portland or blended cement and three parts mortar sand by dry loose volume and hydrated lime not to exceed num percent of the cement by weight .
b one part masonry cement and three parts mortar sand by dry loose volume .
c prepared bag mixes consisting of masonry cement and mortar sand .
the prepared mixes shall produce a minimum compressive strength of num psi in seven days when tested using the applicable procedures specified in c num .
materials for mortar shall meet the following mortar sand num portland cement num blended cement num masonry cement num water num lime num num performance graded asphalt binders and hma num section num performance graded asphalt binders and hot mix asphalt num certification .
the manufacturer and hauler shall furnish certifications as specified in tcnum and the following the manufacturer shall certify a date and time of loading .
b tank or blending system .
c identification of hauling unit .
d binder grade temperature and quantity of materials .
e complete certified analysis .
f lot number if applicable .
g mixing and compaction temperatures .
the hauler shall certify a identification of hauling unit .
b binder grade and source of last delivery .
c the date of the last delivery using this hauling tank and volume of material remaining in the tank at the time of current loading .
num performance graded asphalt binders .
performance graded asphalt binders for mixes containing all virgin materials recycled asphalt pavement materials or roofing shingles from manufacturing waste shall meet m num table num for the specified performance grade .
the asphalt binder recovered from the final plant mixed material will be considered rolling thin film oven rtfo material and shall meet m num table num for the specified performance grade .
the performance graded binder shall be preapproved by the administration .
submit a certificate of analysis showing conformance with the performance graded binder specification m num and the critical cracking temperature in conformance with pp num standard practice for num num performance graded asphalt binders and hma determination of lowtemperature performance grade pg of asphalt binder for the binders specified in the contract documents .
the pg binder for hma mixes shall be achieved by the use of neat asphalt with elastomer polymer modifications when needed .
num emulsified asphalts .
m num or m num with the following exceptions a cement mixing tests are waived .
b grade ssnum viscosity shall be num to num seconds at num f. c maximum of num percent by volume of oil distillate .
d the sieve test requirement for field samples shall be a maximum of num percent .
num hot mix asphalt hma .
mixes shall be produced in a plant as specified in section num .
num aggregates .
section num and m num with the exception that the aggregate retained on the num mm sieve shall be tested for flat and elongated particles using d num .
when recycled asphalt pavement is used in an hma mix as defined in msmt num it shall be considered an aggregate source .
num mix design .
develop superpave mix designs in conformance with r num except that table num superpave gyratory compaction shall be replaced with the following table design level numyear design traffic esals ndesign num num num num num to num num num num to num num num num to num num num num num hma superpave mixes shall conform to the specification for superpave volumetric mix design m num and be designed for the equivalent single axle loading esal range specified in the contract documents .
num performance graded asphalt binders and hma num crushed recycled asphalt pavement rap material and maximum of num percent roofing shingles from manufacturing waste may be used in the mix design .
allowable percentage and suitability for use shall be determined in conformance with msmt num and m num .
when using less than num percent rap binder grade adjustments are not required .
surface mixes using num percent or more rap and base mixes using more than num percent rap shall be tested and evaluated in accordance with tp num determining dynamic modulus of hotmix asphalt concrete mixtures to determine plant mixing capabilities .
a demonstration strip or mix verification may be required before placement .
the use of rap not to exceed num percent may be considered for applications where higher polish value aggregates are required and in mixes requiring elastomer type polymer binder .
approval for use will be on an individual project basis by omt .
placement areas within the project limits shall be designated by omt .
these applications shall require isolated rap stockpiles from an identified single source .
submit documentation of rap stockpile management quality and traceability for approval prior to use .
do not use crushed glass in surface mixes .
do not use roofing shingles in gapgraded mixes or mixes requiring elastomer type polymer binder .
num mix design approval .
at least num days prior to paving operations submit data from the laboratory study to the engineer for tentative approval .
submit mix designs in an approved format .
include the following a mix designation .
b source percentage and grade of performance graded asphalt binder .
c source gradation and proportion of each component aggregate .
d target aggregate gradation .
e plant where the hma mix will be produced .
f plant target mixing temperature based on viscosity of num pas .
g ratio of dust to binder material on effective asphalt .
num num performance graded asphalt binders and hma h maximum specific gravity at the target binder content .
i mix design grading plotted on num power gradation chart .
j tensile strength ratio and worksheets .
k the bulk specific gravity at ndesign gyrations .
l the air void content percent va at n gyrations .
design m the voids in the mineral aggregate percent vma and the voids filled with asphalt percent vfa at n gyrations t num. design n all consensus and source properties .
num coarse aggregate angularity .
num flat and elongated .
num sand equivalent .
num uncompacted void content of fine aggregate .
num bulk and apparent specific gravity of coarse and fine aggregate .
num absorption of coarse and fine aggregate .
with each mix design submitted to omt for approval include a quantity of job mix formula aggregate and appropriate amount of required pg binder for ignition oven calibration .
if previous construction or performance experience has shown the proposed mix design to be unsatisfactory omt may require that a more suitable design be submitted .
when a change to the source of aggregate used in the mix is proposed submit a revised mix design with the information required above and in num .
if a change in the performance grade binder source becomes necessary conduct a stripping test in conformance with msmt num prior to approval .
the administration may require an antistripping additive test in conformance with d num before giving the final approval .
num performance graded asphalt binders and hma num field verification of mix design .
after receiving tentative approval for the mix design from the asphalt technology chief representative conduct a field verification of the mix at the beginning of production in each plant .
field verification shall be performed by the certified personnel as specified in num .
prepare the verification samples per r num .
notify the engineer at least two working days in advance of the scheduled verification .
verification evaluation .
a initial verification shall consist of four samples tested for the parameters listed in msmt num table num .
these samples shall be randomly drawn from the first days production .
if the first day of production is less than num tons the verification testing may be spread over the number of days needed to accumulate num tons .
a verification sample and test is required on any day that exceeds num tons of production .
complete the verification testing no later than on the day when production has reached the num tons .
evaluate the verification tests results as specified in msmt num. b if the mix produced by the plant conforms to the parameters listed in msmt num table num with a percent within specification limit pwsl of at least num production may proceed without any changes .
if the contractor has submitted mixes with identical aggregate combinations and differing asphalt contents associated with changes in esal loads verification may be limited to volumetric analysis at the engineers discretion .
c if the mix produced by the plant does not conform to the parameters listed in msmt num table num with a pwsl of at least num then an adjustment to the asphalt content or gradation may be made to bring the mix design requirements within acceptable levels .
permissible adjustment limitations between the approved mix design and adjusted mix design are as follows num num performance graded asphalt binders and hma test property permissible adjustment larger than num in .
num mm sieve num num in .
num mm thru no .
num num mm sieves num no .
num num mm thru no .
num num m sieves num no .
num num m sieve num binder content num the permissible adjustment for all mixes shall be within control points .
when an adjustment is made to the mix design perform a second verification to ensure that the modified mix conforms to all design requirements .
meet the time and tonnage limitations as specified in a .
if the adjusted mix meets the pwsl production may proceed .
if the mix does not meet these requirements suspend production for the mix and submit a new mix design for approval .
design the new mix as specified in msmt num or r num. d if subsequent designs submitted due to nonconformance do not meet b during the initial verification suspend production for the mix until corrective action is taken as approved by the engineer .
thin lifts .
when specified lift thickness does not meet numtimes nominal maximum aggregate size for fine graded mix designs or numtimes nominal maximum aggregate size for coarse graded mix designs the lift thickness shall be designated as a thin lift .
fine graded and coarse graded mix designs shall be determined in accordance with m num table num gradation classification and the table below .
num thin lift mix design identification table gradation classification mix designation control sieve mix design target passing fine graded coarse graded a thin lift is a specified a thin lift is a specified nummm pavement thickness num pavement thickness num inch .
inch .
when the nummm num is when the nummm num is or num a thin lift is a num a thin lift is a nummm specified pavement specified pavement thickness num num inches thickness num num inches when the nummm num is when the nummm num is or num a thin lift is a num a thin lift is a nummm specified pavement specified pavement thickness num num inches thickness num inches when the nummm num is when the nummm num is or num a thin lift is a num a thin lift is a nummm specified pavement specified pavement thickness num num inches thickness num inches when the nummm num when the nummm num is is or num a thin lift is num a thin lift is a nummm a specified pavement specified pavement thickness num inches thickness num inches when the nummm num when the nummm num is or num a thin lift is num a thin lift is a nummm is a specified pavement specified pavement thickness num num inches thickness num inches performance graded asphalt binders and hma num num antistripping additives .
hma shall have a tensile strength ratio tsr of at least num when tested in conformance with d num .
the freezethaw conditioning cycle is required .
hma mixes not meeting the minimum tsr requirement shall include an antistripping additive .
when an antistripping additive is needed the exact quantity shall be determined by the producer in conformance with d num based on a minimum tsr of num .
when a heat stable antistripping additive is used the dosage rate shall be at least num percent of the total weight of asphalt .
the additive shall be introduced at the plant by line blending metering or otherwise measuring to ensure accurate proportioning and thorough mixing .
when hydrated lime is used it shall be added in slurry form at the rate of num to num percent by weight of total aggregate .
the hydrated lime shall conform to c num .
lime slurry shall be sprayed uniformly on the damp cold aggregate on the feed belt prior to entry into the hma plant dryer .
num num performance graded asphalt binders and hma plant control and acceptance of the mix shall be based on msmt num with respect to its stripping potential .
num plant control .
the following tolerances shall apply table num a mix tolerances physical property tolerancep lant site or hauling unit samples b tolerancep roject site behind the paver samplesb passing no .
num num mm sieve and larger num num passing no .
num num mm thru no .
num num m sieve num num passing no .
num num m sieve num num asphalt content num num ratio of dust to binder material num to num a num to num a mix temperature leaving plant versus mix design temperature f num na deviation of maximum specific gravity per lot versus design maximum specific gravity num num voids total mix vtm num num num num voids total mix num mm mix vtm num num num num voids in mineral aggregate vma num from design target num from design target voids filled asphalt vfa within spec within spec bulk specific gravity gmb num num gmb at nmax num num a not applicable to num mm .
b for mixes other than gap graded hma .
pwsl computations shall be performed for maximum specific gravity voids in the total mix voids in the mineral aggregate and voids filled with asphalt .
this computation shall be performed as specified in num using the moving average of the last three consecutive test values for each parameter .
if the pwsl for the three test values falls below num corrective action shall be taken to bring the pwsl to at least num performance graded asphalt binders and hma num num .
if the pwsl drops below num production shall be suspended until corrective action is taken as approved by the engineer .
num gap graded stone matrix asphalt ggsma .
num aggregates .
refer to num .
num mix design .
refer to num and the following table mix tolerances physical properties mix design vca mix less than vcadrc vma num min .
vtm num ndesign gyrations num ac by volume num min .
draindown max num stabilizer by weight of total mix num num vca voids in coarse aggregate .
num num performance graded asphalt binders and hma mix shipment and placement tolerances for ggsma physical property tolerance plant site or hauling unit samples tolerance project site behind the paver samples passing no .
num num mm sieve and larger num num passing no.num num mm sieve num num passing no.num num mm sieve num num passing no.num num mm sieve num num passing no.num num mm sieve num num passing no.num num mm sieve num num passing no.num num mm sieve num num passing no .
num num m sieve num num asphalt content num num ratio of dust to binder material na na mix temperature leaving plant versus mix design temperature f num na deviation of maximum specific gravity per lot versus design maximum specific gravity num num voids total mix vtm num num num num voids in coarse aggregate vca less than vcadrc less than vcadrc voids in mineral aggregate vma num min num min voids filled asphalt vfa na na stabilizer by weight of total mix num na pwsl computations shall be performed for maximum specific gravity voids in the total mix and voids in the mineral aggregate .
this computation shall be performed as specified in num using the moving average of the last three consecutive test values for each parameter .
if the pwsl for the three test values fall below num corrective action shall be taken to bring the pwsl to at least num .
if the pwsl drops below num production shall be suspended until corrective action is taken as approved by the engineer .
num performance graded asphalt binders and hma num num mix design approval .
refer to num .
num stabilizer .
ggsma shall incorporate a stabilizer selected from a source currently approved by the administration .
num stabilizer supply system .
a separate system for feeding shall be used to proportion the required amount into the mixture so that uniform distribution is obtained .
when a batch plant is used the stabilizer shall be added to the aggregate in the weigh hopper and both dry and wet mixing times shall be increased .
the stabilizer shall be uniformly distributed prior to the addition of asphalt cement into the mixture .
the plant shall be interlocked so that asphalt can not be added until the stabilizer has been introduced into the mix .
when a drum plant is used the stabilizer shall be added to the mixture in a manner that prevents the stabilizer from becoming entangled in the exhaust system .
the stabilizer supply system shall include low level and noflow indicators and a printout of the status of feed rate in lbminute and have a num second plant shut down function for noflow occurrences .
the stabilizer supply line shall include a section of transparent pipe for observing consistency of flow or feed .
all stabilizer addition systems shall be as approved by the engineer .
num antistripping additives .
refer to num .
num num pipe section num pipe num certification .
the manufacture shall furnish certification for all pipe as specified in tcnum .
material specification remarks nonreinforced concrete pipe m num class num reinforced concrete pipe m num class num and num load bearing option concrete end sections m num class num pipe reinforcement required corrugated polyethylene pipe m num corrugated polyethylene drainage pipe m num perforated underdrain and underdrain outlet pipe .
polyvinyl chloride pvc profile wall pipe m num polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe m num underdrain outlet pipe m num a perforated underdrain reinforced concrete arch culvert m num reinforced concrete elliptical pipe m num load bearing option class heiv preformed rubber joint for circular pipe m num type a corrugated steel pipe pipe arches and underdrain m num b c end finish shall be annular corrugations corrugated aluminum alloy pipe m num b end finish shall be annular corrugations structural plate for pipe pipe arches and arches m num copper pipe fed spec ww tnum type k polyethylene pe precoated corrugated steel pipe m num and m num minimum thickness num mil on each of the surfaces .
concrete drain tile m num nonasbestos fibercement storm drain pipe c num reinforced concrete lowhead pressure pipe c num a perforations shall conform to the requirements of f num. b bands with dimples are prohibited .
c all corrugated steel pipe shall be aluminumcoated type num conforming to m num unless otherwise specified .
num pipe num num certified reinforced concrete pipe plants .
reinforced concrete pipe conforming to the specifications will be accepted on the manufacturers certification based on the requirements outlined below .
this includes the sampling testing documentation and certification of the product by the manufacturer in combination with an administration monitoring program .
initial inspection .
any plant initially setting up and starting production will be subjected to a comprehensive inspection to determine whether plant equipment and personnel conform to all applicable specifications and that suitable testing facilities will be available .
the administration will accept certification by a professional engineer registered in the state of maryland that the plant facilities conform to all applicable specifications however final acceptance will be determined by the administration .
num responsibilities of the concrete pipe producer .
perform quality control operations at the plant to ensure that the material conforms to specifications .
the quality control process will be subject to unannounced periodic verification by representatives of the engineer .
the plants quality control personnel shall fully participate in the verification .
submit a quality control plan for approval prior to the start of production .
in addition submit a quality control plan annually for review and approval .
submit any change in personnel production testing facility and policy as a supplement to the plan .
the plan shall include the following a the manner in which the materials will be handled .
b the following quality control procedures num the names qualifications and responsibilities of the quality control personnel and the designation of a quality control manager .
num sampling and testing methods and frequencies .
num method used for inspecting reinforcement cages prior to and during production .
num method of curing .
num num pipe num method of maintaining accurate quality control records .
num samples of forms approved by the administration .
num patching procedure .
num method of preparation of units for shipping .
num method of identification of each unit as tested and approved .
a pipe lot is defined as a maximum num day production run of concrete pipe all being of like size material strength designation and manufacturing process .
the num days need not be consecutive as long as they occur within a one month period and the process is not altered in any way between production days .
the lot size may include up to num pieces for num to num in .
pipe or num pieces for num in .
and larger pipe .
a threeedge bearing test to produce a num in .
crack is required for each lot in conformance with m num section num .
perform at least one threeedge bearing test per year to ultimate load on each size and class of pipe manufactured and shipped to administration projects to verify that the applicable specified ultimate load can be achieved .
perform at least one absorption test per year on each size and class of pipe manufactured and shipped to administration projects .
ensure that the ultimate load test and absorption test is completed on the first lot of the year of that size and class pipe shipped to administration projects .
num test facilities .
the producers facilities equipment and quality control personnel shall be capable of conducting the tests specified in t num and shall be as approved .
the quality control personnel shall be identified by a number used for testing and stamping pipe for shipping .
the producer shall maintain yearly calibration certificates on all equipment used for testing .
num pipe num the producer may elect to use the services of an independent commercial testing laboratory that is acceptable to the engineer in lieu of conducting their own tests .
num shipment .
pipe may be shipped to the administrations projects when the required testing for all pipe in the lot has been completed with acceptable results and all of the pipe to be shipped is at least the age of the test specimens at testing .
prior to shipping mark the following information on the inside of each pipe .
a plant name .
b plant location .
c size of pipe .
d class of pipe .
e date of manufacture .
f quality control stamp .
g quality control personnel number .
num certification .
a manufacturers certification shall accompany each shipment of pipe .
a copy of the certification shall be delivered to the engineer the administrations laboratory and the contractor for each shipment .
one copy shall remain at the plant .
the certification shall include the following a the plant name address and location .
b size and class of the pipe .
c date of manufacture and shipment .
d number of pieces .
e administration contract number .
f statement of specification compliance .
num num pipe g signature and number of the quality control personnel that inspected the shipment .
num records .
all testing and inspection documents shall be maintained at the production plant for at least three years from the manufactured date and shall be made available to the administration upon request .
the producer shall collect and maintain conformance certificates and mill test reports for aggregates cement fly ash joint material reinforcing steel and other materials intended for use in products used on administration projects .
num quality control forms .
the producer shall maintain an administration approved quality control form for all pipe produced for use on administration projects .
each form for each lot shall contain the following pipe dimensions reinforcement tests general information diameter length wall thickness joint style size spacing area spec and test results adequacy and quality of welds and splices absorption spec and test results once per year visual inspection plant name technician signature lot identification production dates pipe class units per lot material sources cement fine aggregate coarse aggregate reinforcement three edge bearing num in .
crack strength spec and test results ultimate strength spec and test results once per year num pipe num num responsibilities of the administration .
verification of certification will be performed at the discretion of the administration a minimum of once per year .
the administration reserves the right to discontinue acceptance of reinforced concrete pipe if the verification process indicates that materials test procedures or finished pipe do not conform to the contract documents and quality control program .
num certified corrugated polyethylene pipe plants .
polyethylene pipe conforming to the specifications will be accepted on the manufacturers certification based on the requirements outlined below .
this includes the sampling testing documentation and certification of the product by the manufacturer in combination with an administration monitoring program .
num responsibilities of the corrugated polyethylene pipe producer .
submit a quality control plan for approval .
the plan shall be site specific and include the following a a detail of how the producer proposes to control the equipment materials and production methods to ensure that products produced are in conformance with the specifications .
b a list of the personnel responsible for production and quality control at the site including information on how to contact each person .
c identification of the physical location of the plant .
d the method of identification of each lot of material during manufacture testing storage and shipment .
e the method of sampling and testing of raw materials and of the finished product including lot sizes type of material tests performed and a description of equipment modifications or equipment developed inhouse to perform the tests .
f a plan for dealing with quality control sample failures which shall include how the producer plans to initiate an immediate investigation and what corrective action will be implemented to remedy the cause of the problem .
g a statement as to what determines lot size i.e .
a single days production num num linear feet etc .
a lot is defined as a num num pipe production run of pipe all being of like size material and manufacturing process .
num test facilities .
the certification program requires all tests to be conducted at laboratories that are accredited by aashto or approved by the administration .
each source may establish and maintain its own laboratory for the performance of quality control testing or may request to utilize an approved independent laboratory .
the producer shall make a written request and have written approval from the administration prior to having material tested off site .
the equipment required for all approved laboratories shall be sufficient to perform the required test procedures as required by the applicable specification and standards .
num certification .
a manufacturers certification shall accompany each shipment of pipe .
a copy of the certification shall be delivered to the engineer and the contractor for each shipment .
one copy shall remain at the plant .
the certification shall include the following a plant name address and location .
b lot or production identification .
c date of manufacture and shipment .
d number of units of each size pipe or total linear feet of each size pipe .
e administration contract number .
f statement of specification compliance .
g signature of the quality control manager or authorized representative name shall be designated in the quality control plan .
num records .
all testing and inspection documents shall be maintained at the manufacturing facility for at least three years from the manufactured date and shall be made available to the administration upon request .
num quality control forms .
the manufacturer shall maintain an administration approved quality control form for all pipe produced for administration projects .
include the following num type c or cp only .
general information tests plant identification qc technicians signature lot identification production dates tubingpipe dimension perforation dimensions workmanship identification markings pipe stiffness pipe flattening elongation environmental stress cracking brittleness low temperature flexibility num responsibilities of the administration .
the administration will randomly conduct at least one plant inspection per year with the cooperation and assistance of the producer to ensure conformance with specifications and quality control requirements .
visual inspection will be made by the engineer when pipe is received on the project .
the administration will verify the manufacturers certification test results by sampling in conformance with the administrations frequency guide .
section num gabions num wire for gabions .
all wire including tie and connecting wire shall have a tensile strength of at least num num psi when tested per a num .
all wire sizes and mesh spacing shall be as recommended by the manufacturer .
stainless steel interlocking fasteners meeting a num may be substituted for wire ties .
when subjected to directional tension along its axis the fastener shall remain in a closed and locked condition for a minimum force of num lb .
num galvanized coating for gabions .
galvanized coating for fabric ties and connecting wire shall not be at least num ozftnum when tested per a num .
num polyvinyl chloride pvc coating for gabions .
pvc coating for fabric ties and connecting wires shall exhibit no weight loss when tested per msmt num .
color shall meet federal standard num gray color no .
num or green color no .
num and match throughout the project .
gabions num num num piles and piling section num piles and piling num timber piling .
m num .
num resin and fiberglass caps for timber pile heads .
meet the following property specification limits test method moisture insensitive resin tensile strength psi min num d num tensile elongation min num d num compressive strength psi min num c num abrasive resistance lmil min num d num woven glass cloth weight ozydnum min num type volan a liters l of fine aggregate per mil thickness of resin num steel pipe piles .
a num grade num .
num steel bearing piles .
a num including all splice material .
num steel sheet piles .
a num .
sheet pile accessories a num .
high strength bolts num .
num welding materials .
aashtoaws dnum .
num num reinforcement steel section num reinforcement steel num certification .
the steel manufacturer shall furnish certification for each heat of steel as specified in tcnum .
num deformed reinforcement .
unless otherwise specified reinforcement bars and reinforcement bars used as anchoring devices shall be grade num deformed bars per a num or a num .
deformed bars shall be epoxy coated when specified .
epoxy powder shall be as specified in num .
num plain reinforcement .
unless otherwise specified dowel bars and dowel bars used as ties in portland cement concrete pavement expansion and contraction joints shall be plain round steel bars meeting a num grade num or a num .
bars shall be epoxy coated .
epoxy powder shall be as specified in num .
all dowel bars used for traverse joints shall have a maximum pullout strength per m num .
num stainless steel bars .
stainless steel bars may be used in lieu of epoxy coated plain bars .
stainless steel shall meet a num type smnum .
deformed stainless steel bars shall meet a num for cross sectional area and deformations .
num sleeves for dowel bars in pavement expansion joints .
sleeves for dowel bars shall be of sheet metal capable of sliding over num num in .
of the dowel and have a closed end with a stop to hold the end of the sleeve at a minimum distance of num in .
from the end of the dowel bar .
num welded steel wire fabric .
m num .
fabric used in pavement construction shall be furnished in flat sheets .
num welded deformed steel wire fabric .
m num .
num fabricated steel bar mats .
steel shall meet a num .
num wire fabric for pneumatically applied mortar and concrete encasement .
fabric shall meet a num and be galvanized as specified in num .
fabricate from size wnum wire on num in .
centers in each direction or from wnum wire on num in .
centers in each direction .
num cold drawn steel wire .
concrete reinforcement shall meet m num .
num num metals num tie devices for concrete pavement .
tie device sizes shall be as specified and produce a frictional force of at least num lbft per foot of spacing when tested per msmt num .
num steel strand .
m num grade num low relaxation strand .
section num metals num certification .
the metal producer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum .
the certification shall include actual mill test results .
the chemical and physical properties of the finished metal products shall also be furnished by the processing manufacturer .
num structural steel .
structural steel shall meet the requirements specified .
all primary load carrying members shall meet the supplementary toughness requirements of m num zone num .
primary load carrying members are as follows or as designated in the contract documents finger joint steel from which saw tooth configurations have been cut all stringers cover plates bearing stiffeners splice plates pins and pin links for straight rolled steel beam bridges all flanges webs bearing stiffeners splice plates pins and pin links for straight steel girder bridges .
additionally on curved rolled steel beam and steel girder bridges all diaphragms cross frames lateral bracing including connection plates to main stringers .
num steel for miscellaneous use .
a num or a num grade num .
steel for bearings on structures shall conform to a num grade num .
num welding materials .
aashtoaws dnum .
num bearings num num gray iron castings .
a num class numb .
num steel stud shear developers .
aashtoaws dnum .
num bolts nuts and washers for general use .
a num galvanized per a num .
anchor bolts shall be galvanized and meet a num grade num .
num high strength bolts nuts and washers .
a num .
num anchor bolts for traffic signals highway lighting and signs .
f num grade num snum .
anchor bolts shall be galvanized for the full length of the threads and num in .
below the threads per a num .
nuts shall be hex nuts meeting a num grade numh or a num gr dh .
flat washers shall be heavy washers per f num .
all hardware shall be galvanized per a num .
num cast washers .
cast washers ogee washers and special cast washers per a num .
cast washers shall be hot dip galvanized .
the coating shall meet the thickness adherence and quality requirements of a num .
num hardware .
spikes wood screws staples brads lag screws carriage bolts and other parts under the general heading of hardware shall be composed of carbon steel and meet federal specification ffnnum .
num steel forms .
steel bridge deck forms and deck form supports that remain in place shall be fabricated from steel per a num designation ss grades num through num coating designation g num .
the minimum thickness of uncoated steel shall be num in .
section num bearings num certification .
the bearing producer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum .
the certification shall include actual mill test results .
the chemical and physical properties of the finished bearings shall also be furnished by the processing manufacturer .
num bronze or copper alloy bearing and expansion plates .
either of cast bronze or rolled copper alloy .
num num bearings num cast bronze .
b num alloy no .
num or no .
num .
selflubricating bronze bearing plates shall be an article of standard production by an approved manufacturer of such equipment .
they shall be provided with trepanned recesses not grooves that shall be filled with a lubricating compound consisting of graphite and metallic substances with a lubricating binder capable of withstanding the atmospheric elements .
the lubrication compound shall be compressed into the recesses by pressure to form dense nonplastic lubricating inserts .
the lubricating area shall comprise at least num percent of the total area .
the static coefficient of friction shall not exceed num .
the certification shall be as specified above and shall include the actual test results showing that bearing plates of the same design as those supplied meet the static coefficient of friction requirements .
test specimens shall be at least num in .
long by num in .
wide .
the static coefficient of friction shall be determined by testing a specimen plate subjected to a vertical pressure of num psi and num cycles consisting of num in .
horizontal strokes at a speed not to exceed num cycles per minute .
conduct testing at an ambient temperature of num num f. the static coefficient of friction on the specimen bearing plate shall be calculated by dividing the total applied vertical load on the plate into the total horizontal load required to start motion between the bearing plate and its mating surface while subject to the vertical load .
upon completion of the test the bronze plate shall show no signs of galling .
num rolled copper .
per pb num alloy no .
num .
num structural bearing pads .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum .
num elastomeric pads .
elastomeric bearing pads shall meet the material requirements described in the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
the elastomeric bearing shall be num durometer hardness shore type a .
accompanying the certificate for elastomeric bearing pads shall be two standard astm tensile slabs molded from the same compound batch as the furnished elastomeric bearings .
the static load deflection of any layer of elastomeric bearing pads shall not exceed num percent at num psi average unit pressure when tested under laboratory conditions .
the design load for the elastomeric bearing pads will be as specified .
the manufacturer shall proof load each steel reinforced bearing design with a compressive load of num times the maximum design load and specify that the material conforms to the material certification .
num joints num when test specimens are cut from an actual bearing pad a reduction of num percent in the minimum requirements for original tensile strength and ultimate elongation will be required .
num selflubricating bearing assembly .
a fabric reinforced elastomeric pad tetrafluoroethylene tfe bonded to the pad and a stainless steel sheet .
all elements shall meet aashto standard specifications for highway bridges as modified herein .
fabric reinforced elastomeric pad shall be type a durometer hardness of num to num .
stainless steel sheet shall be type num minimum thickness of num gauge .
the surface of the stainless steel sheet in contact with tfe shall have a numb finish and be welded to the sole plate using an approved welding procedure .
num preformed fabric pads for general application .
multiple layers of num oz cotton duck impregnated and bound with high quality natural rubber or of equally suitable materials approved by the engineer and compressed into resilient pads of uniform thickness after compression and vulcanizing .
the finished pads shall withstand compression loads perpendicular to the plane of the laminations of at least num num psi without detrimental reduction in thickness or extrusion .
section num joints num joint sealer and crack filler .
d num as modified by msmt num .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum .
manufacturers recommendations regarding heating and pouring temperatures will be used when testing these materials .
if a range of temperatures is recommended the midpoint will be used as the pour point .
num silicone joint sealer and crack filler .
low modulus one component compounds .
if a primer is required it shall be as recommended by the sealant manufacturer and be placed on the joint faces following the insertion of the backup material .
silicone material when tested at num num f and num to num relative humidity shall meet the following num num joints test property test method specification limits shore a hardness at num days d num num tensile strength at num elongation psi max d num die c num elongation min d num die c num adhesion in peel lbin .
min fed spec ttsnum num flow num in .
max t num num tackfree time minutes d num num each container of silicone sealer and crack filler shall have a shelf life of at least six months .
material more than six months old shall be retested .
num preformed joint fillers .
m num .
bituminous fiber type shall meet m num with the bitumen content determined per t num .
the weathering test is not required for either type of material .
num preformed joint inserts .
m num .
num preformed polychloroprene elastomeric compression joint seals .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum .
num roadway seals for concrete pavement .
m num .
num bridge seals .
m num .
the minimum depth of all seals measured at the contact surface shall be at least num percent of the minimum uncompressed width of the seal .
num lubricant adhesive .
the lubricant adhesive shall be compatible with the preformed joint seals and concrete .
the engineer will determine if consistency is suitable at the time of installation .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum showing that lubricant adhesive meets the following num joints num test and method specification limits viscosity d num method b cp min num num film strength d num psi min num elongation d num min num each container shall be plainly marked with the manufacturers name or trademark lot number and date of manufacture .
do not use lubricant adhesive after nine months from the date of manufacture .
num neoprene strip seals .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum showing that the neoprene strip seals meet the following num num joints physical properties for preformed elastomeric strip seals property requirement test method tensile strength psi min num d num elongation at break min num d num hardness type a durometer points num num d num modifiedac oven agingnum hr at num f tensile strength loss max elongation loss max hardness type a durometer points change num num num to num d num d num modifiedac oil swell astm oil num num hr at num f weight change max num d num ozone resistance num strain num pphm in air num hr at num f no cracks d num modifiedb low temperature stiffening num days at num f hardness type a durometer points change num to num d num d num modified ac compression set num hr at num f max num d num method modified ba a the term modified in the table relates to the specimen preparation .
the use of the strip seal as the specimen source requires that more applications than specified in either of the modified test procedures be used .
the specimen modification shall be agreed upon by the purchaser and producer or supplier prior to testing .
b test per procedure a of d num .
ozone concentration is expressed in pphm .
c the hardness test shall be performed with the durometer in a durometer stand as recommended in d num .
num special molded intersection pieces .
where joint elements intersect a special strip seal element manufactured by molding in one piece from neoprene material similar to that specified above shall be num in .
from point of intersection to nearest end along center line of joint in any direction .
ends shall be plane and square to facilitate bonding to adjacent extruded areas and corners of sharp angles shall be rounded sufficiently to relieve damaging stress concentrations .
angles to which moldings are fabricated shall be within num degrees of the actual angle as specified in the contract documents to avoid excessive deformation when installed in steel joint components .
num joints num lubricant adhesive for use in installing and bonding neoprene seal elements to steel joint components shall be one part moisture curing polyurethane and hydrocarbon solvent mixture having the following physical properties test and method specification limits average weight lbgal num num solids content min num adhesives shall remain liquid from f num to num film strength d num psi min num elongation d num min num steel extrusions and neoprene seals shall be matching components by the same manufacturer .
the steel extrusions shall have a thickness of at least num in .
all steel portions of the joint assembly shall be painted with an inorganic zinc rich primer meeting num and applied as specified in section num .
num sealer for loop detector .
type a two part epoxy or type b one part polyurethane .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum .
do not mix aggregate with the sealer material .
apply the sealer in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num num joints num tests .
meet to the following type a two part epoxy test and method specification limits viscosity cone and plate viscometer num c cps max num num pot life num c minutes min num cure time num c no tackiness hr max num hardness type a durometer d num num num tensile elongation d num min num water absorption d num num hr max num oil absorption d num max num volume resistivity num c d num ohmcm min num x num type b one part polyurethane test and method specification limits viscosity brookfield rvf num spindle num rpm num c cps max num num cure time num c no tackiness hr max num hardness rex type a num num tensile strength d num psi min num tensile elongation d num min num arc resistance d num sec min num dielectric constant d num min num num hz num num khz nonvolatile content num num roofing paper .
roofing paper used in expansion joints shall be composed of roofing felt saturated and coated on both sides with an asphaltic material .
it shall weigh at least num lbnum ftnum and not crack when bent num degrees over a num in .
radius at room temperature .
num water stops .
rubber or polyvinyl chloride pvc .
shall be of the shape and dimensions specified .
the cross section shall be uniform along its length and transversely symmetrical so that the thickness at any given distance from either edge of the water stop is uniform .
num joint s num shall meet the following testand method specification limits tensile strength d num psi min num elongation break d num min num hardness rubber type a durometer d num num num hardness pvc type a durometer d num num num furnish a test sample for each lot or shipment of water stop .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum .
num asphalt sealer for concrete pipe .
a mixture of asphalt mineral filler and petroleum solvents and having adhesive and cohesive properties .
each container shall be clearly marked with a lot number manufacturer and location of manufacturer .
the supplier shall furnish a certified copy of the test results showing that the sealer meets the following test and method specification limits residues by evaporation nonvolatile matter d num min num inorganic filler on ignition ash content d num num num num closed cell neoprene sponge elastomer .
d num type s. skin coating is optional .
the material shall meet the following num method to calculate permanent set t permanentset num tnum xnum tnum where tnum original thickness of sample and tnum thickness of specimen num minutes after removal of clamps or after num days recovery .
test and method specification limits compression deflection d num pressure necessary for num deflection num num psi one layer num in .
thick pad num num f accelerated aging test change in compression deflection after aging num days num f num max permanent set d num num deflection num f for num hr num max residual permanent set after num days recovery num max water absorption by weight num in .
immersion of num in .
diameter sample for num hr room temperature num max water resistance d num quality retention num weeks exposure num num drainage troughs .
num neoprene drainage troughs .
m num and the following num joints neoprene drainage troughs physical property method limits thickness in .
min num tensile strength psi min d num num elongation at break min d num num hardness type a durometer d num modified num num compression set num hr num f max d num num oven aging num hr num f tensile strength loss max d num num elongation loss max num hardness type a durometer points change num to num num num coating systems for structural steel num optional preformed fabric drainage troughs .
a sheet composed of multiple plies of num num ozydnum polyester fabric laminated with butadiene acrylonitrile vulcanized to form an integral laminate .
physical properties of the laminate shall meet the following alternate preformed fabric drainage troughs physical property method limits no .
of plies num laminate weight lbftnum min num thickness in .
min num breaking strength lbin .
min d num num elongation at break max d num num elongation at num breaking strength max d num num num shims for noise barrier installation .
either neoprene or composite elastomer with a durometer of num num shore a value .
section num coating systems for structural steel num general .
the office of materials technology omt will maintain a list of approved paint manufacturers .
only manufacturers on this list will be acceptable .
unless otherwise specified paint shall be tested in accordance with federal test method standard num .
only one formulation per color will be permitted per project .
tests shall be performed at num f and num percent relative humidity unless otherwise specified .
all paint shall be satisfactory for brushing rolling or spraying .
all paints within a system shall be from the same manufacturer and shall be tinted at the point of manufacture to differentiate between coats existing coats and bare metal .
paint shall be shipped in the original containers and all containers shall bear the identification of the paint consisting of the manufacturers name the name or title of material volume of contents manufacturers paint identification number the date of manufacture color name and number handling instructions precautions and the batch number .
num approved paint manufacturers .
admission onto the list of approved paint manufacturers will be based upon the acceptance of the manufacturers submitted quality control plan .
num num coating systems for structural steel num quality control plan .
the quality control plan shall define the manufacturers process to ensure the quality of the products during and upon completion of the manufacturing process .
as a minimum the quality control plan shall list the following information a name of quality control tests and test procedures used .
b detailed description of the test procedures if not a standard test .
c frequency of quality control tests .
d maintenance of quality control records and length of time that they will be maintained .
num acceptance .
the paint manufacturer shall furnish certified test results for each lot and color of paint as specified in tcnum .
certified test results for each lot shall list the actual test results for the specified properties .
the certification shall be approved by omt prior to shipment and a copy shall accompany each shipment .
num original infrared spectrogram .
the manufacturer shall submit an original analysis of vehicle solids by infrared spectroscopy performed as specified in d num as follows a for zinc primer coatings infrared spectrum num to num m of each vehicle component .
b for two component coatings infrared spectrum num to num m of each single component and each mixed component when applicable in appropriate mixing ratios .
num certification verification tolerances .
the manufacturers facilities will be visited at random intervals and samples will be taken .
a comparison will be made between the manufacturers certified test results and the administrations tests results on the same batch .
the tolerances between these results shall meet the following num num coating systems for structural steel test tolerance test method total solids by mass num d num pigment content by mass num d num or d num vehicle solids by mass num d num viscosity ku num d num unit weight lbgal num d num volatile organic compound voc maximum limits shall meet the current regulations governing the point of application .
num primer coats and sealers .
num inorganic zinc rich .
m num type i or ia .
zinc dust shall meet d num type ii .
num aluminum epoxy mastic .
aluminum epoxy mastic primer shall have one component that is the condensation product of the reaction of epichlorohydrin with bisphenol a. drying times shall be num hours maximum to touch num hours minimum to num days maximum for recoat and num hours maximum for hard .
minimum pot life shall be three hours .
solids by weight shall be num percent minimum and num to num percent by volume .
viscosity shall be num to num ku and flexibility shall pass a num degree bend around a num in .
mandrel when tested per d num .
the material shall resist sagging when tested per d num with no sagging at the manufacturers recommended wet film thickness .
the material shall weigh num num lbgal .
num organic zinc rich .
sspcpaint num type ii .
num zinc rich moisture cured urethane .
onecomponent having a minimum zinc pigment content in the dry film of num percent .
minimum solids shall be of num percent by weight and num percent by volume .
the viscosity shall be num to num ku and shall be capable of being applied at num percent greater film build than required without runs or sags per d num .
the interval for application of the next coat shall be num hours minimum and num days maximum .
the coating shall also meet the moisture cured urethanes additional performance criteria table except that the maximum loss for abrasion resistance shall be num mg and salt spray after num hours shall be num in .
maximum .
num micaceous iron oxide and aluminum filled moisture cured urethane .
a minimum solids of num percent by weight and num percent by volume .
num num coating systems for structural steel the viscosity shall be num to num ku .
the coating shall also meet the moisture cured urethanes additional performance criteria table .
num penetrating sealer .
a viscosity of num to num ku and be able to penetrate and seal existing coatings and substrate .
it shall be suitable for application over marginally prepared steel and most generic types of aged coatings .
the sealer shall conform to one of the following a epoxy penetrating sealer shall be crosslinked amidoamine epoxy primersealer having two components mixed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
it shall be a minimum num percent solids by weight .
b moisture cured urethane micaceous iron oxide filled penetrating primersealer shall be one component having a minimum num percent solids by weight .
it shall also meet the moisture cured urethanes additional performance criteria table .
num intermediate coats .
num acrylic .
a single component num percent acrylic and have minimum solids of num percent by weight and num percent by volume .
maximum dry time to touch and recoat shall be num and num hours respectively .
num epoxy polyamide .
epoxy polyamide intermediate coat shall have one component that is the condensation product of the reaction of epichlorohydrin with bisphenol a .
the epoxy polyamide shall have a num minimum fineness of grind hegman units and minimum solids of num percent by weight and num percent by volume .
maximum dry time to touch and recoat shall be num and num hours respectively .
num micaceous iron oxide moisture cured urethane .
micaceous iron oxide moisture cured urethane shall be onecomponent having minimum solids of num percent by weight and num percent by volume .
the viscosity shall be num to num ku .
the interval for application of the next coat shall be num hours minimum and num days maximum .
the coating shall meet the moisture cured urethanes additional performance criteria table .
the micaceous iron oxide content shall be at least num lbgal .
num finish coats .
the color number will be specified in the contract documents and shall conform to federal standard num .
all finish coats shall resist sagging when tested per d num with no sagging at the manufacturers recommended wet film thickness .
num num coating systems for structural steel num acrylic .
refer to num .
num aliphatic urethane .
finish coat shall have minimum solids of num percent by weight and num percent by volume .
drying time to touch and hard shall be the minimum recommended by the paint manufacturer .
num moisture cured aliphatic urethane .
finish coat shall be onecomponent having a maximum free monomer content of num percent .
minimum solids shall be num percent by weight and num percent by volume and the viscosity shall be num to num ku .
the interval for application of the next coat shall be num hours minimum and num days maximum .
the coating shall meet the moisture cured urethanes additional performance criteria table .
num paint systems .
as specified in the paint systems table .
num num coating systems for structural steel paint systems table paint coat section dry film thickness mils min max usage system a inorganic zinc i num num num shop primer acrylic ii num num num first field coat acrylic iii num num num finish coat system b inorganic zinc i num num num shop primer epoxy polyamide ii num num num first field coverall coat aliphatic urethane iii num num num finish coat system c organic zinc i num num num primerfirst coverall coat epoxy polyamide ii num num num second cover all coat aliphatic urethane iii num num num finish coat system d organic zinc i num num num primerfirst coverall coat acrylic ii num num num second cover all coat acrylic iii num num num finish coat system e aluminum epoxy mastic i num num num primerfirst coverall coat epoxy polyamide ii num num num second cover all coat aliphatic urethane iii num num num finish coat system f micaceous iron oxide aluminum filled moisture cured urethane i num num num primerfirst coverall coat num num coating systems for structural steel paint coat section dry film thickness mils min max usage micaceous iron oxide moisture cured urethane ii num num num second cover all coat moisture cured aliphatic urethane iii num num num finish coat system g zinc rich moisture cured urethane i num num num primerfirst coverall coat micaceous iron oxide moisture cured urethane ii num num num second cover all coat moisture cured aliphatic urethane iii num num num finish coat system h penetrating sealer i num num num sealer aluminum filled epoxy mastic ii num num num spot coat aliphatic urethane iii num num num finish coat num num waterproofing moisture cured urethanes additional performance criteria table test property test method test criteria coat i and ii entire system cyclic salt foguv exposure of painted metal d num final ratings rusting num min blistering num min rust creep num max cracking degree and type flaking degree and type num hr num hr salt spray b num num in scribe num in .
max undercut num hr num hr abrasion resistance d num taber abraser csnum wheel num g load num cycles max loss num mg num mg adhesion d num crosscut tape test no peeling or removal no peeling or removal flexibility d num conical mandrel bend test min elongation num num pencil hardness d num min f f accelerated weathering g num quv using uv b lamp time after no more than num loss of gloss num hr impact resistance d num min num in.lb chemical resistance solutions fed .
spec .
tcnum num num sodium hydroxide num hydrochloric acid num sulfuric acid num acetic acid unaffected slight discoloration permitted reversed impact d num rapid deformation no cracking or delamination section num waterproofing num certification .
the producer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum .
num asphaltic materials for dampproofing and waterproofing .
num hot applied asphalt .
d num .
num num waterproofing num cold applied asphalt .
meet the following when tested per msmt num procedure a .
the material shall not contain isocyanide or any derivative of cyanide .
test and method specification limits grade i grade ii grade iii r and b softening point t num num num f num num f num num f penetration num mm t num num f num g num sec num min num min num min num f num g num sec num num num num num num num f num g num sec num min num max num max permeability gcmnum max msmt num num num num flow test mm max msmt num cc num num flexibility num f msmt num no peeling or loss of adhesion imperviousness test msmt num no pitting or discoloration sag test msmt num no movement grade i suitable for below ground and horizontal applications .
grade iisuitable for below ground and above ground where surface temperatures do not exceed num f. grade iiisuitable for below ground and above ground where surface temperatures exceed num f. num cold applied asphalt emulsion .
d num type ii using d num modified by msmt num procedure b .
num primer for use with asphalt for dampproofing and waterproofing .
d num .
num fabric saturated with asphalt for use in waterproofing .
d num .
num dampproofing and waterproofing membrane .
the adhesive side of the membrane shall be protected with a special release paper that can be easily removed for installation .
the membrane shall meet the following requirements num num chain link fence test property test method specification limits grab tensile strength lbin .
num in.minute rate of loading min d num num pliability num bend num in .
mandrel num f d num unaffected resistance to puncture lb min e num square mounting frame method num permeance perm kgpa s mnum max e num method b num weight ozydnum min d num num primer as specified by the manufacturer roll and sheet waterproofing membrane may be accepted on certification .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum with actual test results showing that the material meets these specifications .
num sheet metal for flashing .
shall be of the material and gauge specified .
num copper .
b num for weight per square foot and gauge .
num galvanized sheets .
a num coating designation g num .
section num chain link fence num certification .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum .
a sample of the fence fabric shall be submitted with the fabric certification .
num chain link fencing fabric .
fabric shall be num in .
mesh woven from coated no .
num gauge wire for num ft and num ft fence and no .
num gauge wire for num ft fence unless otherwise specified .
the ends shall have a knuckled selvage at the bottom and a barbed selvage at the top .
the fabric shall conform to m num .
type i fabric shall meet class d coating .
vinyl coated steel shall meet f num class numb thermally fused .
vinyl color shall be warm gray or black as specified .
num num production plants num fence fabric for super silt fence .
galvanized fabric for super silt fence shall meet num except that it shall be woven from no .
num gauge wire having a class c coating .
the fabric shall be num in .
high .
num tie wires line post clips tension wires and tension wire clips .
m num .
the galvanized coating shall have a minimum weight of num ozftnum .
when used with aluminum coated steel fabric these items shall be coated with aluminum at a minimum weight of num ozftnum .
the tension wire used with polyvinyl chloride pvc coated steel fabric shall have the same coating thickness and color requirements as the fence fabric .
num posts braces fittings and hardware .
m num .
when specified to be pvc coated these items shall be thermally fused and bonded .
the pvc thickness shall be num to num mil except that bolts nuts and washers shall be metallic coated steel .
when opting to use round posts the posts shall meet industry standards for class num or num .
num gates .
the fabric used for gates shall be identical to the fencing fabric .
the gate frame and other hardware shall meet num and num .
when the gate frame is pvc coated movable fittings shall be field coated with a pvc coating specifically prepared for this purpose .
num barbed wire .
a num .
the barbed wire shall be num gauge with four point round barbs at num in .
spacing and class num coating .
section num production plants num general .
these specifications are applicable to all batching and proportioning plants .
num approval .
the plant from which the contractor proposes to obtain material shall be approved by the office of materials technology omt before starting deliveries .
num lead time .
notify omt at least two working days prior to the start of operations .
omt shall be kept informed of plant operational procedures and be notified when a change is planned .
inspectors shall have safe access to all areas of the plant for the performance of their duties .
all equipment tools machinery and parts of the plant shall be maintained in a satisfactory working condition at all times .
num num production plants num storage .
the storage and handling of aggregates in stockpiles and bins shall be done in a manner that will prevent segregation intermingling and contamination by foreign material or equipment .
bins discharging to feeder systems shall be equipped with accessible calibrated devices to vary the quantity of material being fed .
num measuring devices .
measuring devices shall meet the current edition of the national institute of standards and technology handbook num except as modified by table num .
the producer shall provide all personnel and equipment for calibrating measuring devices .
before the plant starts any proportioning operation and at least once each year thereafter all measuring devices meters dispensers test weights and other measuring devices shall be inspected tested and certified to be in proper operating condition by an approved testing agency .
during the period of operation all measuring devices meters dispensers and other measuring devices shall be tested monthly and certified for accuracy and operating condition by the producer or an approved testing agency .
any weighing device by which materials are sold by weight as a basis of payment shall be tested monthly and certified by an approved testing agency .
the engineer shall be notified at least two working days in advance of monthly scale inspections .
the certifications shall state capacities minimum graduations loads applied degree of accuracy and magnitude .
balance and zero conditions of scales shall be checked daily and at any other time requested by omt .
the engineer may at any time direct that any measuring device be tested by the producer or an outside agency if there is any doubt about the accuracy of the measuring device .
certificates of inspection shall be posted in a prominent place in the plant and a copy shall be promptly submitted to the engineer .
num num production plants production plant tolerances shall meet the following table table num material maintenance tolerance unit of measure aggregate num weight portland cement or blended hydraulic cement of ground iron blast furnace slag or fly ash num weight asphalt num weight or volume water num weight or volume additives num weight or volume maintenance tolerance shall be the specified percent of the total capacity of the scale or the smallest scale graduation whichever is greater .
if during the monthly check the measuring devices are found to deviate from the allowable tolerance they will be suspended from use until recalibrated to the specification requirements .
a price adjustment will apply to materials sold and accepted by weight that are supplied during the measuring device malfunction period when the malfunction resulted in an overpayment .
the measuring device malfunction period is defined as the elapsed time between the two successive monthly checks .
num sampling equipment .
the producer shall provide all personnel and equipment for obtaining samples from the last practical point prior to combination with other ingredients or introduction into the mixer .
sampling of liquid binder from hma plants shall be from a tap located at the last practical safe point between the binder control unit and the plant m num and d num .
sampling shall meet tables num and num of the msmt manual .
the sampling equipment shall have a minimum capacity of num lb and be positioned in a manner that will provide an accurate representation of the material being furnished .
when the size of the sample is too large to be transported approved sample splitting devices shall be available at the point of sampling that will split the sample to no more than twice the proper testing size .
num quality control laboratory .
at proportioning or batching plants the producer shall provide an onsite administration approved laboratory suitable for conducting the various tests required .
an off site laboratory requires approval of the engineer .
continued approval of the laboratory and the testing personnel will be subject to periodic inspection num num production plants by the administration .
any deficiencies shall be corrected to the satisfaction of the engineer or the approval will be withdrawn .
num hot mix asphalt hma plants .
meet m num and equipped with automatic batching and recording of batching except as modified in num and the following a dryer .
the fuel used for drying aggregates shall be compatible with the plant manufacturers recommendations .
b hot aggregate bins .
new plants shall meet m num. c mixer unit for batch method .
minimum dry and wet mixing times shall be num seconds and num seconds respectively .
d truck scale weighing shall meet the national institute for standards and technology nist except as follows num a plant summary shall be kept by the producer showing the contract number truck identification id number id of the type of mix being produced the number of truck loads and the total tons of mix .
num the producer shall supply a delivery ticket with the id number contract number id of the type of mix date truck id number time loaded gross and tare weights and net weight of the mix for each load .
when requested by the engineer the temperature of the mix shall be shown on the delivery ticket .
e automatic weighing and printout .
the producer shall use an approved plant automatic weighing and printing system .
a printed delivery ticket for each load shall be provided with the cumulative total weighed into the truck contract number time loaded i.d .
of the type of mix and net weight of mix .
when requested by the engineer the temperature of the mix shall be shown on the delivery ticket .
the temperature may be handwritten .
f hauling units .
transport the m ixture to the work site in units previously cleaned of all foreign material and with the contents of each load completely covered with suitable material of sufficient size to protect it from the weather .
each unit shall have convenient access from ground level to insert thermometers to determine mix temperature .
treat the inside surface of all hauling units with an approved release agent that will not contaminate or alter the characteristics num num production plants of the mixture .
petroleum derivatives are prohibited .
approval will be based on results from tests performed per msmt num. g drum mixer plants shall be calibrated per msmt num and approved .
a monitoring station for the purpose of controlling the entire operation shall be provided .
if any part of this control system fails an alternative control system approved by the engineer may be used for a maximum of two working days .
the producer shall determine the moisture content of all aggregates per msmt num .
num certified hot mix asphalt hma plant .
the producer is responsible for quality control of plant operations to ensure that the material meets specifications .
the quality control process will be subject to unannounced periodic inspection by representatives of the engineer when administration projects are in progress .
the plants certified technician shall fully participate in the inspections .
initial inspection .
any plant initially setting up and starting production will be subject to a comprehensive inspection to determine whether the plant equipment and personnel meet all applicable specifications .
the administration will accept certification by a professional engineer registered in the state of maryland that the plant facilities meet all applicable specifications however final acceptance will be determined by the administration .
responsibilities of the hma producer .
a notification .
notify the engineer one working day prior to producing materials for administration projects .
report total tons shipped to administration projects one business day of completed daily shipments .
b quality control .
the m inimum sampling and testing frequencies and criteria necessary for quality control of the hma is the responsibility of the producer .
develop and use a quality control plan acceptable to the engineer that addresses all elements necessary for quality control in the plant .
conduct the minimum sampling and testing as specified in msmt num table num .
additional sampling and testing shall be performed when directed .
the engineer shall be offered the opportunity to witness all sampling and testing .
c reports .
the test results shall be furnished to the engineer on documents approved by the administration .
num num production plants responsibilities of the administration .
a split samples to evaluate the effectiveness of the plant quality control operation .
a minimum of once during five days of plant shipments that require behind the paver quality assurance qa mixture box samples a required qa sample shall be properly split and used to evaluate the effectiveness of the plant quality control qc operation .
the plant qc operation shall test and submit results to the administration in accordance with msmt num table num within num hours after receiving and properly splitting the sample .
num effective plant quality control operation .
when qc and qa split sample results compare within aashto acceptable range of two test results multilaboratory precision parameters for binder content and percent passing the num num and num gradation sieves the qc operation will be evaluated as effective .
num ineffective plant quality control operation .
when qc and qa split sample results do not compare within aashto acceptable range of two test results multilaboratory precision parameters for all the indicated tests the qc operation will be evaluated as ineffective .
three consecutive ineffective evaluations will be cause to discontinue shipments to administration projects .
an investigation will be conducted to determine the cause of the differences .
after a cause is determined and three consecutive split samples are within the precision parameters the qc operation will be reevaluated as effective and shipments may resume .
if the plant qc operation disagrees with the administrations decision the dispute may be resolved as specified in e below .
b recertification of hma plant .
documentation of corrective action shall be submitted to the engineer by a professional engineer registered in the state of maryland .
when this documentation is approved a comprehensive inspection will be conducted to recertify the hma plant .
c independent assurance audits iaa .
the administration will evaluate the proficiency and equipment of qcqa technicians through audits performed on a random basis as outlined in the quality assurance manual .
the technician being audited shall cooperate with the iaa technician in the evaluation of their proficiency and equipment .
num num production plants d technician certification .
per msmt num and the midatlantic region technician certification program martcp .
e dispute resolution system .
this is a general procedure to resolve conflicts resulting from discrepancies between test results from the engineer and producer and nontest related disputes of sufficient magnitude to impact payment .
when a dispute arises the producer or engineer will file a written complaint to the chief engineer describing the nature of the dispute along with the pertinent information .
the chief engineer will appoint a panel of three members to resolve the conflict .
the panel will include a member selected by the asphalt industry .
the panel will make recommendations to the chief engineer .
the chief engineer will decide the disposition of the dispute based on the panels recommendations .
a written report from the panel describing all subsequent actions and final disposition of the dispute shall be included in the project records .
if subsequent disputes arise on the same issue the written report will be included as a resource during the resolution process .
num portland cement concrete plants .
m num except as modified herein including the applicable requirements of num .
num storage of aggregate .
coarse and fine aggregate for use in portland cement concrete shall be maintained at a uniform moisture content in excess of its saturated surface dry condition .
water added for this purpose shall meet num .
num temperature of water and cement .
the plant shall be equipped with approved methods of heating and cooling the mix .
the temperature of the plastic concrete shall meet num .
the temperature of the cementitious materials and the mixing water at the time they are used in the mix shall not exceed num f. num load tickets .
an administration approved computer generated batch ticket indicating the pertinent information per m num shall be provided in duplicate for each load .
the ticket shall indicate maximum allowable water and maximum water allowed for jobsite slump adjustment .
distribution shall be made as specified in num cnum .
the producers copy shall be readily available for inspection upon request by the engineer .
a completed administration num num production plants form num shall be issued for each load in the event a computer generated batch ticket can not be provided .
num mixers and agitators .
the requirements for mixers and agitators and for mixing and delivery of ready mixed concrete shall conform to m num with the following exceptions a during transit operate drums at agitating speed only .
mixing during transit is prohibited .
num at least num percent of design water requirement shall be added at the plant through the certified plant water meter .
num water for slump adjustment may be added at the plant through the administration approved truck water system under the supervision of the certified concrete technician provided the maximum specified watercement ratio is not exceeded .
num a maximum of num gal of water per cubic yard of concrete may be added at the job site provided the maximum specified watercement ratio is not exceeded .
num adding water after partial discharge of the load is prohibited .
b loading of mixers or agitators that contain wash water in the drum is prohibited .
c when the concrete is specified or permitted to be made by volumetric batching and continuous mixing the batching and mixing unit shall meet c num .
calibration shall meet msmt num .
where no mixer performance tests are made for stationary mixers the minimum mixing time is num seconds .
num certified concrete plant .
the producer shall be responsible for quality control of plant operations to ensure that the material meets specification requirements .
the quality control process will be subject to unannounced periodic inspection by omt .
full participation in the inspection by the plants certified technician will be required .
initial inspection .
any plant initially setting up and starting production will be subject to a comprehensive inspection to determine whether the plant equipment and personnel meet all applicable specification requirements .
the administration will accept certification by a professional engineer registered in the state of maryland that the plant facilities meet all applicable specification requirements .
however final acceptance will be determined by the administration .
num num production plants responsibilities of the concrete producer .
a notification .
notif y omt one working day prior to producing materials for administration projects .
b quality control .
have the certified concrete plant technician present while concrete is being batched and delivered to the project .
this technician shall supervise concrete production .
num develop and use an acceptable quality control plan that addresses all elements necessary for quality control in the plants .
num control tests shall be performed by the certified concrete plant technician .
this technician shall perform moisture tests adjust proportions of aggregate for free moisture complete and sign batch or approved delivery tickets and ensure quality control of the batching operations .
num technician certification will be awarded upon satisfactory completion of examinations administered by the administration per msmt num .
num supply all necessary test equipment .
num sample frequency shall meet the msmt frequency guide table num. c reports .
the following reports shall be processed by the producer num administration form num daily stating that the material was sampled and tested in accordance with the administrations sampling and testing guidelines and complies with the applicable specifications .
make a distribution to the producers file and administrations laboratory .
num administration form num for each load .
make a distribution to the project file and producers file .
num administration forms for all concrete materials sampled at the plant per msmt frequency guide table num .
num test worksheet daily for all tests performed at the plant .
num num production plants responsibilities of the administration .
a comprehensive inspection .
b acceptance inspection and testing .
num if deficiencies are found during an administration inspection the producer will be notified immediately to correct the deficiencies to the satisfaction of the engineer .
production will be suspended for critical deficiencies .
num if consecutive inspections reveal identical deficiencies or if additional deficiencies are found the producer will be notified that a reinspection will be held in two production days .
all deficiencies shall be corrected by the reinspection date .
num if reinspection fails the omt will assign an inspector to monitor plant operations for a maximum of five administration production days .
if at the end of this period the quality control process is not satisfactory plant approval will be rescinded and the plant shall be recertified before administration production will be continued .
num recertification of concrete plant .
documentation of corrective action shall be submitted to the omt by a professional engineer registered in the state of maryland .
when this documentation is approved by the engineer a comprehensive inspection will be conducted to recertify the concrete plant .
c independent assurance audits iaa .
the administration will evaluate the proficiency and equipment of qcqa technicians through audits performed on a random basis as outlined in the quality assurance manual .
the technician being audited shall cooperate with the iaa technician in the evaluation of their proficiency and equipment .
d technician certification per msmt num .
num moisture probes .
moisture probe readings may be used in place of actual daily moisture testing of fine aggregate .
when used moisture probes shall be calibrated and maintained per the manufacturers recommendations .
actual moisture tests for the fine aggregate shall be performed weekly and as directed .
when the actual tests of the fine aggregate indicate a difference of greater than num percent free moisture than that of the moisture probe readings a second actual test shall be performed immediately .
when the second test indicates a moisture num num production plants difference of greater than num percent then the moisture probe shall be recalibrated per the manufacturers recommendations and verified .
records of all calibrations and weekly tests shall be maintained and made available to the engineer .
num base course plants .
num nonstabilized .
base course plants producing graded aggregate base material without a stabilizing agent shall meet num num and the following a the material is produced in a processing plant using an approved aggregate source .
b the quality control plan shall be submitted to and approved by the omt prior to production .
c the production shall meet the gradation requirements of the approved job mix formula .
d the required moisture content shall be maintained prior to shipment .
e stockpiles shall be maintained to prevent segregation .
f frozen aggregates shall not be used .
g mixed material shall be handled and transported in a manner that will minimize segregation and the loss of moisture .
all loads shall be covered in accordance with state laws unless hauling is off road and approved by the engineer .
num stabilized .
stabilized base course plants shall meet num num and the following a mechanical mixers shall be used as approved .
all plants shall be equipped with automatic cutoff devices interlocked so the plant will stop operating if delivery of any component of the mix fails .
b the amount of stabilization shall be determined per msmt num. c the charge in a batch mixer or rate of feed to a continuous mixer shall not exceed that which will permit complete mixing of all materials .
d mixed materials shall be handled and transported in a manner that will minimize segregation and loss of moisture or volatiles .
all num num production plants loads shall be covered in accordance with state laws unless hauling is off road and approved by the engineer .
e when cement is used as a stabilizing agent the amount of water added at the plant shall be controlled to obtain a uniform mixture that meets the required density .
f when emulsified asphalt is used as a stabilizing agent all aggregate shall contain moisture in excess of the saturated surface dry condition at time of mixing .
num certification of base course plants .
the quality control and condition of all materials used in base courses as well as all necessary adjustments required in using the materials is the responsibility of the base course producer .
the quality assurance process will be subject to unannounced periodic inspection by representatives of the omt when administration projects are in progress .
the plants certified technician shall participate in the inspection .
inspection .
any plant initially setting up and starting production will be subject to a comprehensive inspection to determine whether the plant equipment and personnel meet all applicable specification requirements .
after the initial inspection the plant shall meet num .
the administration will accept certification by a professional engineer registered in the state of maryland that the plant facilities meet all applicable specification requirements .
however final acceptance will be determined by the administration .
responsibilities of the base course producer .
a notification .
notify the omt one working day prior to producing materials for administration projects .
b quality control .
the pr oducer is responsible for quality control of plant operations to ensure that the material meets specification requirements .
all producers supplying base courses shall have a certified base course plant technician present while base course material is being plant mixed and delivered to the project .
this technician shall supervise base course production .
num control tests shall be performed by a certified base course plant technician .
this technician shall obtain samples and test per msmt frequency guide table num and num .
num technician certification will be awarded upon satisfactory completion of an examination given by the administration in per msmt num .
the certification shall be as follows num num production plants applications for certification shall be obtained from omt a minimum of num days prior to producing material for the administration .
omt will contact the producer and schedule an examination based on aashto and msmt procedures and knowledge of the administrations base course plant reports and documentation .
upon satisfactory completion of the examination a certificate will be issued .
num supply all necessary test equipment and provide onsite facilities suitable for conducting the required tests .
offsite test facilities require approval of omt .
c reports .
the following reports shall be processed by the producer num administration form md sha form num daily stating that the material was sampled and tested using the administrations sampling and testing guidelines and meets the applicable specifications .
distribution to the administrations laboratory and producers file .
num administration form md sha form num for all additives introduced at the plant frequency in accordance with table num .
make a distribution to the producers file and administrations laboratory .
num daily plant certification form showing that a technician was on duty at the plant .
make a distribution to project file and producers file .
num test worksheet daily for all tests performed at the plant .
num base course plant checklist daily .
make a distribution to producers file .
responsibilities of the administration .
a comprehensive inspection .
b acceptance inspection and testing .
num if deficiencies are found as defined in the base course plant checklist during an acceptance inspection the producer will be num num production plants notified immediately and operations will be suspended if corrections are not made to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num if on consecutive inspections identical deficiencies are found the producer will be notified that a reinspection will be held in two administration production days .
all deficiencies shall be corrected by the reinspection date .
omt will determine whether plant certification will be revoked .
c independent assurance audits iaa .
the administration will evaluate the proficiency and equipment of qcqa technicians through audits performed on a random basis as outlined in the quality assurance manual .
the technician being audited shall cooperate with the iaa technician in the evaluation of their proficiency and equipment .
d recertification of aggregate base course plant .
documentation of corrective action shall be submitted by a professional engineer registered in the state of maryland .
when this documentation is approved a comprehensive inspection will be conducted to recertify the base course plant .
e technician certification .
per msmt num .
num certified precast concrete plants .
all plants producing precast concrete items shall be certified by the national precast concrete association .
the producer is responsible for quality control plant operations to ensure that the material meets specifications .
the quality control process will be subject to unannounced periodic inspection by representatives of the concrete technology division .
the plants certified technician shall fully participate in the inspections .
initial inspection .
any plant initially setting up and starting production will be subject to a comprehensive inspection to determine whether plant equipment and personnel meet all applicable specifications and that suitable testing facilities will be available .
the administration will accept certification by a professional engineer registered in the state of maryland that the plant facilities meet all applicable specifications however final acceptance will be determined by the administration .
num responsibilities of the precast concrete producer .
a notification .
notify the engineer at least two working days prior to producing materials for administration projects .
b quality control procedures .
quality control procedures shall include the following num num production plants num sampling and testing per tables num num and num of the msmt sample frequency guide .
num the method of inspecting reinforcement steel placement and forms prior to pouring concrete .
num the method of curing the concrete .
num the method of maintaining accurate quality control records .
num samples of documents approved by the engineer .
num patching procedures .
num methods of preparing the concrete units for shipment .
num a method of identifying each piece as tested and approved by quality control .
c quality control plan .
submit a quality control plan prior to the start of production .
the plan shall indicate the following num all precast concrete products shall meet the standards or approved working drawings .
all materials shall be from an administration approved source and meet all applicable specifications .
num the plan shall indicate how the producer intends to handle all of its materials .
certification of materials shall be as specified in the msmt sample frequency guide .
num the names qualifications and responsibilities of a quality control manager and a quality control technician .
d quality control technician .
the quality control technician may be approved if certified from at least one of the following num the precastprestressed concrete institute plant certification program pci technician level i minimum .
num american concrete institute aci field technician level i. e test equipment and facilities .
supply all necessary test equipment and provide administration approved facilities suitable for conducting the various tests required .
off site test facilities shall be approved by the engineer .
num num soil and soilaggregate borrow num responsibilities of the administration .
a comprehensive inspection .
b verification testing .
num verification of certification will be performed a minimum of once per year at the discretion of the administration .
num the administration reserves the right to discontinue acceptance of precast units if its verification indicates that materials or test procedures do not meet the contract documents .
section num soil and soilaggregate borrow num borrow excavation .
a soil or soil aggregate mixture meeting the following maximum dry density and optimum moisture content of the material per t num method c unless the material has more than num percent retained on the no .
num sieve in which case method d shall be used .
material with a maximum dry density of less than num lbftnum is unsatisfactory and shall not be used in embankments unless otherwise specified in the contract documents .
potentially expansive materials such as steel slag are prohibited .
recycled portland cement concrete or recycled hma pavement may be used as common select and modified borrow with the written approval of the engineer .
recycled portland cement concrete recycled hma pavement and processed contaminated soil are prohibited for use within num ft of the surface in any area to be vegetated .
all recycled or rehandled materials shall meet section tcnum .
num select borrow .
anum anum or anum material as specified in the contract documents .
the maximum dry density shall not be less than num lbftnum .
num capping borrow .
meet the select borrow requirements except when anum material has less than num percent retained on the no .
num sieve at least num percent shall pass the no .
num sieve .
determine sieve analysis using t num .
num num miscellaneous protective coatings num modified borrow .
a minimum of num percent retained on the no .
num sieve a maximum liquid limit of num using t num and a maximum plasticity index of num using t num .
the maximum dry density shall not be less than num lbftnum .
anum material as defined in the contract documents is prohibited .
num common borrow .
a maximum dry density of not less than num lbftnum .
section num miscellaneous protective coatings num epoxy protective coatings for concrete .
the protective coatings shall be two component epoxy systems for use in conjunction with concrete .
one component shall be a clear or pigmented condensation product of the reaction of epichlorohydrin with bisphenol a the resin of which shall be composed of num percent reactive constituents .
the other component shall be a clear polyamide hardener .
the producer shall submit a sample of each component for laboratory analysis .
the sample shall be coded as the original sample .
the original and all subsequent samples shall meet the following test property test method specification limits pot life hr min fed .
spec ttcnum num color fed .
std .
num gray no .
num dry film thickness numst coat mil min numnd coat mil min d num num num sagging d num shall pass test for recommended film thickness flexibility federal spec ttpnum shall not crack check or delaminate infrared spectrogram equipment manufacturers procedure each component shall match original sample tensile strength psi min msmt num num num num miscellaneous protective coatings num fusion bonded epoxy powder coatings for steel .
m num .
a onecoat heat curable thermosetting powdered coating that is electrostatically applied on metal surfaces as specified in the contract documents .
for reinforcement steel the color shall be bright in order to contrast with the normal color of reinforcement and rust e.g .
orange red green yellow etc .
and not brown or any color in the rust family .
if reinforcement steel is coated before fabrication all hairline cracks and minor damage on fabrication bends shall be patched even if there is no bond loss .
the epoxy coating material shall be selected from the prequalified materials list maintained by the office of materials technology .
num touch up system .
material used for the touch up system shall be a two part epoxy system designated and color matched for patching the epoxy coating used .
patching material shall be available through the manufacturer of the epoxy powder .
the patching material shall be fully cured one hour after application at num f ambient .
num certification .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum .
num fusion bonded polyester powder .
num materials .
the polyester powder shall be a super durable tgic triglycidyl isocyanurate polyester meeting num .
the polyester powder shall be selected from the prequalified materials list maintained by the office of materials technology .
material used for the touch up system shall be a two component aliphatic polyurethane meeting num and color matched for patching the polyester coating used .
the coating thickness of the touch up material shall be the same as the thickness of the polyester and can be applied in multiple coats .
num cleaning and coating .
cleaning and coating shall be performed in an environmentally controlled plant that is fully enclosed and approved by the administration .
all items to be coated shall be free of any oil or grease and shall be abrasive blasted to near white per sspc spnum .
cleaned surfaces shall be protected from high humidity rainfall and surface moisture and shall not be allowed to flash rust .
the blast profile shall be num to num mils as determined per d num method c. num num miscellaneous protective coatings the thickness of the cured coating shall be num num mils when measured per d num .
the cured coating shall have a pencil hardness of numh when tested per d num .
the color of the coating shall match the federal standard num color number specified in the contract documents .
using a num volt wet sponge detector the polyester coating shall be checked for holidays pinholes and discontinuities .
there shall be no more than one deficiency per num ftnum .
num acceptance .
the acceptance of a polyester powder will be based on the quality control test results required on the manufacturers certification .
the coating applicator is responsible for reviewing certifications to ensure meeting num .
the coating applicator shall maintain a file of all reviewed certifications .
num certification .
the polyester powder manufacturer shall furnish production batch certification as specified in tcnum showing that the material meets the following test property test method specification limits infrared spectrogram d num match prequalification sample taber abrasion resistance mg loss max d num num specific gravity d num method a prequalification sample num color e num or e num match fed .
std .
num color no .
specified in contract documents num polyester prequalification requirements .
the following physical tests will only be required to prequalify the polyester and will not be required for certification num num miscellaneous protective coatings test property test method specification limits abrasion resistance taber abraser csnum num gm load num cycles d num num mg max weight loss adhesion d num method a bonderite num panel rating numa gloss d num num initial num num per fed .
std num hardness d num min numh no gouge impact d num pass num in.lb salt spray resistance b num d num num hr bonderite num panel table num rating num thickness g num num num mils color e num or e num as specified in the contract documents from fed .
std .
num color no .
num infrared spectrogram equipment manufactures procedures manufacturers ir weather resistance d num test condition d test shall be conducted with a uva lamp num nm peak for num hr num min gloss retention specific gravity d num manufacturers result num duplex zincpolyester powder coating system .
num materials .
organic zinc rich paint num fusion bonded polyester coating and touch up system num hot dip galvanized zinc a num and a num this duplex system consists of a cathodic zinc layer applied by either the hot dip galvanizing process or the application of an organic zinc rich paint and a barrier layer of polyester powder coating .
prior to application of a duplex system the applicator shall have demonstrated the ability to properly apply and cure the materials of the system .
material used for the touch up system shall be a two component aliphatic polyurethane meeting num and color matched for patching the polyester coating used .
the coating thickness of the touch up material shall be the same as the thickness of the polyester and can be applied in multiple coats .
num num miscellaneous protective coatings num cleaning and coating .
cleaning and coating shall be performed in an environmentally controlled plant that is fully enclosed and approved by the administration .
a zinc coating .
num hot dip galvanized method .
when a polyester powder is to be applied over hot dip galvanizing the galvanized surface shall be prepared by solvent cleaning per sspc spnum followed by brush off blast cleaning using grit per sspc spnum .
the blast profile shall be num to num mils as determined per d num method c. when the blast cleaning exposes bare steel the bare steel shall be spot primed with an organic zinc rich coating .
the polyester powder shall be applied within num hours of surface preparation .
the cured polyester powder shall meet the requirements of b .
num organic zinc rich paint method .
when a polyester powder is to be applied over an organic zinc rich paint they shall be applied in a continuous operation .
the surface shall be prepared by solvent cleaning per sspc spnum followed by abrasive blast cleaning using grit to a condition per sspc spnum near white .
the blast profile shall be num to num mils as determined per d num method c. the organic zinc rich paint shall be fully cured prior to application of the polyester powder .
the thickness of the organic zinc rich paint shall be num to num mils as determined per d num. b polyester coating .
the thickness of the polyester coating shall be num to num mils for methods a num and num when measured per d num .
the cured coating shall have a pencil hardness of numh when tested per d num .
material used for the touch up system shall be a two component aliphatic polyurethane meeting num and color matched for patching the polyester coating used .
the coating thickness of the touch up material shall be the same as the thickness of the polyester and can be applied in multiple coats .
the color of the coating shall match the federal standard num color number as specified .
using a num volt wet sponge detector the polyester coating shall be checked for holidays pinholes and discontinuities .
there shall be no more than one deficiency per num ftnum .
num num miscellaneous protective coatings num acceptance .
organic zinc rich paint num .
polyester powder num .
hot dip galvanized zinc shall be based on inspections per a num a num and the contract documents .
num certification .
polyester powder num .
organic zinc rich paint num .
num paint system for new galvanized structures .
num materials .
all paint within the paint system shall be from the same manufacturer .
the manufacturer shall be on the list of approved paint manufacturers maintained by the office of materials technology .
the paint shall meet the following primer coat num num to num mils finish coat num num to num mils color federal standard num brown color no .
num black color no .
num green color no .
num num cleaning and coating .
shall be performed in an environmentally controlled plant that is fully enclosed and approved by the administration .
num surface preparation .
new galvanized steel shall not have been water or chromate quenched .
the surface shall be solvent cleaned per sspc spnum using a nonresidue solvent and a lint free cloth .
the surface shall then be brush off blasted per sspc spnum using grit .
damaged areas shall be repaired per a num .
if repair is made using an organic zinc rich primer the primer shall meet num .
num paint application .
if application of primer does not immediately follow the brush off blasting each item shall be stored in an environment free of moisture and dust .
the primer shall be applied per the manufacturers recommendations within num hours of brush off blasting .
after the primer has properly cured the finish coat shall be applied per the manufacturers recommendation .
num acceptance .
the finished painted surface shall be holiday free when tested with a low voltage holiday detector minimum num volts using tap water .
if holidays are detected the coatings may be repaired with additional coatings per a num or they may have the paint stripped and recoated at no additional cost .
num num traffic barrier s section num traffic barriers num certification .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum .
num traffic barrier w beam .
m num type ii or iv for rail elements and end treatments .
in lieu of galvanizing rail elements may be coated with a minimum of num mil dry film thickness of inorganic zinc rich primer meeting num .
the primer shall be applied as specified in section num after the rail elements are fabricated .
num traffic barrier posts .
m num for steel and m num for galvanized coating .
in lieu of galvanizing posts may be coated with a minimum of num mil dry film thickness of inorganic zinc rich primer meeting num .
the primer shall be applied as specified by the manufacturer after the posts are fabricated .
num hardware for traffic barriers .
m num for quality of steel and m num for galvanized coating .
num timber rail and posts .
m num .
num wire rope .
federal specification rrwnum type i general purpose class num num by num improved plow steel fiber core .
the individual wire strands shall have a zinc coating of num ozftnum when tested per t num .
section num reserved num num landscaping section num landscaping materials num soils .
topsoil subsoil and bioretention soil mix shall conform to requirements of this section .
soils shall be sampled tested and approved per specifications of msmt num by the soils and aggregates technology division of the office of materials technology or by other approved tests or laboratories .
soils shall be amended as specified by the nutrient management plan nmp .
num salvaged topsoil .
the surface material classified as topsoil that is removed from the project and stored for reuse .
salvaged topsoil shall conform to the following composition salvaged topsoil test property test method test value and amendment prohibited weeds free of seed or viable parts of shattercane johnsongrass canada thistle bull thistle plumeless thistle musk thistle and common reed when inspected before transportation .
debris num or less by weight of cement concrete asphalt crushed gravel or construction debris when inspected .
grading analysis t num sieve size passing by weight minimum num in .
num no .
num num no .
num num textural analysis t num particle passing by weight size mm minimum maximum sand num num num num silt num num num num clay less than num num num soil ph d num ph of num to num .
apply limestone to soil with ph num to num per nmp .
apply sulfur or iron sulfate to soil with ph num to num per nmp .
organic matter t num num to num om by weight .
apply compost to soil with num to num om per nmp to achieve at least num om .
nutrient content mehlichnum administration will assess .
apply fertilizer per nmp for nitrogen requirement and optimum fertility index values fiv for phosphorus and potassium .
soluble salts ecnum vv num ppm num mmhoscm or less .
apply gypsum to soil with num to num ppm num to num mhoscm per nmp .
harmful materials shall not contain substances in concentrations that are harmful to human health water quality or plant growth .
industrial waste such as ash slag raw sludge dredge spoil or similar materials shall not be soil components .
num num landscaping num furnished topsoil .
a natural friable surface soil that is uniform in color and texture and not derived from the project .
furnished topsoil shall conform to the following .
a composition .
composition furnished topsoil test property test method test value and amendment prohibited weeds free of seed and viable parts of species in num and viable parts of bermudagrass quackgrass and yellow nutsedge .
debris num grading analysis t num num textural analysis t num num soil ph d num ph of num to num .
apply limestone to soil with ph num to num per nmp .
apply sulfur or iron sulfate to soil with ph num to num per nmp .
organic matter t num num nutrient content mehlichnum num soluble salts ecnum vv num ppm num mmhoscm or less .
harmful materials num b storage .
soil shall be a homogenous mixture stored at a specific identifiable site in a stockpile constructed as specified in num and numc .
c approval .
ensure that form numb has been completed and that a source of supply letter for the soil has been submitted and approved .
tests shall be completed and approval granted before soil is delivered .
d certification and delivery .
certification shall be submitted that the soil is delivered from an approved stockpile .
certification shall accompany the first load of soil delivered each day .
num num landscaping num salvaged subsoil .
the subsurface material classified as subsoil that is removed from the project and stored for reuse .
salvaged subsoil shall conform to the following composition salvaged subsoil test property test method test value and amendment prohibited weeds num debris num or less by weight of cement concrete asphalt crushed gravel or construction debris when inspected .
grading analysis t num sieve size passing by weight minimum num in .
num no .
num num no .
num num textural analysis t num particle passing by weight size mm minimum maximum sand num num num num silt num num num num clay less than num num num soil ph d num ph of num to num .
organic matter t num num to num by weight .
soluble salts ecnum vv num ppm num mmhoscm or less .
harmful materials num num furnished subsoil .
a natural subsurface soil that is uniform in texture and not derived from the project .
furnished subsoil shall conform to the following a composition .
num num landscaping composition furnished subsoil test property test method test value and amendment prohibited weeds num debris num grading analysis t num num textural analysis t num num soil ph d num num organic matter t num num soluble salts ecnum vv num ppm num mmhoscm or less harmful materials num b storage .
numb .
c approval .
numc .
d certification and delivery .
numd .
num bioretention soil mix bsm .
a homogeneous mixture composed by loose volume of num parts coarse sand num parts base soil and num parts fine bark .
bsm shall conform to the following a components .
components of bsm shall be sampled tested and approved before mixing as follows num coarse sand .
msmt num .
coarse sand shall be washed silica sand or crushed glass that conforms to astm fine aggregate cnum .
coarse sand shall include less than num by weight of clay or silt size particles and less than num by weight of any combination of diabase greystone calcareous or dolomitic sand .
num base soil .
base soil shall be tested and certified by the producer to conform to the following requirements num num landscaping composition base soil test property test method test value and amendment prohibited weeds free of seed and viable plant parts of species in numabc when inspected .
debris no observable content of cement concrete asphalt crushed gravel or construction debris when inspected .
grading analysis t num sieve size passing by weight minimum num in .
num no .
num num no .
num num textural analysis t num particle passing by weight size mm minimum maximum sand num num num num silt num num num num clay less than num num num soil ph d num ph of num to num .
organic matter t num num to num by weight .
soluble salts ecnum vv num ppm num mmhoscm or less .
harmful materials numa num fine bark .
fine bark shall be the bark of hardwood trees that is milled and screened to a uniform particle size of num in .
or less .
fine bark shall be composted and aged for num months or longer and be free from sawdust and foreign materials .
a num to num lb sample of fine bark shall be submitted to the landscape operations division for examination .
num num landscaping b composition .
bsm shall be sampled and tested according to the requirements of msmt num and conform to the following composition bioretention soil mix bsm test property test method test value and amendment weeds free of seed and viable plant parts of species in numabc when inspected .
debris numanum textural analysis t num particle passing by weight size mm minimum maximum sand num num num num silt num num num clay less than num num num soil ph d num ph of num to num .
organic matter t num minimum num by weight .
nutrient analysis and soluble salts mehlichnum concentration element minimum maximum ppm fiv ppm fiv calcium ca num num no limit no limit magnesium mg num num no limit no limit phosphorus p num num num num potassium k num num no limit no limit sulfur sonum num na no limit no limit ecnum vv soluble salts num na num na harmful materials numa .
c amendment or failure .
bsm that does not conform to composition requirements for ph or nutrient analysis shall be amended as specified by the nmp .
bsm that exceeds maximum phosphorus concentration or fails other composition requirements will not be accepted and shall not be delivered or used as bsm .
d storage .
numb .
bsm shall be stored in a stockpile that is protected from weather under tarp or shed .
bsm stored for num months or longer shall be resampled retested and reapproved before use .
e approval .
numc .
f certification and delivery .
numd .
num num landscaping num soil amendments .
num limestone .
limestone shall be an approved agricultural product manufactured and labeled for increasing soil ph .
limestone shall contain at least num percent calcium and magnesium carbonates .
dolomitic limestone shall contain at least num percent magnesium as magnesium oxide and num percent calcium and magnesium carbonates .
limestone shall be supplied as a fine powder or as pellets produced from fine powder that conforms to the following limestone grading analysis sieve size number passing by weight minimum num num num num num num num sulfur .
sulfur shall be an approved agricultural product manufactured and labeled for reducing soil ph .
sulfur labeled as a fertilizer may also be used to supply sulfur as a plant nutrient .
sulfur shall be supplied as a fine powder or pelletized powder with a minimum purity of num percent elemental sulfur .
num iron sulfate .
iron sulfate shall be an approved agricultural product manufactured and labeled for reducing soil ph .
iron sulfate labeled as a fertilizer may also be used to supply sulfur or iron as a plant nutrient .
iron sulfate shall be supplied as a fine powder or pelletized powder with a minimum purity of num percent water soluble iron derived from ferrous sulfate .
num gypsum .
gypsum shall be an approved agricultural product manufactured and labeled as an aid for improving soil structure and removing soil soluble salts or as a fertilizer to supply calcium and sulfate .
gypsum shall be supplied as a fine powder or pelletized powder with a minimum purity of num percent calcium sulfate dihydrate .
num compost .
a compost types .
compost shall be either type a biosolids or type b sourceseparated and will be subject to approval by the landscape operations division as follows num num landscaping num biosolids compost type a .
type a compost shall be approved for distribution by the maryland department of the environment mde .
num sourceseparated compost type b .
type b compost shall be produced by a compost operator certified by the maryland department of agriculture mda .
type b compost shall be tree leaf compost or nontree leaf compost .
type b compost produced from lawn clippings shall be tested for contaminants in conformance with maryland law and regulations .
b stability .
compost shall be biologically mature and no longer able to reheat to thermophilic temperatures .
c ph .
compost shall have a ph of num to num except when specified in sections num and num where it shall have a ph of num to num. d soluble salts .
type a compost shall have a soluble salt concentration less than num mmhoscm and type b compost shall have soluble salts concentration less than num mmhoscm .
e moisture .
compost shall have a moisture content of num to num percent .
f particle size and grading .
com post shall be screened so that it has a uniform particle size of num in .
or less with grading analysis as follows .
compost grading analysis sieve size mm passing by volume maximum num num num num num num num peat moss .
a milled sphagnum peat moss with negligible woody substances .
num aged pine bark fines .
derived from the bark of pine trees that have been composted and milled to a fineness approved for use by the landscape operations division .
num num landscaping num water absorbent gel .
a cross linked polyacrylamide agricultural product used to maintain moisture around bare root plants and as a soil conditioner .
formulas used shall conform to the manufacturers recommendations .
num fertilizers .
num composition .
fertilizers shall be commercial grade labeled for use as agricultural fertilizer and shall conform to federal and maryland state regulations and the standards of the association of official analytical chemists .
all analyses are subject to approval by the landscape operations division prior to application .
standard and special fertilizers shall be the following a standard fertilizer .
standard fertilizers shall be produced of ingredients analysis and composition as follows num ingredients .
one or more of the following fertilizer ingredients ammonium nitrate polymer coated urea ammonium sulfate potassium chloride biosolids potassium sulfate sop diammonium phosphate dap sulfur coated urea isobutylidene diurea triple super phosphate methylene urea urea monoammonium phosphate map ureaform uf num analysis and composition .
standard fertilizers shall contain nitrogen n phosphorus p potassium k and sulfate sonum derived from ingredients above .
num num landscaping standard fertilizer analysis and composition fertilizer use section num sop a supply p and sonum num num num num others num b refertilization num num map a supply n and p num num others num b temporary seeding num num num uf with map and sop c turfgrass establishment and other seeding num num num num num num uf a slowrelease n num num num num others a purity shall be at least num uf map or sop as indicated .
b shall be a mixture of any ingredients listed in numanum with no more than num by weight of any combination of other materials .
c shall be a mixture of uf map and sop with no more than num by weight of any combination of other materials .
b special fertilizers .
special fertilizers shall be of ingredients analysis and composition as follows num ingredients .
special fertilizers shall provide label analysis guaranteeing nitrogen phosphorus and potassium from ingredients in a and also include plant micronutrients coatings or materials to augment their performance .
num analysis and composition .
as follows special fertilizer analysis and composition fertilizer use section num polymercoated with minor nutrients plant installation .
num num num num to num grams per tablet .
num water insoluble and num water soluble n with minor nutrients tree shrub vine installation .
num num water soluble powder with minor nutrients fertilizer solution application after plant installation .
num num others shall be a mixture of any ingredients listed in numanum and bnum with no more than num by weight of any combination of other materials .
num num landscaping num mulches .
materials used as mulch shall have a uniform texture and be free from foreign materials or concentrations of metals chemicals or other substances that are harmful to human health water quality or plant growth .
num straw mulch .
shall consist of thoroughly threshed stems and leaves of barley oats rye and wheat .
straw mulch shall be in an airdry condition suitable for application with a mulch blower or other equipment .
straw mulch shall be visually inspected to ensure it is free of objectionable quantities of mold foreign substances and weed seeds .
num wood cellulose fiber mulch .
a uniformly processed wood product that is able to form a homogenous slurry with seed fertilizer and other materials under agitation with water .
the fiber shall perform satisfactorily in hydraulic seeding equipment without clogging or damaging the system .
the slurry shall contain a green dye to provide easy visual inspection for uniformity of application .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum of the technical association of pulp and paper industry tappi in conformance with the following wood cellulose fiber test property test value particle length approx .
num in .
particle thickness approx .
num in .
net dry weight content minimum as stated on bag ph tappi standard t num num num ash content tappi standard t num num maximum water holding capacity num minimum the material shall be delivered in packages of uniform weight which shall not exceed num lb net weight and shall bear the name of the manufacturer the net weight and a supplemental statement of the net weight content .
num shredded hardwood bark shb mulch .
shall consist of natural bark derived from hardwood trees that has been milled and screened to a maximum num in .
particle size .
num num landscaping shb mulch shall contain negligible quantities of sawdust or other non bark woody materials .
num composted wood chip cwc mulch .
shall consist of natural wood mechanically reduced to a maximum size of num x num x num in .
by a chipping machine before being composted .
grading analysis of cwc mulch shall be as follows composted wood chip mulch sieve size in .
passing by volume maximum num num num num num num num soil stabilization matting .
num soil stabilization matting ssm .
ssm products shall be selected from the office of materials technologys qualified products list for soil stabilization matting manufacturers .
ssm shall consist of machineproduced matting of uniform thickness weave or distribution of fibers supplied in rolls at least num in .
wide .
ssm shall be smolder resistant .
the chemical components shall be nonleaching nontoxic to vegetation and germinating seed and noninjurious to the skin .
num num landscaping ssm shall conform to the following soil stabilization matting test property and method type a type b type c type d functional longevity degradable num months nondegradable permanent nondegradable permanent degradable num months matting fiber excelsior nonwoven synthetic uvstabilized synthetic lattice easily soil infilled and compacted .
woven coir netting on top and bottom degradable synthetic nondegradable synthetic uvstabilized netting opening no more than num x num in .
no more than num x num in .
stitching thread and spacing degradable no more than num in .
apart nondegradable uvstabilized synthetic no more than num in .
apart thickness d num at least num in .
at least num in .
at least num in .
at least num in .
weight d num d num at least num oz per ydnum at least num oz per ydnum at least num oz per ydnum at least num oz per ydnum tensile strength md d num at least num lb per in .
at least num lb per in .
at least num lb per in .
tensile strength td d num at least num lb per in .
at least num lb per in .
at least num lb per in .
tensile strength num hr .
exp .
d num at least num of original at least num of original light penetration d num at least num at least num porosity or open area at least num at least num soil loss ratio at num in .
per hr .
for num min .
d num at least num to num at least num to num shear for num in .
soil loss d num at least num lb per ftnum at least num lb per ftnum num fasteners for soil stabilization matting and turfgrass sod .
fasteners marked x shall used as specified in section num and conform to the following num num landscaping a wood peg .
wood peg .
wood biodegradable untreated single leg is driven into the soil so that wider top is flush with turfgrass sod and ssm .
turfgrass sod soil stabilization matting type a type b type c and d approx .
num in .
long num in .
thick top num in .
wide tapered to base .
x x b thead pin .
thead pin .
molded plastic biodegradable .
single leg with barbs is driven into the soil so that molded thead top is flush with turfgrass sod and ssm .
turfgrass sod soil stabilization matting type a type b type c and d approx .
num in .
long num in .
thick head num in .
wide .
x x c circletop pin .
circletop pin .
steel wire single leg is driven into the soil so that coil or loop top is flush with turfgrass sod and ssm .
turfgrass sod soil stabilization matting type a type b type c and d num gauge leg num in long .
x x num gauge leg num in .
long .
x x d roundhead pin .
roundhead pin .
molded plastic biodegradable .
single leg with barbs is driven into the soil so that molded disk top is flush with turfgrass sod and ssm .
turfgrass sod soil stabilization matting type a type b type c and d approx .
num in long head num in .
dia .
x x approx .
num in long head num in .
dia .
x x num num landscaping e ushape staple .
ushape staple .
steel wire two main legs are driven into the soil so that top of staple is flush with turfgrass sod and ssm .
turfgrass sod soil stabilization matting type a type b type c and d num gauge bent into u shape legs num in .
long top num to num in .
wide .
x x num gauge bent into u shape legs num in .
long top num to num in .
wide .
x x x x num gauge bent into u shape .
legs num in .
long top num to num in .
wide x x f fabric pin .
fabric pin .
steel nail single leg is driven into the soil so that steel washer top is flush with ssm .
turfgrass sod soil stabilization matting type a type b type c and d num gauge approx .
num in .
long .
x x num in .
approx num in .
long .
x x num seed and turfgrass sod standards .
num names and naming .
the authority for common and scientific names shall be the usda nrcs the plants database website at httpplants.usda.gov .
cultivar names shall be those of the registered cultivar .
plant and seed identification tags and labels shall correspond to the common name and scientific name of the species in the plants database .
any conflict in names or naming shall be resolved by the engineer in consultation with the landscape operations division .
num num landscaping num prohibited weeds .
a weeds prohibited in turfgrass sod and sha seed mixtures .
turfgrass sod sha turfgrass seed mix sha temporary seed mix and additive seed shall be free from seed or viable parts of the following species weeds prohibited in turfgrass sod and sha seed mixtures common name scientific name annual bluegrass poa annua l. balloonvine cardiospermum halicacabum l. bermudagrass cynodon dactylon l. pers .
canada thistle cirsium arvense l. scop .
carolina horsenettle solanum carolinense l. common corncockle agrostemma githago l. common reed phragmites phragmites australis cav .
trin .
ex steud .
crested anoda spurred anoda anoda cristata l. schltdl .
dodder cuscuta spp .
l. field bindweed convolvulus arvensis l. japanese bristlegrass giant foxtail setaria faberi herrm .
javabean sicklepod senna obtusifolia l. irwin and barneby johnsongrass sorghum halepense l. pers .
and hybrids meadow garlic wild onion allium canadense l. plumeless thistle carduus l. quackgrass elytrigia repens l. gould rough cocklebur xanthium strumarium l. serrated tussock nassella trichotoma nees hack .
wild garlic allium vineale l. yellow nutsedge cyperus esculentus l. num num landscaping b weeds prohibited in meadow and wildflower seed .
meadow and wildflower seed shall be free of species listed in a and the following species weeds prohibited in meadow and wildflower seed common name scientific name asiatic tearthumb mileaminute polygonum perfoliatum l. burdock and related species arctium l. canarygrass and related species phalaris l. common wormwood mugwort artemisia vulgaris l. var .
vulgaris dogbane and related species apocynum l. eastern poison ivy toxicodendron radicans l. kuntze fig buttercup lesser celandine ranunculus ficaria l. var .
bulbifera marsden jones garlic mustard alliaria petiolata m. bieb .
cavara and grande giant hogweed heracleum mantegazzianum sommier and levier japanese honeysuckle tatarian honeysuckle and related species lonicera l. japanese knotweed polygonum cuspidatum siebold and zucc .
lesser knapweed spotted knapweed centaurea nigra l. multiflora rose rosa multiflora thunb .
nepalese browntop japanese stiltgrass microstegium vimineum trin .
a. camus purple loosestrife and related species lythrum l. poison hemlock conium maculatum l. silvergrass and related species miscanthus andersson thistle and related species cirsium mill .
onopordum l. c weeds prohibited in shrub seed .
shrub seed shall be free of species listed in a and b and the following species weeds prohibited in shrub seed common name scientific name common buckthorn rhamnus cathartica l. burningbush euonymus alatus thunb .
siebold japanese barberry berberis thunbergii dc .
oriental bittersweet celastrus orbiculatus thunb .
privet etc .
ligustrum l. oleaster russian olive autumn olive related species elaeagnus l. tree of heaven ailanthus altissima mill .
swingle num num landscaping num turfgrass sod .
turfgrass sod shall be maryland certified sod and comply with the maryland turfgrass law and regulations of the state of maryland .
a each load of turfgrass sod shall bear a maryland state certified label and be in good health at the time of delivery .
b turfgrass sod shall be field grown in the state of maryland and be sufficiently knitted when harvested to resist breakage under normal handling .
c prior to harvest tall fescue sod shall be mowed to a height of num to num in .
bermudagrass sod shall be mowed from num to num in .
height .
d turfgrass sod shall be machine cut in strips at least num in .
wide .
e turfgrass sod shall be uniform thickness of num to num in .
excluding top growth with thatch thickness less than num in .
num approved cultivars .
refer to specifications for seed and seed mixes a list of cultivars of species approved for use in seed mixes and specifications maintained by the landscape operations division .
only cultivars included on that list may be used .
when no cultivar is specified any common type cultivar of the species may be provided .
num seed testing and sampling .
seed shall comply with the maryland seed law and regulations of the sate of maryland .
seed suppliers shall assume charges for seed inspections and testing .
a sha mixtures and additive seed .
sha turfgrass seed mix sha special purpose seed mix sha temporary seed mix and certified cultivars of additive seed shall be sampled and tested by an inspector of the maryland department of agriculture turf and seed section mda for percent purity percent germination percent weed seed noxious weed content and conform to mda standards for maryland certified seed .
sha seed mixtures shall carry mda certified seed tags that show the purity germination weed seed and noxious weed seed content .
b unmixed seed .
seed supplied for use as meadow seed or shrub seed shall be supplied in containers of a single species unmixed .
each species shall be tested for purity germination and weed seed and carry tags provided by the grower or distributor that num num landscaping indicate the test results .
when the quantity of seed delivered to a project of a meadow species exceeds num lb .
or the quantity of seed of a shrub species exceeds num lb .
the seed shall be tested for noxious weed seed content by mda .
a sample that conforms to the minimum weight requirement of mda for a seed sample of meadow or shrub species shall be submitted for testing at least num days before the scheduled seeding date .
the seed will be returned after evaluation .
tested seed shall be accompanied by mda documentation to indicate the seed conforms to requirements when it is mixed or seeded .
num standards for seed species .
seed supplied in lots of individual species or used to produce mixes shall conform to the requirements of this section for minimum percent germination minimum purity and maximum percent of weed seed .
meadow or shrub seed that does not conform to these standards may be used after review and approval by the engineer in consultation with the landscape operations division .
the seed will be subject to use at increased seeding rates or measures to compensate for reduced substandard seed purity weed content or germination .
num num landscaping a sha turfgrass seed mix and sha special purpose seed mix .
species included in sha turfgrass seed mix and sha special purpose seed mix shall be mda certified seed of approved cultivars and conform to the following requirements for minimum percent purity maximum percent weed seed and minimum percent germination turfgrass seed species common name and scientific name purity min weed max germ min chewings fescue festuca rubra l. ssp .
fallax thuill .
nyman num num num red fescue festuca rubra l. ssp .
rubra num num num hard fescue festuca brevipila tracey num num num kentucky bluegrass poa pratensis l. ssp .
pratensis num num num perennial ryegrass lolium perenne l. ssp .
perenne num num num sheep fescue festuca ovina l. num num num tall fescue schedonorus phoenix scop .
holub festuca elatior l. num num num num num landscaping b temporary and grass additive seed .
species included in sha temporary seed mix or used as additive seed with sha turfgrass seed mix or sha special purpose seed mix shall conform to the following requirements for minimum percent purity maximum percent weed seed and minimum percent germination temporary and grass additive seed species common name and scientific name purity min weed max germ min cereal rye secale cereale l. num num num common barley winter type hordeum vulgare l. num num num common oat winter type avena sativa l. num num num common wheat winter type triticum aestivum l. num num num italian ryegrass annual ryegrass lolium perenne l. ssp .
multiflorum lam .
husnot num num num foxtail bristlegrass foxtail millet setaria italica l. p. beauv .
num num num lehmann lovegrass eragrostis lehmanniana nees num num num weeping lovegrass eragrostis curvula schrad .
nees num num num c legume additive seed .
species used as additive seed with sha turfgrass seed mix or sha special purpose seed mix shall be mda certified seed when cultivars are specified and conform to the following requirements for minimum percent purity maximum percent weed seed minimum percent germination and maximum percent hard seed .
legume additive seed species common name scientific name and cultivars purity min weed max germ min hard max birdsfoot trefoil lotus corniculatus l. var .
corniculatus num num num num crownvetch securigera varia l. lassen num num num num sericea lespedeza lespedeza cuneata dum .
cours .
g. don cv .
interstate or interstate num num num num num note minimum percent germination includes all seed identified as hard seed .
num num landscaping d meadow forb seed .
seed shall be supplied in lots of individual species unmixed and conform to the following num purity .
weed andor other crop seed content shall be num percent or less by weight .
seed that does not conform to this specification may be used after approval by the engineer in consultation with the landscape operations division at increased seeding rates or with measures to compensate for increased weed or crop seed content .
num origin .
seed shall either be collected from native sources in usda hardiness zone numb numa numb and numa in the states of maryland pennsylvania new york new jersey delaware virginia west virginia or north carolina or shall be grown and produced from seed certified to have been collected from sites in the usda hardiness zones of those states .
seed that does not conform to origin requirements may be used after review and approval by the engineer in consultation with the landscape operations division .
num num landscaping num species .
seed shall conform to the following species subspecies and varieties meadow forb seed species common name scientific name allegheny monkeyflower square stem monkeyflower mimulus ringens l. var .
ringens bearded beggarticks showy tickseed bidens aristosa michx .
britton blackeyed susan rudbeckia hirta l. var .
hirta rudbeckia hirta l. var .
pulcherrima farw .
browneyed susan rudbeckia triloba l. var .
triloba rudbeckia triloba l. var .
pinnatiloba torr .
and a .
gray common boneset eupatorium perfoliatum l. var .
perfoliatum common evening primrose oenothera biennis l. crimsoneyed rose mallow hibiscus moscheutos l. eastern purple coneflower echinacea purpurea l. moench flattop goldenrod grassleaved goldenrod euthamia graminifolia l. nutt .
euthamia graminifolia l. nutt .
var .
graminifolia euthamia graminifolia l. nutt .
var .
hirtipes fernald c.e.s .
taylor and r.j. taylor gray goldenrod solidago nemoralis aiton var .
nemoralis lanceleaf tickseed lanceleaf coreopsis coreopsis lanceolata l. maryland senna senna marilandica l. link maximilian sunflower helianthus maximiliani schrad .
new england aster symphyotrichum novaeangliae l. g.l .
nesom new york aster symphyotrichum novibelgii l. g.l .
nesom var .
elodes torr .
and a .
gray g.l .
nesom symphyotrichum novibelgii l. g.l .
nesom var .
novibelgii symphyotrichum novibelgii l. g.l .
nesom var .
villicaule a .
gray j. labrecque and l. brouillet new york ironweed vernonia noveboracensis l. michx .
partridge pea chamaecrista fasciculata michx .
greene chamaecrista fasciculata michx .
greene var .
fasciculata chamaecrista fasciculata michx .
greene var .
macrosperma fernald c.f .
reed king of the meadow tall meadow rue thalictrum pubescens pursh seedbox ludwigia alternifolia l. smooth blue aster symphyotrichum laeve l. a. lve and d. lve var .
laeve symphyotrichum laeve l. a. lve and d. lve var .
concinnum willd .
g.l .
nesom smooth oxeye oxeye sunflower heliopsis helianthoides l. sweet var .
helianthoides heliopsis helianthoides l. sweet var .
scabra dunal fernald spotted trumpetweed spotted joe pye weed eupatoriadelphus maculatus l. king and h. rob .
var .
maculatus num num landscaping stiff goldenrod oligoneuron rigidum l. small var .
rigidum sundial lupine wild blue lupine lupinus perennis l. ssp .
perennis lupinus perennis l. ssp .
perennis var .
perennis lupinus perennis l. ssp .
perennis var .
occidentalis s. watson swamp milkweed asclepias incarnata l. asclepias incarnata l. ssp .
incarnata asclepias incarnata l. ssp .
pulchra ehrh .
ex willd .
woodson swamp sunflower narrowleaved sunflower helianthus angustifolius l. swamp verbena blue vervain verbena hastata l. var .
hastata talus slope penstemon tall white beardtongue penstemon digitalis nutt .
ex sims trumpetweed joe pye weed eupatoriadelphus fistulosus barratt king and h. rob .
wild bergamot monarda fistulosa l. ssp .
fistulosa monarda fistulosa l. ssp .
fistulosa var .
mollis l. benth .
monarda fistulosa l. ssp .
fistulosa var .
rubra a .
gray monarda fistulosa l. ssp .
brevis fosberg and artz scora ined .
e meadow grass sedge and rush seed .
seed shall be supplied in lots of individual species unmixed and conform to the following num purity .
refer to numdnum .
grasses with awns shall be debearded or deawned .
num origin .
refer to numdnum .
cultivars may be produced in any state east of the mississippi river .
num num landscaping num species .
seed shall conform to the following species subspecies varieties and cultivars meadow grass sedge and rush seed species common name and cultivars scientific name big bluestem cv .
niagara andropogon gerardii vitman longhair sedge bristly sedge carex comosa boott broomsedge bluestem broomsedge andropogon virginicus l. andropogon virginicus l. var .
virginicus andropogon virginicus l. var .
decipiens c.s .
campbell deertongue cv .
tioga dichanthelium clandestinum l. gould fox sedge carex vulpinoidea michx .
var .
vulpinoidea gamagrass cv .
meadowcrest pete tripsacum dactyloides l. l. indiangrass cv .
rumsey sorghastrum nutans l. nash little bluestem cv .
aldous schizachyrium scoparium michx .
nash var .
scoparium schizachyrium scoparium michx .
nash var .
divergens hack .
gould shallow sedge lurid sedge carex lurida wahlenb .
rattlesnake mannagrass glyceria canadensis michx .
trin .
common rush soft rush lamp rush juncus effusus l. var .
conglomeratus l. engelm .
juncus effusus l. var .
decipiens buchenau juncus effusus l. var .
pylaei laharpe fernald and wiegand juncus effusus l. var .
solutus fernald and wiegand switchgrass cv .
blackwell shelter panicum virgatum l. var .
virgatum panicum virgatum l. var .
spissum linder woolgrass scirpus cyperinus l. kunth f wildflower seed .
seed shall be supplied in lots of individual species unmixed and conform to the following num purity .
species shall be num percent purity or greater with num percent germination or greater and with weed andor other crop seed content of num percent or less by weight .
seed that does not conform to purity requirements may be used after approval by the engineer in consultation with the landscape operation division at increased seeding rates or with measures to compensate for increased weed or crop seed content .
num num landscaping num origin .
any state of the united states .
num species .
seed shall conform to the following species subspecies varieties and cultivars wildflower seed species common name and cultivars scientific name firewheel annual gaillardia gaillardia pulchella foug .
gaillardia pulchella foug .
var .
pulchella blackeyed susan rudbeckia hirta l. var .
hirta rudbeckia hirta l. var .
pulcherrima farw .
calendula calendula officinalis l. lemon beebalm monarda citriodora cerv .
ex lag .
garden cosmos pink cosmos cv .
sensation cosmos bipinnatus cav .
doubtful knightsspur rocket larkspur consolida ajacis l. schur siberian wallflower erysimum marshallii henfr .
bois moroccan toadflax spurred snapdragon linaria maroccana hook .
f. common sunflower cv .
autumn beauty helianthus annuus l. garden cornflower bachelors button centaurea cyanus l. sulphur cosmos yellow cosmos cv .
bright lights cosmos sulphureus cav .
g shrub seed .
seed shall be supplied in lots of individual species unmixed and conform to the following num purity .
weed andor other crop seed content shall be num percent or less by weight .
minimum purity and minimum germination shall conform to the requirements of num below .
num origin .
refer to numdnum .
num species .
seed shall conform to the following species subspecies and varieties num num landscaping shrub seed species species including subspecies and variety purity min germ min american black elderberry sambucus nigra l. ssp .
canadensis l. r. bolli num num american cranberrybush viburnum opulus l. var .
americanum aiton num num black chokeberry photinia melanocarpa michx .
k.r .
robertson and phipps num num bristly locust robinia hispida l. var .
fertilis ashe r.t. clausen robinia hispida l. var .
hispida num num chokecherry prunus virginiana l. var .
viginiana num num common buttonbush cephalanthus occidentalis num num common ninebark physocarpus opulifolius l. maxim .
orth .
cons .
num num common winterberry ilex verticillata l. a .
gray num num desert false indigo amorpha fruticosa l. num num fragrant sumac rhus aromatica var .
aromatica num num gray dogwood cornus racemosa lam .
num num inkberry ilex glabra l. a .
gray num num mapleleaf viburnum viburnum acerifolium l. num num nannyberry viburnum lentago l. num num red chokeberry photinia pyrifolia lam .
k.r .
robertson and phipps num num red elderberry sambucus racemosa l. var .
racemosa num num redosier dogwood cornus sericea l. ssp .
sericea num num silky dogwood cornus amomum mill .
num num smooth sumac rhus glabra l. num num southern arrowwood viburnum dentatum l. var .
dentatum viburnum dentatum l. var .
venosum britton gleason viburnum recognitum fernald num num spicebush lindera benzoin l. blume var .
benzoin num num staghorn sumac rhus typhina l. num num steeplebush spiraea tomentosa l. num num swamp rose rosa palustris marsh .
num num witch hazel hamamelis virginiana l. num num num num landscaping num seed mixes .
refer to num thru .num and the document specifications for seed and seed mixes maintained by the landscape operations division which includes lists of approved cultivars .
a sha turfgrass seed mix .
sha turfgrass seed mix mix species common name scientific name num tall fescue schedonorus phoenix scop .
holub num kentucky bluegrass poa pratensis l. ssp .
pratensis num perennial ryegrass lolium perenne l. ssp .
perenne b sha special purpose seed mix .
sha special purpose seed mix mix species common name scientific name num hard fescue festuca brevipila tracey num chewings fescue festuca rubra l. ssp .
fallax thuill .
nyman num kentucky bluegrass poa pratensis l. ssp .
pratensis c sha temporary seed mix .
sha temporary seed mix mix species common name scientific name num common wheat winter type triticum aestivum l. common barley winter type hordeum vulgare l. common oat winter type avena sativa l. cereal rye winter type secale cereale l. num foxtail bristlegrass foxtail millet setaria italica l. p. beauv .
num plant materials .
num certificate and licenses .
sellers distributors installers or producers of nursery stock shall possess the plant dealer license plant broker license or nursery inspection certificate of the maryland department of agriculture or substitute a similar certificate or licenses from another state where they do business .
num num landscaping num plant material inspection .
plant material will be inspected for conformance with num thru .num and tagged with administration plant material inspection seals seals as follows a inspection .
the plant material inspection will be conducted in maryland at the nursery where the plant material is grown or at the brokerage where the plant material is sold .
when plant material is produced by a nursery outside maryland the inspection will be conducted at the contractors holding area or at the project site before planting unless otherwise specified in the contract documents .
the contractor shall ensure that the plant material is present for inspection on the scheduled date and that it meets the requirements of num .
the condition and identity of plant material will be subject to reinspection for the duration of the contract .
b scheduling .
the inspection will be scheduled by the engineer in consultation with the landscape operations division .
at least num days notice to schedule an inspection within maryland and at least num days notice to schedule an inspection outside maryland .
c seals .
the administration will determine which plants if any will be tagged with seals .
when seals are placed upon representative plants within a block of plant material the plant material delivered for installation shall be similar in size shape and character to the plant material that received seals .
plant material that is delivered with broken or missing seals or that is not similar to the plant material within the block that was tagged with seals will be rejected .
d rejected plants .
plant materials which do not meet these requirements will be rejected .
plant material rejected at the nursery or holding area shall not be delivered to the project if delivered it shall immediately be removed .
plants shall not be installed until the plant material inspection has been completed and satisfactory identification has been provided .
num num landscaping num plant material standards .
plant material shall be grown identified graded and delivered in good condition as specified in this section .
a hardiness zones of origin .
plant material shall be nursery grown within plant hardiness zones num num or num according to the usda plant hardiness zone map unless otherwise specified .
plant material shall be dug and transported in conformance ansi znum .
bare root deciduous plants shall be delivered in a dormant condition .
roots shall be adequately protected and kept moist .
b names and identification .
refer to num .
num .
plant material shall be clearly and correctly identified by the grower or distributor .
plant materials that are misidentified or not satisfactorily tagged or labeled or do not conform to the accepted characteristics of the species or cultivar will be rejected .
c ansi standards .
plant material shall conform to american standard for nursery stock ansi znum of the american nursery and landscape association .
plant grades shall be those established in ansi znum and shall include plants from that size up to but not including the next larger grade size .
when specimen plants are specified by the contract documents the specimen requirement shall also be met .
plant material which does not meet the standards of this section shall be rejected .
d health and sanitation .
plant material shall be in good health and be declared and certified free from disease and insects as required by law for transportation and shall be free from pestrelated stress and pest damage .
plants shall be healthy free from physical defects and stresses and have welldeveloped branches and a vigorous root system .
plants that exhibit wilt shriveling insufficient root mass broken or loose root balls or inadequate protection will be rejected .
container grown plants shall be well rooted vigorous and established in the size pot specified shall have well balanced tops for their pot size and shall not be root bound .
plants grown in fields or containers which include ailanthus canada thistle johnsongrass or yellow nutsedge will be rejected .
num num landscaping e shade and flowering trees .
shade and flowering trees shall be symmetrically balanced .
major branch unions shall not have v shaped crotches bark inclusion or unions derived from water sprouts epicormic growth capable of causing structural weakness .
trees shall be free of unhealed branch removal wounds greater than num in .
diameter or wounds or scars caused by staking wire or ties or any other defect which could cause structural failure or disfigurement .
shade trees and central leader flowering trees shall have a single main trunk .
trunk height to the lowest branch shall conform to the following height to lowest branch caliper in .
height ft num and num num num to num num num num f unacceptable plants .
pla nt material that becomes unacceptable after installation shall be rejected as specified in num .
num american holly ilex opaca aiton .
each lot of plants shall include num percent female plants and num percent male plants of cultivars selected from the following american holly cultivars female male angelica miss helen david arlene leach old heavy berry jersey knight b and o patterson leather leaf dan fenton satyr hill nelson west jersey princess wyetta north wind num plant storage and handling .
adequate facilities shall be provided for plant storage .
plants shall be handled with care to avoid damage .
a bulbs .
bulbs shall be stored under appropriate climate control .
num num landscaping b annual plants .
annual plants shall be kept moist .
c bare root plants .
bare root plants shall be kept moist and heeled into moist soil or other suitable material until installed .
during transport the roots shall be covered with canvas burlap or straw .
d balled and burlapped and container grown plants .
balled and burlapped plants and container grown plants shall be kept moist and installed within seven days of delivery or the root balls or containers shall be covered with mulch or straw until removed for installation .
num marking and staking materials .
num outline stakes .
outline stakes shall be full cut num x num in .
sound hardwood num in .
long as approved .
num stakes .
stakes for supporting trees shall be rough sawn straight grain hardwood reasonably free from bark knot holes excessive warping or other imperfections .
stakes shall be full cut num x num in .
thickness .
num wire .
wire shall be no .
num and num gauge new annealed galvanized wire .
num wire rope .
wire rope shall be num in .
zinc coated steel wire seven strand as commonly used for guying large trees .
num cable clamps .
cable clamps shall be zinc galvanized steel .
num hose .
hose shall be num in .
inside diameter corded synthetic rubber hose .
num turnbuckles .
turnbuckles shall be zinc galvanized with num in .
openings and num in .
threaded ends with screw eyes .
num anchors .
tree anchors shall be earth anchors of a type commonly used for anchoring large trees .
num water pesticides and adjuvants .
num water .
water used for the installation and establishment of vegetation shall not contain concentrations of substances that are harmful to plant growth .
num num landscaping water derived from public and municipal water systems in maryland shall be acceptable for irrigation fertilization or mixing with pesticides .
water derived from wells or other sources may be used when it has soluble salts concentration less than num ppm sodium less than num percent of total salts and ph between num to num .
num seed carrier .
seed carrier shall be one or more inert horticulturalgrade materials used to improve seed mixing and distribution through a spreader or drill .
seed carriers shall be free flowing easily mixable with seed and nontoxic to seed plants humans and wildlife .
seed carrier shall include one or more of the following a calcined clay .
calcined clay shall be a furnacebaked clay product .
b cocoa shell .
cocoa shell shall be processed cocoa seeds .
c oyster shell .
oy ster shell shall be crushed shells of oyster or other mollusk .
d vermiculite .
vermiculite shall be heatexpanded mineral mica .
e perlite .
perlite shall be heatexpanded mineral perlite .
num pesticides .
pesticides shall be epaapproved and registered for use in maryland to control plants fungi insects or other pests .
pesticides shall be approved for use and acceptable application rates established by the landscape operations division as follows a herbicide .
herbicide shall control or prevent regrowth of plants or vegetation .
b insecticide .
insecticide shall control or protect against insect or other arthropod pests .
c fungicide .
fungicide shall control or protect against fungal or bacterial pests .
d other pesticides .
other pesticides shall control or protect against other pests .
num marking dye .
marking dyes shall be used to color spray solutions be nonphytotoxic oil or water soluble and compatible with the num num miscellaneous pesticide products they are applied with .
marking dye products and application rates shall be approved by the landscape operations division .
num spray adjuvant and wetting agent .
spray adjuvant and wetting agents shall be mixable with water and compatible with the pesticides or other products they are applied with .
num antidesiccant .
antidesiccant and antitranspirant products shall be materials that provide a film over plant surfaces to limit water loss .
these products and application rates shall be approved by the landscape operations division .
section num miscellaneous num water for concrete mixes .
water shall be clear and meet the ph requirements of t num method b .
if questionable quality is suspected the water shall meet the limits of the comparison tests with distilled water per t num .
determine the chloride concentration of water used in mixing and curing of portland cement concrete per d num .
chloride content shall not exceed the following limits bridge superstructure and prestressed concrete num ppm latex modified concrete num ppm other concrete and water used in curing num ppm num moisture and dust control agents .
num calcium chloride .
m num type s grade i class a for solid calcium chloride .
calcium chloride in solution shall contain a minimum of num percent salts .
the solution shall be made using potable water in a quantity designated by the engineer .
when analyzed per msmt num the residue shall meet m num .
num magnesium chloride .
flakes shall meet the following test property specification limits magnesium chloride mgclnum num num calcium chloride caclnum num num potassium chloride kcl num num sodium chloride nacl num num sulfates max num num num miscellaneous when used as a solution shall contain num to num percent solids .
num lime .
num hydrated lime shall meet the chemical requirements of c num type n when used in finishing or c num type n when used for masonry .
num hydrated lime for soil stabilization shall have a minimum combined calcium oxide and magnesium oxide content of num percent when tested per c num and meet the following gradation percent sieve size retained max num in .
num no .
num num no .
num num num quicklime shall have a combined calcium oxide and magnesium oxide content of num percent minimum and a gradation of num percent passing the num in .
sieve when tested per c num .
num epoxy adhesives .
epoxy resin bonding material shall consist of a thermosetting epoxy resin and a hardener .
the individual components of mixed epoxy shall not settle or skin and contain no volatile solvents lumps or foreign materials .
the epoxy shall meet c num .
unless otherwise specified epoxy adhesive used for bearing and expansion pads shall be nonsagging .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum .
the certification or data sheet shall show actual test results for each required property of the type grade and class of epoxy submitted and shall accompany each sample .
the manufacturer shall supply actual bond test results for each batch submitted for use .
num structural timber and lumber .
m num .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum .
num timber preservatives .
m num for preservatives and pressure treatment .
num conduits .
num num miscellaneous num metallic conduit .
material specification electrical metallic tubing ul num intermediate metal conduit ul num rigid metal conduit ul num rigid steel conduit zinc coated ansi cnum metallic outlet boxes ul numa fittings for conduit and outlet boxes ul numb num nonmetallic conduit .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum .
each length shall be stamped or embossed with the grade or type and applicable ul or nema designation .
material specification schedule num and num rigid polyvinyl chloride pvc conduit ul num electrical plastic tubing ept and electrical plastic conduit epcnum and epcnum nema tc num nonmetallic outlet boxes flush device boxes and covers ul numc electrical nonmetallic conduit enc nema tc num pvc fittings for use with rigid pvc conduit and tubing nema tc num flexible pvc coated conduit ul num liquid tight flexible nonmetallic conduit for detector sleeves ul num num pvc coated metallic conduit .
nema rn num .
pvc externally coated galvanized rigid steel conduit and electrical metallic tubing .
num straw bales .
when used for erosion and sediment control straw bales shall meet the contract documents and be approximately num x num x num in .
num num miscellaneous num geotextiles .
num geotextile requirements .
all geotextiles shall be listed in the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep for geotextiles .
the geotextile shall be manufactured from fibers consisting of long chain synthetic polymers composed of a minimum num percent by weight of polyolefins or polyesters .
the fibers shall be formed into a stable network so that the filaments or yarns retain their dimensional stability relative to each other including selvages .
the geotextile shall meet the following grab puncture permittivity apparent trapezoid maryland application class type of geotextile strength lb strength lb secnum opening size max mm tear strength lb d num d num d num d num d num type nonwoven num num num num num sd i woven monofilament num num num num num type nonwoven num num num num num ii woven monofilament num num num num num type nonwoven num num num num num pe i woven monofilament num num num num num type ii nonwoven num num num num num woven monofilament num num num num num type nonwoven num num num num num iii woven monofilament num num num num num se nonwoven num num num num num woven num num num num num st woven num num num num num f woven num num num e nonwoven num num num num num note num all property values are based on minimum average roll values in the weakest principle direction except for apparent opening size .
note num the ultraviolet stability shall be num percent after num hours of exposure for all classes except class f which shall be num percent d num .
minimum num percent elongation .
this is a minimum apparent opening size not a maximum .
only those geotextiles that have been tested by ntpep will be considered candidates for use .
in addition the geotextiles shall meet the contract documents and the geotextile acceptance and quality assurance procedure msmt num .
num num miscellaneous geotextiles used for reinforcement applications shall have a separate approval process .
num seam and overlap .
d num .
when geotextiles are joined by sewing the geotextile seam shall meet the following a seams shall be either j or butterfly type and shall utilize a lock stitch .
b seams shall meet the tensile strength requirements for the geotextile when tested across the seam .
c the durability of the thread for seaming shall be at least equal to the geotextile itself .
num securing pins or staples .
shall be a minimum num in .
length and be designed to securely hold the geosynthetic in place during construction .
num polyethylene pe manholes .
d num type iii class c category num grade pnum .
working drawings shall be submitted to the engineer prior to fabrication .
compressive strength shall be determined per d num modified pipe stiffness test .
pipe stiffness shall be a minimum of num psi at num percent deflection including joints .
axial compressive strength shall be a minimum of num num lb at less than num percent deflection .
pe manholes for storm drains shall be manufactured with an invert bowl that will not interrupt flow .
manholes for sanitary sewers shall have a factory molded invert for channeled flow .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum .
the certification shall accompany each shipment of pe manholes and show actual test results the quantity of manhole sections and date of manufacture .
manholes shall be marked with the manufacturers name and trademark .
num num num prefabricated edge drains num preformed fiberglass .
meet the following test property test method specification limits density gcm min d num num absorption max d num num tensile strength average of five specimens each direction psi min d num num num thickness unless otherwise specified in .
num thickness tolerance in .
num num color no .
fed .
std .
num num longitudinal and transverse directions .
section num prefabricated edge drains num certification .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum .
num prefabricated edge drains .
shall be flexible rectangular conduit consisting of supporting drainage core encased in a geotextile .
drainage core .
material shall be manufactured from polymers having a high resistance to deterioration by pavement deicing salts petroleum based materials and naturally occurring soil chemicals .
the core shall have sufficient flexibility to withstand bending and handling without damage or significant weakening .
the core geotextile contact point spacing for post and cuspated sheet type cores shall not exceed num in .
elongated pipe core sections shall have a num in.ft minimum open area to allow lateral flow into the core .
cores with support on only one side shall have a minimum of num percent of the area of that support side in unobstructed flow .
drainage core shall meet the following requirements num test property test method specification limits thickness in .
min num compressive strength psi num maximum deformation min a num inplane flow rate galminft of width min d num b num a d num for crushed sheet and post type cores .
d num for elongated pipe type cores .
b num psi load after num hr at a hydraulic gradient of num .
geotextile wrap .
num class sd type ii .
the fabric shall be bonded to contact points of supporting core for post and cuspated sheet type cores to ensure that the geotextile does not sag into the core flow area .
the geotextile shall be tightly stretched over the core for elongated pipe type cores .
num fittings .
fittings for the pavement edge drain systems including but not limited to end seals splices outlets and shunts shall meet the manufacturers recommendations and be of sufficient strength to withstand construction handling and permanent loading .
all fittings shall be as approved .
num outlet pipe .
pipe for outlets shall be num in .
minimum diameter and meet section num .
section num slurry seal num aggregates .
aggregates shall be crushed stone compatible with the emulsion and shall meet section num .
num mineral filler .
section num .
num emulsified asphalt .
m num grade cssnumh except that the cement mixing test is waived .
emulsified asphalt shall not separate before placement of ss or lmss .
num latex modified emulsion .
the latex modifier and other emulsifiers shall be milled into the asphalt cement .
the emulsified asphalt shall be modified by the addition of num num percent latex solids num slurry seal num num slurry seal by weight of the asphalt .
the latex modifier shall be an unvulcanized styrene butadiene rubber sbr or num percent natural latex in liquid form .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification as specified in tcnum showing actual test results meeting these specifications .
num mix design approval .
mix design data shall be submitted to the engineer for approval at least three weeks in advance of the paving operation .
the mix design shall list the ingredients and their proportions as well as the gradation of the proposed aggregate .
the sbr latex modifier shall meet the following test property specification limits styrene butadiene ratio num num solids content min num ph max num weight per gallon wet basis num c lb min dry basis num c lb min num num latex modified emulsion cssnumh shall meet m num modified as follows the num percent natural latex shall be a high ammonia natural latex meeting d num type i .
the mix design report shall show test results meeting the following test property specification limits msmt num mixing test minutes min num msmt num setting time minutes max num msmt num water resistance slight discoloration msmt num wet track abrasion gftnum max num international slurry seal association issa tb num set time test num minutes kgcm min num the percent of residual asphalt based on the dry aggregate weight shall be between num and num for type ii mix and num and num for type iii mix each having a control tolerance of num percent .
num num detectable warning surfaces the contractor shall submit sufficient material for testing the mix design whenever corroborating information is required by the engineer .
residue requirements test property specification limits penetration num c min num ductility num c min num c min num num r and b softening point f min num cement mixing test waived the latex modified emulsion after standing undisturbed for num hours shall be a uniform color throughout .
num mix design .
the stability shall be a minimum of num lb and the flow shall be num to num in .
when tested per t num modified modification permits air drying of the mixture at num to num f for a minimum of num hours followed by placement in a num f oven and drying to a constant weight prior to reheating and placing in molds .
section num reserved section num detectable warning surfaces num general .
the detectable warning surface shall conform to the most recent accessibility guidelines of the americans with disabilities act ada .
the office of materials technology will maintain a list of prequalified products from which a surface shall be selected .
prior to inclusion on the list of products the manufacturers shall submit test results to the office of materials technology showing conformance to the table of physical properties as specified in num .
in addition the manufacturers shall submit complete conforming physical property test results in six month intervals beyond the date of the original prequalification testing .
materials shall meet certification requirements prior to use on a project submit the proposed source of supply and specific product to the engineer for approval .
num num detectable warning surfaces num composition .
the surface shall be either flexible or rigid .
the office of materials technology shall be notified of any changes to the composition of a prequalified detectable warning product .
in this case the manufacturer shall resubmit complete test results showing conformance to the table of physical properties as specified in num .
num size .
the detectable warning surface shall be num in .
wide in the direction of pedestrian travel and extend the full width of the curb ramp landing or blended transition .
num configuration and dimensions .
the surface shall consist of a system of truncated domes aligned in conformance with and meeting the dimensional requirements of the most recent ada accessibility guidelines .
each dome shall have a base diameter of num in .
tonum in .
a top diameter of num to num percent of the base diameter minimum to num percent of the base diameter and a height of num in .
arrange the truncated domes in a square grid with centertocenter spacing of num in .
to num in .
num color .
detectable warning product shall contrast with adjoining surfaces in conformance with current ada requirements .
the color shall be homogenous throughout the surface .
num num detectable warning surfaces num physical properties .
the detectable warning surface shall meet the following requirements property test method specification limit slip resistance coefficient c num dry method .num minimum abrasive wear index c num num minimum fade uv resistancecolor retention g num g num cyclenum no fading or change in color after num hours chemical stain resistance d num no discoloration or staining freezethaw resistance c num no disintegration adhesionbond strength c num no adhesion failure contrast contrast percentage formula using e num to determine cap y brightnesslight reflectance values lrv current ada requirement chromaticity coordinates cie system checked per e num before and after test .
immersion test for acid solution soap solution and detergent solution reagents .
spot test open for salts lubricating oils and greases .
tests shall be conducted at num f for durations of num hrs .
contrast bnum bnumbnum x num where bnum lrv of the lighter area and bnum lrv of the darker area .
for the purpose of determining whether a material meets acceptable contrast criteria inserting cap y brightness of detectable warning surface and assume a value of num for the cap y brightness of cured concrete to determine percentage difference .
when a detectable warning surface is to be installed on any material other than cured concrete additional testing will be required to ensure the contrast requirements are met .
num certification .
the manufacturer shall furnish certification stating that the detectable warning surface meets all maryland state highway administration specification requirements and that the surface meets the most recent ada accessibility guidelines .
num num traffic materials with the exception of test results the certification shall be as specified in tcnum .
section num thru num reserved section num traffic materials num precast concrete traffic barrier .
as specified in the contract documents .
welded wire fabric as specified in num .
num reserved .
num reflectorization of signs and channelizing devices .
unless otherwise specified in the contract documents retroreflective sheeting for signs shall meet num .num or .num .
when yellow type iii iv vi vii or ix is specified in the contract documents fluorescent yellow shall be used .
retroreflective sheeting for channelizing devices shall meet num .num .num .num or .num .
sign sheeting shall be selected from the qpl .
all retroreflective sheeting shall meet d num .
sign legend and background sheeting shall be from the same sheeting manufacturer .
num type iii retroreflective sheeting .
d num type iii and the following minimum reflective intensity values for type iii sheeting minimum coefficient of retroreflection ra cdlx mnum observation angle entrance angle white yellow red blue green brown num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num traffic materials num type iv retroreflective sheeting .
d num type iv and the following minimum reflective intensity values for type iv sheeting minimum coefficient of retroreflectionra cdlx mnum enum average of num and num degrees orientation observation angle entrance angle white yellow red green blue orange .num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num type ix retroreflective sheeting .
d num type ix and the following minimum reflective intensity values for type ix sheeting minimum coefficient of retroreflectionra cdlx mnum per astm enum average of num and num degrees orientation observation angle entrance angle white yellow fluor .
yellow fluor .
yellow green red green blue num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
num num num num num num num num num temporary traffic signs tts .
a all rigid temporary traffic signs shall be fluorescent orange and meet d num type vii or super high efficiency full cube retroreflective sheeting .
b all temporary flexible rollup signs shall be fluorescent orange and meet d num type vi .
num black sheeting .
shall be nonreflective .
num drums for maintenance of traffic .
d num type vii .
num num traffic materials num overhead sign structures .
structural steel shall meet a num grade num .
steel tubes or pipes a num grade a or api num lxnum .
design and minimum thickness of material shall meet aashto specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
all steel shall be galvanized per a num .
hardware shall be galvanized per a num .
num backfill material for trenches for buried cable .
the lower num ft depth of trench shall be fine aggregate meeting section num .
material above the num ft depth shall be select material as specified in section num .
num electrical cable and wire .
a standard commercial product manufactured not more than one year prior to the date of the contract .
all cable and wire shall be made of copper .
num direct burial cable .
a single conductor stranded with an unshielded chemically crosslinked thermosetting polyethylene insulation rated for num volts .
the cable shall be suitable for direct earth burial or installation in ducts or conduit and shall meet ul type use xhhw or thw and bear the applicable ul labels denoting type size stranding manufacturers name and surface marking or molded ridges for phase and neutral identification .
sizes shall be as specified .
num building cable and wire .
num v plastic insulated nylon jacketed and shall meet ul type thwnthhn and bear the applicable ul labels denoting type size stranding manufacturers name and surface marking or molded ridges for phase and neutral identification .
sizes shall be as specified .
num cable duct .
shall consist of cables preinstalled in either a polyvinyl chloride pvc or polyethylene pe plastic duct meeting nema tc num and the nec .
pvc shall meet d num .
pe duct shall be manufactured from black virgin high density pe resin meeting d num type iii grade pnum class c category num .
minimum inside diameter of duct shall be num in .
cable shall be rated for num volts .
num ground wire and rods .
ground wire shall be bare medium drawn copper .
ground wire shall be of the size solid or stranded configuration shown in the contract documents .
ground rods shall be num in .
diameter a minimum of num ft in length with a steel core and copper jacket .
num traffic signal cable .
per imsa specification num conductors shall be stranded no .
num awg .
num num traffic materials num loop detector leadin cable .
per imsa specification num .
shall be two conductor no .
num awg pe jacketed .
num loop detector wire .
single conductor num v no .
num awg num strand wire in a flexible pe tubing .
num voice grade communication cable .
selfsupporting cable shall be solid no .
num awg and meet imsa specification num .
underground cable shall meet imsa specification num .
num electric service wire .
electric service wire for traffic signals intersection control beacons hazard identification beacons and luminaires mounted on traffic signal structures shall have three individual wires .
each wire shall be seven stranded .
electric service wire color identification by spray paint tape heat shrink tubing or any other after manufacturing method is prohibited .
num lighting structures .
per aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals based on num mph wind loads luminaire weight of num lb and luminaire projected area of num ftnum .
ground mounted lighting structures consist of a one piece round tapered shaft a cast steel anchor base for steel structures and a cast aluminum base for aluminum structures bracket arms complete with all necessary accessories including anchor bolts pole top shims grounding lug and handhole .
steel shafts shall meet a num grade a .
after forming and welding the shaft shall have a smooth finish with only one longitudinal weld and no transverse welds .
steel bracket arms and mounting brackets shall meet a num schedule num .
structures shall be either mechanically or hotdipped galvanized .
the coating shall meet the thickness adherence and quality requirements of a num .
aluminum shafts and bracket arms shall be spun from one piece of extruded tubing meeting b num num tnum series alloy .
the shaft and bracket shall be cold worked to form the required taper .
each lighting structure shall be provided with a permanent num x num in .
tag fabricated from clear anodized num in .
thick aluminum .
the edge shall be smooth with rounded corners and the tag shall fit the lighting structure shaft .
tags shall be secured to shafts by means of four num in .
diameter num stainless steel round head drive screws or selftapping screws .
the identifying letters or numerals as specified .
num num traffic materials num signs .
the manufacturer or supplier shall furnish certification as specified .
num sheet aluminum sign panels .
b num with an anodized mill finish .
alloys shall be either num tnum or numhnum .
num extruded aluminum sign panels and edge strip .
b num alloy num tnum .
num hardware .
shall be clear anodized meeting of the following b num alloy num tnum or b num alloy num tnum num tnum num tnum num tnum or num tnum .
num steel span wire .
a num class c. num or num in .
diameter and seven wire strand .
num conduit .
as specified in section num and num .
num electrical conduit detector tape .
consists of one layer of aluminum foil laminated between two layers of inert plastic film .
the foil shall be num in .
wide with a tensile strength of num lb .
the plastic film shall have a minimum thickness of num mil .
num luminaires and lamps .
a complete lighting device consisting of a housing support clamp reflector refractor or flat lens socket lamp integral ballast terminal block associated hardware and necessary wiring .
all parts of the luminaire shall incorporate the latest ratings and design improvements .
luminaires shall incorporate individual twist lock photoelectric cells when specified .
exposed hardware shall be stainless steel .
num luminaire construction .
a bracket arm mounted luminaire housing shall be cast aluminum with natural finish .
the housing shall contain and support the reflector refractor or flat lens socket ballast terminal block and support clamp .
provisions shall be made for leveling and adjusting the luminaire to the specified transverse and longitudinal position to the roadway .
the refractor or flat lens retaining ring shall be securely latched with an operable hinge made from noncorrodible material .
the reflector shall be of specular polished alzak aluminum or equivalent aluminum reflective surface and be held firmly in the housing but easily removed without the use of special tools .
num num traffic materials silicone rubber ethylene propylene terpolymer dacron felt gaskets or other gasketing materials as approved by the engineer shall seal the optical assembly at the socket entry and between the refractor and reflector to make a dust tight optical system .
the reflector shall be clean and free from scratches .
glass for the refractor or flat lens shall be heat resistant borosilicate glass and shall be free of imperfections .
the optical system of the luminaire shall clearly indicate the street side and curb side .
the socket shall be a mogul screw shell with large center contact spring providing a firm contact with the lamp base and have lamp grips to prevent the lamp from loosening .
the shell shall be of the skeleton type or shrouded in porcelain .
the contacts shall be identifiable .
socket extension adapters will be permitted for special applications when directed .
luminaires providing various ansiies type of distribution by socket adjustment shall also include a means of identification to associate each lamp position with each distribution type .
the socket adjustment shall provide positive positioning by means of index holes lugs or notches .
slots with infinite settings are prohibited .
the ballast shall be a high power factor auto regulator type capable of operating from a multiple circuit and shall operate a high intensity discharge lamp of the type wattage and voltage specified .
multitap ballasts shall be provided where supply voltage is num volts or less .
the ballast shall start the lamp at temperatures as low as num f and shall deliver rated lamp current at circuit voltage variation of plus or minus num percent .
the primary power factor shall not be less than num percent with normal secondary load .
the ballast assembly shall be provided with plug in connectors and installed on a hinged door to permit ready interchange of ballast .
provide glare shields on luminaires where specified or as directed .
the glare shield shall cut off the upward component of light but shall not reduce the total output of the luminaire more than num percent .
b bridge underpass luminaires shall be a complete lighting device consisting of a cast aluminum housing a door with cast aluminum frame and thermal shock resistant glass refractor attached to the frame with a stainless steel latch hinges and retaining chain a specular polished alzak aluminum reflector a shrouded adjustable porcelain socket and an integral ballast as num num traffic materials specified above.the refractor and reflector shall direct all useful light well below all normal driver viewing angles to ensure that glare will be at a minimum .
c sign lighting luminaires shall be of the type specified in the contract documents .
the refractor shall be permanently sealed to the door assembly with silicone adhesive around its perimeter .
the reflector shall be a single piece dieform of sheet aluminum alloy num or as approved processed to alcoa class si alzak finish .
a heavy duty mogul lampholder shall be securely mounted to the reflector with a galvanized steel bracket .
the refractordoor assembly shall be nonpermanently sealed to the luminaire housing and reflector assembly with a single piece neoprene gasket to effectively seal the luminaire and locked in place by stainless steel springloaded latches .
the refractordoor assembly shall open and be held captive by double pivot internally mounted stainless steel hinges and shall be removable .
weepholes shall be provided in the bottom of the housing in the lowest area of the luminaire as normally mounted .
the sign lighting luminaire shall be designed to properly illuminate the sign with the lamp source type and size as specified in the contract documents .
the contractor shall submit for the approval working drawings showing locations and aiming angles of luminaires with relation to each of the signs of the various sizes .
num lamps shall be provided for luminaires of the type and wattage specified .
lamps shall be first line high quality and be as approved .
lamp wattage horizontal or vertical initial lumens rated lamp life and percent of initial lamp lumens at end of rated lamp life shall be as specified or as follows num num traffic materials type watts initial lumens rated life num hrstart percent initial lumens deluxe mercury num num num num num num deluxe mercury num num num num num num deluxe mercury num num num num num num h.p .
sodium num num num num num num h.p .
sodium num num num num num num h.p .
sodium num num num num num num h.p .
sodium num num num num num num h.p .
sodium num num num num num num h.p .
sodium num num num num num num metal halide num num num num num num metal halide num num num num num num num control and distribution equipment .
num circuit breakers .
molded case type having a minimum rating of num num amp interrupting capacity aic and be quick make quick break thermal magnetic trip indicating and have common trip on all multiple breakers with internal tie mechanism .
they shall have the current and voltage ratings and number of poles as specified in the contract documents and be treated to resist fungus and be ambiently compensated for the enclosure and proximity to adjacent breakers .
all circuit breakers shall be the bolt in type .
num photoelectric controls .
solid state cadmium sulfide type with hermetically sealed silicone rectifier rated num v num cycle ac and num watts maximum load .
built in surge protection shall be provided and a fail safe operating feature shall be included so that the lighting circuits will remain energized in the event the photo control components become inoperative .
nominal operating levels of this control shall turn on at a minimum vertical illumination value of num ftc and turn off at a maximum vertical illumination value of num ftc .
these limitations shall be set by the manufacturer and tolerances of plus or minus num percent for the specified value will be acceptable .
photoelectric controls for luminaires and lighting controls shall be twist lock type .
a suitable mounting bracket with locking type receptacle and all other necessary mounting hardware shall be furnished .
num num traffic materials num contactors and relays .
contactors of the current ratings and number of poles specified .
they shall be fully rated for all classes of load to num v and shall have an interrupting rating of num percent of rated current .
a handoffautomatic selector switch shall be provided in the photoelectric cell circuit .
relays shall be the type size and contact ratings as specified .
num panel boards .
federal specification wpnum and shall be suitable for operation on the voltage and type service specified .
they shall be ul listed and labeled .
panel boards shall be equipped with the number and size circuit breakers specified .
circuit breakers in panel boards shall meet federal specification wcnum and shall be bolted to copper busses .
buss ratings shall be as specified .
num lightning arresters .
shall be secondary type having the specified number of poles and num to num v rms .
arresters shall be provided with suitable mounting brackets and all other necessary mounting hardware .
num control power transformers .
control power transformers shall be the dry type two windings of the size and voltage ratings specified .
num enclosures .
shall meet the nema type specified and be dead front type weatherproof metal enclosed selfsupporting structures as specified .
free standing enclosures shall be fabricated from sheet aluminum and be as specified herein .
panel and control equipment cabinets shall be the manufacturers standard enclosure for the type and application specified .
they shall have door clamps solid neoprene gaskets welded seams stainless steel external hardware and continuous hinges with stainless steel pins .
enclosures shall have two weep holes in the bottom and shall be equipped for padlocking .
num pad mounted enclosures .
for ventilation all cabinets shall be provided with louvered vents in the front door with a removable air filter .
a louvers shall meet the nema rod entry test for numr rated ventilated enclosure .
b filters for all cabinets shall be num in .
long num in .
wide and num in .
thick .
the filter shall cover the vents and be held firmly in place with top and bottom brackets and a spring loaded upper clamp .
c exhaust air shall be vented out of the cabinet between the top of num num traffic materials the cabinet and the main access door .
the exhaust area shall be screened with a material having a maximum hole diameter of num in .
num thermostats and fans .
a thermostatically controlled cooling fan shall be provided for all cabinets .
the fan and thermostat shall be rated for num percent of capacity and shall be mounted at the top of the cabinet .
a thermostats shall be the inline type single pole num v num amps with a minimum range of num to num f. b the fan shall have a minimum rated capacity of num cfm air flow and a minimum rated design life of num num hours .
c the thermostat shall be manually adjustable within a num degree range from num to num f. num disconnect switches and utility connections .
nema standard ks num .
disconnect switch enclosure shall be type num stainless steel with external operating handle enclosure cover interlock and external switch mechanism handle with provisions for securing in both the on and off positions by padlock .
the switch mechanism shall be of heavy duty design with quick make quick break type operations and visible blades .
the disconnect switch shall be fusible with integral fuse puller .
single phase disconnect switches shall have num poles with a solid neutral and shall be rated at num v. three phase disconnect switches shall have num poles with a solid neutral and shall be rated at num v. the design of the neutral bar may be factory or field installable .
disconnect switch fuseholders for traffic signals intersection control beacons and intersection lighting operating at num v shall be single phase num amps fused num amps .
disconnect switch fuseholders for hazard identification beacons and luminaires mounted on traffic signal structures operating at num v shall be rated single phase num amps fused num amps .
disconnect switches for lighting control cabinets shall have the same number of poles and amperage rating specified in the electrical service equipment item .
disconnect switches for electrical service distribution cabinets shall be num amp num pole and single phase .
num num traffic materials num electrical cable and wire connectors .
num cable connectors and connector kits .
for use in lighting structures hand holes junction or pull boxes and for terminating underground cables in lighting structures shall be rated for a minimum of num v service .
cable connectors shall be compression type applied by means of a compression tool .
connectors shall be fabricated from high strength copper alloy .
plated connectors fabricated from metals other than copper are prohibited .
bolted type connectors shall be utilized for splicing bare ground conductors .
num connector kit components .
each cable connector kit shall be furnished with all component parts described under the various listed types .
each kit shall contain sufficient silicone compound to lubricate metal parts and the housing for each assembly along with complete installation instructions .
a all housings shall be made of water resistant synthetic rubber suitable for burial in the ground or exposure to sunlight .
each housing shall form a watertight seal around the cable at the point of disconnection and between the insert body and enveloping y housing .
b all copper pins sockets and fuse contacts shall have a minimum conductivity of num percent .
the crimpable portion shall be fully annealed while the rest of the device is maintained in its original state .
c plastic sleeves shall be rigid molded insulating plastic material of sufficient outside diameter to form a watertight fit with its related housing .
wall thickness shall be num in .
maximum and sleeve lengths of num and num in .
shall be available .
d all fuses shall be rated numv num num amps aic .
num connector types .
each cable connector kit furnished shall be one of the following types a type i unfused quick disconnect inline connector kit containing num a copper pin crimpable to a conductor .
num a receptacle having a centrally located recessed locking socket constructed so that it is filled and retained by its housing and a disposable assembly pin .
num a plug housing for retention of the copper pin .
num num traffic materials num a receptacle housing with disposable protective sleeve .
b type ii fused quick disconnect inline connector kit containing num a pair of spring loaded copper fuse contacts suitable for gripping the specified cartridge fuse .
one contact shall be crimpable on a conductor and after insertion into its proper position within the load side plug housing be capable of being securely retained therein .
the other contact shall be preassembled for retention within the line side of the connector body .
num a load side housing permanently marked load side .
num a disposable assembly pin .
num a fuse of the specified amp rating .
c type iii fused quick disconnect y connector kit containing num a pair of spring loaded copper fuse contacts suitable for gripping the specified cartridge fuse .
one contact shall be crimpable on a conductor and after insertion into its proper position within the load side plug housing be capable of being securely retained therein .
the other contact shall be preassembled for retention within a y insert body .
num a line side y housing with two water seal cable ports .
num two terminal lugs each having a mounting hole .
num a bolt and a selflocking nut .
num a y insert body with preassembled line side fuse contact and a ring tongue terminal .
num a load side plug housing permanently marked load side .
num a disposable assembly pin .
num a fuse of specified amp rating .
d type iv unfused quick disconnect y connector kit containing num a copper pin crimpable to a conductor and suitable for retention in the load side receptacle housing .
num num traffic materials num a y insert body with preassembled load side copper socket and ring tongue terminal .
num a line side y housing with two water seal cable ports .
num two terminal lugs each having a mounting hole .
num a bolt and selflocking nut .
num a load side receptacle housing .
num traffic signal heads .
pedestrian signal indications and vehicular signal heads shall meet the institute of transportation engineers ite specifications .
a all materials shall be clean smooth and free from flaws cracks blowholes and other imperfections .
b signal heads shall be furnished with the section assembled together including all hardware as specified in the contract documents .
c all metallic signal head hardware shall be stainless steel material .
d vehicular opticallyprogrammed and pedestrian signal heads shall be capable of mating to the same type of the signal heads from either the top or bottom of each housing .
e all hardware furnished shall be installed on the corresponding fitting and threaded component .
num num traffic materials mounting hardware shall meet the following item description a b c d num aluminum alloy casting a num a num a num num tnum num yield strength ksi num num num num num tensile strength ksi num num num num num brinell hardness num num num num num elongation in num in .
num num num num num stainless steel a num num galvanized steel a num a num g num num steelflat sheet num gauge num coating anodized finish using federal standards num the signal head housing shall be yellow meeting color chip no .
num .
the signal head door and visor shall be optical flat dull black color no .
num .
aluminum signal heads shall be painted using fusion bonded polyester coating method .
hardware .
hub plate shall meet a num thru num and numb .
a span wire hanger clamp shall meet c num thru num. b balance adjuster shall meet numa numa and numb .
c numway lower arm shall meet numc and numa .
d numway tristud arm shall meet a num thru num. e span wire entrance fitting shall meet c num thru num. f mast arm mount signal bracket numway numway and numsection shall meet numa and numd .
g side pole upper and lower arm assembly shall meet numb thru numb or numd thru numd .
vehicular signal heads and pedestrian signal indications housings and doors .
num num traffic materials a aluminum signal head housings and doors shall be diecast aluminum as specified in the ite vehicle traffic control signal head specification .
b dual hingelatch mechanisms shall be mounted on the signal head housing and not the signal head door .
captive door latch mechanisms one for num in .
and two for num in .
vehicular signal heads and one for num in .
and two for num in .
pedestrian signal indications shall secure the door to the housing by use of stainless steel eyebolts and wing nut assemblies .
c all openings to the housing interior shall be provided with a gasket meeting the physical properties listing in ul num and that forms a weather tight seal .
visors .
a visors shall be as specified in the ite vehicle traffic control signal head specification and shall be tunnel type .
visors shall be num in .
deep for num in .
vehicular signal heads num in .
deep for num in .
vehicular signal heads num in .
deep for num in .
pedestrian signal indications and num in .
deep for optically programmed signal heads .
b visors shall be secured to the signal head door by a minimum of four screws mounted perpendicular to the face of the signal head door .
c visors for aluminum vehicular signal and pedestrian signal sections shall be made from aluminum alloy sheet .
visors for polycarbonate signal sections shall be either formed from sheet plastic or assembled from one or more injection rotational or blowmolded polycarbonate sections .
optical system .
vehicular and pedestrian traffic control signal indications shall meet the following .
a signal head lamps .
approved by the office of traffic and safety .
b reflector .
shall be made of aluminum .
reflector support assembly shall be die cast aluminum separate from the reflector and fully encompass the periphery of the reflector .
num num traffic materials reflector support assembly shall be spring hinged to allow access to the rear of the signal head main body without the use of tools .
c lens .
shall be standard ball red yellow or green or specified arrow red yellow or green traffic signal lens .
the lens shall be glass .
directional arrow lenses shall have the same brilliance regardless which direction they are positioned in the signal face .
the lens shall fit into a onepiece slotted neoprene lens gasket designed to provide a weather resistant fit to the housing door .
lenses shall be secured by a flat clipscrew design fastened from the inside of the signal head door perpendicular to the face of the door .
the flat clipscrew design shall not pass through the lens itself .
all pedestrian signal heads shall provide the messages of walk and dont walk in the international walking person and the raised hand symbols .
optical system for optically programmed signal heads .
a the indication from the lens shall meet the requirements of ite transmittance and chromaticity standards .
b optically programmed signal heads shall have an optical system containing a color filter lamp fixture lamp collar optical limiterdiffuser and objective lens .
c lamp fixtures shall be comprised of a separately accessible housing and integral lamp support indexed ceramic socket and selfaligning and quick release lamp retainer .
electrical connection between case and lamp housing shall be accomplished with an interlock assembly that disconnects the lamp holder when opened .
d the optical limiter shall provide an accessible imaging surface at focus on the optical axis for objects num to num ft distance and permit an effective veiling mask to be variously applied as determined by the desired visibility zone .
the optical limiter shall be composed of heatresistant glass .
e optically programmed signal heads shall utilize incandescent par type lamps .
the lamp shall be coupled to the diffusing element .
num num traffic materials the diffusing element may be discrete or integral with the convex surface of the optical limiter .
f the objective lens shall be a high resolution annular incremental lens hermetically sealed within a flat laminate of weather resistant acrylic or as approved by office of traffic and safety .
the lens shall be symmetrical in outline and may be rotated to any num degree orientation about its axis without displacing the primary image .
electrical .
a the entire signal head assembly shall be either listed or labeled by a maryland state fire marshall or a recognized electrical inspection agency .
b wiring connections at the lamp socket shall lock and not be of the malefemale demountable type .
c a unitized bail wire with integral spring shall secure the socket to the rear of the reflector .
the lamp socket shall have a serrated base to permit locking .
d each single section and the middle section of three section signal heads shall have a minimum of a six section twelve position terminal block capable of accepting three number num awg spade terminal ends .
the top section of two section pedestrian signal indications shall be furnished with a minimum of five section ten position terminal blocks capable of accepting three number num awg spade terminal ends .
e optically programmed signal heads shall not contain a resistance device for use as an intensity controller with integral means for regulating its intensity between limits as a function of individual background illumination .
num index item section page a abbreviations gpnum num acceptance for maintenance gpnum num accidents gpnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num acknowledgements gpnum num administration gpnum administration furnished materials gpnum num administrator gpnum admixtures for portland cement concrete structures num num num num aerial electric lines num volts or more tcnum num aggregate base courses compaction num num dust control num num equipment num num grade or finish surface control num num maintenance num num maintenance of traffic num num protection and curing num num spreading of material num num subgrade preparation num num transportation num num weather num num aggregates slurry seal num num table num a num num table num b num num table num c num num table num d num num aluminum lighting structures num num aluminum signs sheet or extruded num num amendments to invitations for bids gpnum num anchor bolts and assemblies bridges num num noise barriers num num retaining walls num num annuals and bulbs installation and establishment num num berming num num edging num num establishment phase num num fertilizing and watering after installation num num installing num num num num installation phase acceptance num num ipm program numd num nutrient management plan nume num payment schedule numa num planting seasons numb num preparing planting beds and planting areas num num num num submittals and inspection num num utilities marking layout and inspection num num num index item section page application of bridgestructure numbers num num arrow panel for maintenance of traffic num num asphalt binders performance graded num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num asphaltic materials for dampproofing and waterproofing num num asphalt sealer for concrete pipe num num authority and duties of inspectors gpnum num authority of the procurement officer gpnum num award gpnum award of contract gpnum num b backer rod for concrete pavement joint sealing num num backfill flowable for utility cuts num num material for trenches for buried cable num num traffic signals highway lighting and signs foundations num num backfilling against brick masonry num num against curb combination curb and gutter numi num against gabion edges num num against structures num num concrete ditches num num concrete slope and channel protection num num pipe culverts num num prefabricated edge drains num num riprap ditches num num slope and channel protection num num structural plate pipe and arches num num underdrains subgrade drains and spring control num num barbed wire for chain link fence num num barricades and warning signs gpnum num barricades type i ii and iii for maintenance of traffic num num base course plants num num bearings num num num num elastomeric num num finishing bearing seat areas numc num materials num num prestressed concrete beams and slab panels num num steel bronze or copper num num bearing value of piling num num bedding of pipe culverts num num benching for embankments num num bids amendments to invitations for gpnum num bond gpnum bidder gpnum confirmation of gpnumb num delivery of gpnum num evaluation and award gpnum num form gpnum num index item section page invitation for gpnum num irrevocable gpnum num late gpnum num mistakes in gpnum num multiple or alternate gpnum num opening and recording of gpnum num preparation of gpnum tcnum num num protests gpnum num rejection of all gpnum num samples and descriptive literature gpnumc num schedule quantities in gpnum num bioretention soil mix num num blasting explosives tcnum num removal of existing masonry num num rock numb num bleeder ditches num num board gpnum num bolts nuts and washers general use num num high strength num num num num bond for brick masonry num num bond requirements gpnum num borrow excavation beyond specified limits num num borrow pit material num num clearing and grubbing num num contractors options num num types num num breakaway base support systems num num brick building num num manhole num num masonry num num sewer num num bridge deck accessories in slabs num num curing of concrete num num forms num num grade control numcnum num grooved slab numdnum num latex modified concrete overlay num num lightweight concrete num num linseed oil protective coating num num maintain existing during life of contract patching num num protective shields for removal num num rate of concreting numcnum num removal num num repair num num replacement num num sidewalks and safety curbs nume num slab tolerances numdnum num bridge hauling numver proposed structures tcnum num bridge mounted sign supports num num bridge removal num num num index item section page bridge storing material and equipment onagainst structures restriction tcnum num bridge underclearance tcnum num bridge underpass luminaires num num bronze or copper alloy bearing and expansion plates num num brown polyester coated traffic barrier num num brush removal num num damage repair num num marking num num permits numa num operations num num tree preservation program numb num buildings existing removal and disposal num num burning numa num business gpnum num buy american steel act gpnum num c cable connectors and connector kits num num direct burial num num duct num num in conduit num num in lighting structures num num caissons see drilled shafts calcium chloride num num num num calendar day gpnum num cancellation of invitation for bids gpnum num caps wales and planks timber protection num num cast washers num num castings for grates and covers num num chain link fence num num num num change order gpnum num changes gpnum num num num num num character of workmen methods and equipment gpnum num chip seal surface treatment aggregate spread rate num num asphalt spray rate num num equipment num num first seal coat num num foundation preparation num num prime coat num num rolling num num second seal coat num num traffic num num weather num num choice of law gpnum num claims gpnum num cleaning and painting new structural steel abrasives num num areas to be coated num num base metal readings num num bolts and field welds num num num index item section page caulking num num containment system plan guidelines field cleaning num num containment system requirements num num control of overspray and spills num num defective work num num environmental protection num num environmental protection plan of action num num environmental requirements num num field applications of prime intermediate and finish coats num num field cleaning and painting num num field cleaning waste disposal num num final identification num num floodlighting num num general requirements num num hazardous waste generator num num hazardous waste transportation and disposal num num inspection equipment num num maintenance of traffic num num methods of cleaning num num nonhazardous waste disposal num num osha requirements num num painting sequence num num paint systems num num num num paint representative num num quality assurance inspector num num repair of coatings num num repair of surface imperfections num num required submittals num num roadway joints numc num shop application of prime coat num num shop priming and field finish painting num num shop priming of new steel num num storage and mixing num num surface condition prior to painting num num surface preparation num num time restrictions num num toxic metals num num waste containment field cleaning num num waste handling plan of action num num waste sampling and analysis num num weather restrictions num num weathering steel numb num worker protection num num cleaning and painting existing structural steel abrasives num num ambient air monitoring numb num applications of prime intermediate and finish coats num num areas to be cleaned and painted num num assessing emissions num num brush off blast cleaning numg num caulking num num certification requirements num num certified industrial hygienist numc num num index item section page competent numb num containment system plan guidelines num num containment system requirements num num control of overspray and spills num num defective work num num environmental protection num num environmental protection plan of action num num assessing emissions num num environmental requirements num num field cleaning waste disposal num num field painting num num final identification num num floodlighting num num hand tool cleaning nume num hazardous waste generator num num hazardous waste transportation and disposal num num high pressure water cleaning numc num inspection equipment num num low pressure water cleaning numb num maintenance of traffic num num methods of cleaning num num monitor placement and reporting numbnum num near white metal abrasive blast cleaning numh num nonhazardous waste disposal num num osha requirements num num painting sequence num num paint systems num num num num personal qualifications num num power tool cleaning numd num power tool cleaning to bare metal numf num quality control inspectors numa num quality control plan num num quality assurance inspector num num repair of surface imperfections num num removal of defects in existing coatings num num removal of vegetation planking and signage num num required submittals num num surface preparation num num solvent cleaning numa num storage and mixing num num surface condition prior to painting num num paint representative num num temporary waste storage site num num test plates num num time restrictions num num toxic metals num num waste containment field cleaning num num waste handling plan of action num num waste materials tcnum num waste sampling and analysis num num waste water disposal num num weather restrictions num num worker protection and exposure monitoring num num worker protection compliance program num num clearances over and under structures tcnum num num index item section page clearing and grubbing damage to trees and protected resources .
num num damage compensation num num definitions num num disposal num num erosion and sediment control num num fences num num grubbing num num mailboxes stream and channel changes vegetation not to be removed closed cell neoprene sponge elastomer coal deposits cofferdams and foundation seals cold drawn steel wire cold weather protection portland cement concrete pavement portland cement concrete structures combination curb and gutter removal of communications and interpretations prior to bid opening compliance with federal law compliance with laws gpnum tcnum .
compost concrete admixtures box culverts for consolidation of plain and reinforced pavements curb curing materials depositing under water ditches encasement for pipe epoxy protective coatings fence post base for foundations for traffic signals etc .
latex modified overlay for bridge decks lightweight superstructure masonry block hollow masonry block solid miscellaneous structures inlets manholes etc .
mix designs monolithic median patching bridge deck pavement repairs prestressed beams and slab panels prevention and removal of stains saline water in seals sidewalk slope and channel protection steel pipe piles for num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gpnum num gpnumb num num num num num num num num numd num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numc num numb num num num num num num num num index item section page subfoundation numa num concrete foundations for signals lights signs num num concrete overlays see latex modified concrete concrete structures num num concrete traffic barriers num num conduit and fittings num num num num structures in num num confidential data gpnumb num confirmation of bid gpnumb num conflict of interest law gpnum num conformity with contract requirements gpnum num connections for pipe culverts num num connector kits num num connectors for timber structures num num construction gpnum num warranty of gpnum num construction documents to successful bidder tcnum num construction entrance stabilized num num construction joints concrete pavements num num concrete structures num num soilcement base num num construction safety and health standards gpnum num construction stakeout control markers num num control stakes num num details furnished by the engineer num num equipment and personnel num num layout num num layout of utilities num num rightofway and easement line num num subgrade subbase and base controls num num contents of bid forms gpnum num content of written protest gpnumb num contingent fee prohibition gpnum num continuously reinforced concrete pavement see portland cement concrete pavements contract award and execution gpsection num num conformity with requirements gpnum num documents gpnum num drawings gpnum num failure to execute gpnum num intent of gpnum num item pay item gpnum num modification gpnum num notice to proceed gpnum num subcontracting gpnum num num num time determination and extension of tcnum num contractor cooperation gpnum gpnum num num responsibility for utility property and services gpnum num responsibility for work gpnum num num index item section page control and distribution equipment num num control of the work gpsection num num control strip hot mix asphalt pavement num num hma gapgraded num num permanent pavement markings num num control subgrade num num controller cabinets for traffic signals num num conveyors for concrete structures numh num cooperation with utilities gpnum num cores for hot mix asphalt pavement num num corporate registration and tax payment certification gpnum num cost and price certification gpnum num cotton mats for curing concrete numd num crash cushion temporary num num crossovers and interchanges numc num cross section method of measurement of excavation num num cultural resources tcnum num culverts concrete box num num culverts pipe num num abandoned num num backfilling num num bedding num num cleaning existing num num connections num num encasement num num ends when placed askew num num excavation num num inspection and acceptance num num installation num num joints num num relaying existing num num removal of existing num num curb combination curb and gutter concrete num num depressed numd num hot mix asphalt num num gutters etc .
abutting hot mix asphalt pavement num num openings concrete nume num removal of concrete num num curing concrete structures duration num num concrete structures methods num num plain and reinforced concrete pavements num num portland cement concrete pavement repairs num num cutoff of piling num num cutting and bending reinforcement num num cutting and boring of timber structures num num num index item section page d dampproofing and membrane waterproofing application of dampproofing num num application of membrane waterproofing num num storage of materials num num surface preparation num num day gpnum num damage liquidated gpnum num responsibility for claims gpnum num responsibility for utility gpnum num termination gpnum num num num debarmentsuspension tcnum num deck pouring sequence numcnum num defective concrete structure work num num material and workmanship for metal structures num num painting work num num num num defective work removal of gpnum num definition tie bid gpnum num definitions gpnum tcnum num num delivery of bids gpnum num depositing concrete under water num num detectable warning surfaces num num num num detector loops for lighting and signal systems num num detours gpnum num detour roads payment for construction and removal of numd num developers steel stud shear num num diameter of holes for timber structures num num differing site conditions gpnum num direct burial cable num num discrepancies in the contract documents gpnum num disposition of bid security gpnumb num disputes gpnum num ditches bleeder num num concrete num num riprap num num trimming num num drainage of roadway during construction num num drainage structures num num drains permanent subgrade num num drilled holes in existing masonry num num driving piles num num drilled shafts caissons num num geotechnical engineer num num shaft installer num num shaft requirements num num subfoundation investigation num num drums for maintenance of traffic num num num index item section page e earth shoulders num num elastomeric bearing pads num num num num electrical cable and wire num num cable connectors and connector kits num num num num cable trenching and backfilling num num conduit and fittings num num conduit detector tape num num general work and testing num num grounding num num handholes manholes pull and junction boxes num num service equipment num num eliminated items tcnum num embankment and subgrade adjacent to structures num num benching num num broken pavement material used in num num compaction num num foundation num num frozen material num num maintenance num num on existing pavement numb num on unstable ground numa num placing and spreading num num protection of structures and utilities num num stability of embankments num num subgrade construction num num test rolling numc num emergency filler for concrete pavement repairs num num emergency filler for hot mix asphalt patches num num emulsified asphalt num num encased conduit num num encasement for pipe num num end treatments for traffic barriers permanent num num temporary num num end walls end sections num num engineer gpnum num engineers office num num enter and exit at interchanges or public use crossovers numc num epoxy adhesives bearing pads num num num num bridge decks num num num num concrete pavement repairs num num num num grout numde num num epoxy coated reinforcing steel num num existing reinforcing num num repair and touchup num num num num shipping handling and storage num num epoxy protective coatings for concrete num num num num epoxy protective coatings for metal fusion bonded num num num num num index item section page equipment aggregate base course num num force account work gpnum num hot mix asphalt pavement num num latex modified concrete overlay for bridge decks .
num num moving and storage tcnum numc num num plain and reinforced concrete pavements num num portland cement concrete pavement repairs num num rental equipment rental rates tcnum d num soilcement base course num num erection plan metal structures num num erosion and sediment control num num excavation num num num fasteners for soil stabilization matting num num grading unit nume num manager num num num num meetings num num plan num num preconstruction conference num num schedule num num soil stabilization matting installation num num soil stabilization matting products num num standards and specifications num num escrow accounts for retained funds tcnum num estimates tcnuma num excavation beyond specified limits num num borrow num num borrow pit material num num broken pavement material num num class num num num class numa num num class num num num class num num num class num excavation for incidental construction num num class num channel or stream change num num classification num num coal deposits num num cross section method of measurement num num drainage of roadway num num erosion and sediment control num num num finished numa num footings num num num frozen material num num gabions num num grading units num num num num pile foundations num num pipe culverts width of trench for num num roadway num num rock blasting and presplitting num num serrated slopes num num structural plate pipe and pipe arch culverts num num subfoundation investigation num num template method of measurement num num test pit num num num chip seal surface treatment num num index item section page underdrains and subgrade drains num num unsuitable material num num execution of contract gpnum num existing bridge deck maintaining during life of contract num num bridge removal num num buildings removal and disposal num num ditches trimming num num masonry removal of num num pavement embankment over numb num pavement removal of num num regulatory warning and guide signs numb num roadway maintenance of numa num expansion joints concrete pavements numb num conduit num num structures num num explosives numb num exposed conduit num num external vibration of concrete numb num f fabric saturated with asphalt num num failure to adequately maintain project tcnum num failure to maintain entire project gpnum num falsework for metal structures num num falsework systems working drawings for tcnum num federal participation gpnum num fence chain link num num temporary orange construction num num within rightofway num num fertilizers num num fiberglass num num num num fill tamped num num filter blanket aggregate num num final acceptance and final payment tcnum num final clean up gpnum num financial disclosure gpnum num finishing aggregate base courses num num concrete structures surfaces for num num plain and reinforced concrete pavements num num portland cement concrete pavement repairs num num soilcement base course num num fire hydrants gpnum gpnum num num flagger for maintenance of traffic num num flagging of motor vehicle traffic gpnum num flooding for curing concrete structures numa num floodlighting cleaning and painting for payment num num num num num num num num num num num num superstructure placement numc num num index item section page flowable backfill num num fly ash flowable backfill num num portland cement concrete num num pozzolans num num footings elevations num num foundations num num force account work tcnum num forms concrete structures num num design criteria numa num forms which remain in place numg num plain and reinforced concrete pavements num num portland cement concrete pavement repairs num num release compounds numj num num num foundations concrete structures numa num embankment for num num hot mix asphalt pavement num num plain and reinforced concrete pavements num num seals numa num traffic signals highway lighting and signs num num frozen material in embankments num num num num furnished topsoil num num furnished subsoil num num fusion bonded epoxy powder coating for steel num num num num fusion bonded polyester coating for metal traffic barriers num num num num g gabions num num galvanized steel beam sign posts num num gates num num general electrical work and testing num num general maintenance of traffic num num general provisions controlling gpnum num geosynthetic stabilized subgrade using graded aggregate base num num geotextiles classes num num gabions num num placement for riprap slope and channel protection num num placement in riprap ditches num num underdrains and subgrade drains num num glass resin composite shield num num governing order of contract documents tcnum num graded stabilized aggregate base protection and curing for base courses num num grading unit nume num num num gray iron castings num num num index item section page grinding hma pavement num num grooving of bridge deck slabs numdnum num grounding num num grubbing num num gypsum num num h hammers pile num num handholes and manholes electrical num num hardware metals for num num hardware for traffic barriers num num hazardous material tcnum num hazardous waste from cleaning and painting num num num num high embankments grubbing numc num high strength bolts nuts and washers num num num num holidays tcnum num hot mix asphalt abutting shoulders num num bid price adjustment num num num num compaction num num curbs gutters etc .
num num num num control strip num num edge dropoff num num equipment num num filling cracks num num foundation preparation num num gapgraded num num grinding num num joints num num maintenance of traffic for num num milling num num mixes num num patches num num pavement profile num num pavement surface checks num num placement num num plants num num sampling and testing for density num num sidewalk num num tack coat num num tiein num num to fill depressions potholes and irregularities num num num num weather num num hydrated lime num num hydraulic cement blended num num i identification of structure num num identification of paint system on structure num num num num industrial hygienist numc num infiltration trenches num num inlets num num inlet protection num num num index item section page inspection of metal structures num num gpnum num num num num num num inspection of work inspectors gpnum installation luminaires and lamps pipe culverts in state preference insurance insurance liability interchange and crossovers internal vibration of concrete interpretation of quantities in bid investigation subfoundation l land air and water pollution landscaping annuals and bulbs installation and establishment brush removal meadow establishment shrub seeding soil stablilization matting temporary seed and temporary mulch topsoil and subsoil tree branch pruning tree felling tree fertilizing tree root pruning tree shrub perennial installation establishment turfgrass establishment turfgrass sod establishment wildflower seeding landscaping materials approved cultivars names and naming fertilizers marking and staking materials mulches plant materials prohibited weeds soil amendments soil stabilization matting soils seed and turfgrass sod standards seed testing and sampling sha seed mixes standards for seed species turfgrass sod water pesticides and adjuvants language late payments latex modified concrete overlay for bridge decks equipment limitation of operations num num num gpnum num tcnum num gpnum num numc num numa num gpnum num num num gpnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num tcnum num tcnum num num num num num index item section page placing and finishing concrete num num proportioning and mixing lmc materials num num num num rate of overlay num num surface preparation num num latex modified slurry seal num num legal relations and responsibility to public gpsection num num liability personal of public officials gpnum num lighting structures num num num num lighting structures disposalrelocate num num lightweight superstructure concrete num num limestone num num limit of disturbance num num limitations of operation gpnum num linseed oil protective coating for concrete num num num num liquid membraneforming compounds for concrete curing numf num numa num liquidated damages gpnum num load and speed limitations tcnum num load restrictions gpnum tcnum num num tcnum num load test pile num num loads on concrete structures num num lockpin and collar fasteners num num loop detector num num loop detector cable sealing num num low embankments grubbing numb num lowest bidder determination of gpnum num luminaires and lamps num num num num lump sum contracts tcnum num m magnesium chloride num num num num mailboxes num num mailboxes maintained or reset gpnum num maintaining existing bridge deck num num maintenance aggregate base course num num soilcement base course num num maintenance of existing roadway numa num maintenance of stream flow num num maintenance of traffic gpnum num num num aggregate num num arrow panel num num barricades type i ii and iii num num cones num num contractors vehicles enter exit legally numc num drums num num existing regulatory warning and guide signs numb num flagger num num general num num hot mix asphalt for num num portable variable message sign num num temporary concrete traffic barrier num num num index item section page temporary crash cushion sand filled plastic barrels num num temporary movable type concrete traffic barrier .
num num temporary pavement markings num num temporary raised pavement markers num num temporary traffic barrier end treatments num num temporary traffic signs num num traffic barrier w beam num num traffic control plan num num traffic maintenance num num traffic manager num num maintenance of work during construction gpnum num manager erosion and sediment control num num manholes num num markers tubular for maintenance of traffic num num marking and shipping metal structures num num marking handling shipping and storage prestressed concrete beams and slabs num num markings pavement permanent num num temporary num num masonry brick num num cement num num drilled holes num num miscellaneous structures num num protection of retained num num removal of existing num num materials found on the project tcnum num material moving and storage numc num materials recycledrehandled tcnum num measurement and payment tc section num num meadow establishment num num application rates num num final acceptance num num meadow seed num num numd e num num nonselective herbicide application num num nutrient management plan nume num pesticide application numc num regional areas numa num seed delivery weighing mixing num num seeding schedule numa num seeding seasons numb num membrane for waterproofing and dampproofing .. num num num num metal railing num num metal structures abutting joints num num anchor bolts num num bent plates num num camber diagram num num changes and substitutions num num damaged or defective material num num defective material and workmanship num num erection plan num num fabrication num num num index item section page facilities for shop inspection num num falsework num num high strength bolts and lockpin and collar fasteners num num inspection of fabricated metal structures num num holes num num marking and shipping num num match marking num num mill orders num num planing num num reuse of bolts and nuts numf num shop assembly num num snug tight numd num storage of material num num substitutes for rolled members num num testing num num turn of nut method nume num web plates num num welding num num work scheduling num num working drawings tcnum num num num num num milling num num minor irregularities or informalities gpnum num minority business enterprise and affirmative action gpnum num miscellaneous structures num num miscellaneous protective coating num num mistakes in bids gpnum num mobilization num num modification of existing signs num num modify existing sign messages num num moisture and dust control agents num num mortar for grout num num mortar for masonry num num mortar pneumatically applied num num moving of equipment tcnum num mowing meadow establishment and wildflower seeding num num num num turfgrass establishment num num tractor and hand mowing payment num num num mulches num num composted wood chip mulch num num shredded hardwood bark mulch num num straw mulch num num wood cellulose fiber mulch num num mulching additional mulch num num annuals and bulbs num num num application equipment numb num meadow establishment and wildflower seeding num num temporary mulch num num temporary seed nume num planting beds annuals and bulbs num num numb num num index item section page planting pits trees shrubs and perennials num num turfgrass establishment shrub seeding num num multiyear contracts contingent upon appropriations gpnum num n negotiated payment provision gpnum num neoprene strip seals num num noise barriers num num anchor bolt assemblies num num defects and tolerances num num drilled shafts caissons num num joints num num panel finish num num post finish num num preapproved alternate num num sample panels num num special bidding instructions num num nondiscrimination in employment gpnum num nonhiring of employees gpnum num notice to proceed gpnum tcnum num num no waiver of legal rights gpnum num nuclear density measurement for hot mix asphalt numa num o organizational structure gpnum num outlets for underdrain num num overhead sign structures num num num num overlay latex modified concrete for bridge decks num num overlay slab bridges num num overseeding and reseeding turfgrass num num overseeding thin turf numa num reseeding failed turf numb num owneroperator tcnum num p paint structural num num num num paint representative num num num num painting existing steel num num painting new steel num num paraffin wax bond breaker for concrete num num partnering tcnum num patented devices materials and processes gpnum num paved ditch removal num num pavement broken material num num concrete repairs num num continuously reinforced concrete num num forms for concrete num num hot mix asphalt num num markers temporary raised num num num index item section page marking num num marking temporary num num paving slip form num num plain and reinforced concrete num num num num reinforcement for concrete num num removal num num payment allowance for stored materials tcnum num final tcnum num progress tcnum num late tcnum num pedestrian signal heads num num perforated pipe num num performance bond and payment bond requirements gpnum num permanent pavement markings num num permanent subgrade drains num num permits and licenses gpnum num pesticide application meadow establishment and wildflower seeding numc num tree shrub perennials annuals bulbs numc num nonselective herbicide application num num numanum num piling bearing value num num cutoff num num driving num num driving tolerances num num hammers num num load test num num preparation for driving num num splicing num num steel pipe piles num num storage and handling num num test num num tips num num unacceptable num num pipe abandoned num num bedding for num num certification and pipe material chart num num cleaning existing num num connections num num num num encasement num num inspection and acceptance num num installation num num joints num num relaying existing num num removal of existing num num temporary for slope drains num num plant materials num num american holly num num certificates and licenses num num inspection num num plant material standards num num rejected plants numd num num index item section page seals numc num storage and handling num num planting beds preparing for perennials num num preparing for annuals and bulbs num num planting pits abandoned num num num num preparing num num relocating num num planting season seeding or installing annuals and bulbs numa num meadow establishment and wildflower seeding numb num shrub seeding numb num tree shrub and perennials numa num turfgrass establishment numb num turfgrass sod establishment numb num plastic retention disk for grout num num plates steel for concrete pavement repairs num num plates steel for hot mix asphalt patching num num pneumatically applied mortar application num num curing and cold weather protection num num equipment num num mixing and screening num num reinforcement num num storage of materials num num test panels num num poles lighting num num political contribution disclosure gpnum num polyester grout for concrete pavement repairs num num polyethylene pe manholes num num polyethylene pe pipe num num polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe num num portable sediment tank num num portland cement and blended hydraulic cement certification num num portland cement concrete num num portland cement concrete pavements continuously reinforced joints num num opening to traffic num num pavement thickness adjustment num num pavement profile num num placing concrete num num reinforcement num num terminal joints num num thickness check num num portland cement concrete pavements plain and reinforced concrete placement num num consolidation of concrete num num curing num num equipment num num finishing num num forms num num foundation num num num index item section page joints num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numd num num num numf num num num num num num num numh num num num num num numl num num num num num num num num num numi num num num num num numo num numd num numn num numm num num num numf num nume num numa num num num num num num num numb num num num num num numg num numcnum num numj num num num nume num numh num numg num numcnum num num num num num num num pavement profile pavement thickness adjustment reinforcement removal of fixed forms slab surface and thickness checks slip form paving texturing and edging weather portland cement concrete pavement repairs portland cement concrete plants portland cement concrete structures admixtures anchor bolt placement box culverts cold weather protection concrete temperature controls concreting consolidation construction joints conveyors use of curing methods curing duration defective forms defective work depositing concrete under water drainage and weep holes equipment fiber column forms finishing footing subfoundation and tremie payment form removal form scaffolds and platforms form support brackets or devices form ties forms forms for exposed surfaces forms for unexposed surfaces foundations linseed oil protective coating loads parapet payment placement of concrete precast reinforced concrete box sections prevention and removal of stains on concrete pumping of concrete rate of concreting for bridge deck slabs release agents for forms safety hazards slip form parapets and median barriers on steel forms which do not remain in place steel forms which remain in place superstructure placement restrictions underpinning post erection for metal traffic barriers braces num index item section page powerdriven hand tools removal of concrete numc num precast concrete traffic barrier num num preexisting regulations gpnum num prefabricated edge drains num num certification num num fittings num num outlet pipes num num preformed joint fillers num num preformed joint inserts num num preformed polychloroprene elastomeric compression joint seals num num preopening modification or withdrawal of bids gpnum num preservation and restoration of property gpnum num presplitting of rock numc num prestressed concrete beams and slabs panels bearing pads num num beds and forms num num detensioning num num erection num num marking handling shipping and storage num num methods of force measurement num num prestress concrete production plants num num pretensioning of steel strands num num protection of steel strand num num reinforcement and tie rod tubes num num reinforcement inserts and chairs num num shear keys num num slab panel plant assembly num num steel strand num num steel strand splices num num steel strand tensioning num num steel strand vises num num stringing steel strands num num tolerances num num wire failure in steel strands num num working drawings num num prevailing wage contracts for public works gpnum num prevention and removal of stains on concrete num num prime coat for chip seal surface treatment num num primer for use with asphalt for dampproofing and waterproofing num num production plants general num num progress payments tcnum num project classification tcnum num project schedule cpm num num project schedule ac num num proposal guaranty gpnum num prosecution of the work gpnum num protective shield num num num num numc num public convenience and safety gpnum num pumping of concrete numg num num index item section page r rail assembly for metal traffic barriers num num railroad highway grade crossing and separations tcnum num railroad right of way operations within gpnum num rapid hardening cementitious material for concrete pavement repairs num num recycled or rehandled materials tcnum num references tcnum num refertilizing annuals and bulbs num num shrub seeding num num trees shrubs and perennials numf num turfgrass establishment num num reflectorization of signs and channelizing devices .. num num regional areas for landscaping numa num reinforcement chairs or chair bars for num num cutting and bending num num deformed num num epoxy coating reinforcing see epoxy coating reinforcing inserts and chairs for prestressed concrete slabs num num placing and fastening num num plain num num plan dimensions num num repair and replacement num num num num num num shipping handling and protection of material num num splicing num num substitution of bar sizes num num tying new into existing num num working drawings num num rejection of individual bids or proposals gpnum num relaying existing pipe num num removal bridge deck slabs and parapets num num cofferdams numc num defective work gpnum num existing signs and relocation num num existing structures num num piles num num num num num num roadway lighting structures num num stains on concrete structures num num temporary pavement markings num num resident business preference gpnum num responsibility for damage claims gpnum num restoration of surfaces opened by permit tcnum num restrictions load gpnum num public convenience and safety gpnum num steel gpnum num wage gpnum num num index item section page restrictions storage of materials and contractors vehicles numc num retention of records gpnum num retaining walls num num anchor bolt assemblies num num concrete stain num num preapproved alternates num num num num sample panels num num return of proposal guaranty gpnum num rightofway and easement lines num num rights in and use of materials on the project tcnum num riprap num num roadway drainage num num roadway excavation broken pavement used in embankments num num coal deposits num num excavation beyond specified limits num num frozen materials num num grading units num num serrated slopes num num use of excavated materials num num rock excavation num num rock in embankments numc num rock in footing foundations num num roll and sheet waterproofing membrane num num roofing paper num num rumble strips .. num num s safety hazards concrete structures num num safety hazards in confined spaces tcnum num safety hazards metal structures num num saline water concrete in numc num salvaged topsoil num num salvaged subsoil num num salvaging and placing topsoil and subsoil num num samples and testing control of material gpsection num num failures gpnum num storage and handling gpnum num sampling and testing hot mix asphalt pavement densities num num sampling devices and testing equipment .. num num sandfilled plastic barrels sfpb temporary crash cushion num num sanctions upon improper acts gpnum num saw cuts concrete pavement repairs num num loop detector wire and leads num num removal of existing pavement sidewalk paved ditches curb or combination curb and gutter num num removal of portions of existing structures num num sawed joints in concrete pavements numcnum num num index item section page schedule for erosion and sediment control num num scope of payment tcnum num scour protection riprap num num seal coats for chip seal surface treatment num .num num sealer for loop detector num num seed and seed mixes additive seed grass numb num legume seed numc num meadow forb seed numd num meadow grass sedge rush seed nume num meadow seed mixes num num prohibited weeds num num sha turfgrass seed mix numa num numa num sha special purpose seed mix numa num numb num sha temporary seed mix numb num numc num shrub seed numg num shrub seed mixes num num wildflower seed numf num wildflower seed mix num num selected backfill num num serrated slopes num num shear studs num num sheet metal for flashing num num sheeting and shoring num num num num num num num .num .num num shoulders abutting hot mix asphalt pavement num num shrub seeding num num application rates num num final acceptance num num nutrient management plan numc num regional areas numa num seed delivery weighing mixing num num seeding seasons numb num shrub seed num num numg num sidewalk hot mix asphalt num num sidewalks and safety curbs for bridges nume num signal heads num num signal structures num num signs aluminum sheet or extruded num num breakaway base support systems num num bridge mounted supports num num existing regulatory warning and guide numb num hardware num num panels num num num removal of existing num num temporary for maintenance of traffic num num wood supports num num silt and super silt fence num .num num num site investigation gpnum num slab panel plant assembly num num num index item section page sleeves for dowel bars in pavement expansion joints num num slip form parapets and median barriers on bridges nume num slip form paving num num slurry seal num num aggregates num num emulsified asphalt num num latex modified emulsion num num mineral filler num num mix design num num small business procurements gpnum num soilcement base course compaction num num construction joints num num design mix num num equipment num num finishing num num grade control num num maintenance num num mix in place construction num num spreading of plant mix materials num num subgrade preparation num num transportation num num weather num num soil stabilization matting num num fasteners num num fastening num num final acceptance num num infilling num num payment schedule num num products num num soil preparation and seeding num num keyin num num watering num num soil testing topsoil subsoil bioretention soil num num span wire for signal heads or sign mountings num num specifications definition gpnum num splices in steel strand prestressed concrete slabs .
num num splicing of reinforcement num num stability of embankments num num stabilized base course plants num num stabilized construction entrance num num stabilized graded aggregate base mix num num stainless steel reinforcement num num stains removal of from concrete num num stakeout construction num num steel bearing piles num num num num cleaning and painting num num num num fabrication num num field splices num .num .num num num .num .num .num num num forms num num num num miscellaneous use num num overhead sign structures num num num index item section page plates for patching concrete and asphalt pavement .
num num num num sheet piles num num num num span wire num num stud shear developers num num num num weight num num stone channel num num ditches num num gabions num num num num riprap channels ditches slopes and gabions num num slopes for num num storage and handling of materials gpnum num storage and movement of equipment and materials numc num storage portland cement concrete and related products num num stored materials payment allowance for tcnum num strand for prestressed concrete beams and slab panels num num num num strand splices num num straw bales for sediment control num num num num stream and channel changes cleared and grubbed num num structural bearing pads num num num num structural plate pipe and pipe arch culverts num num structural steel welding material for num num structural timber and lumber num num num num structure identification num num structures bearings for num num excavation class num num num expansion joints num num loads on concrete num num metal num num portland cement concrete num num reinforcement for concrete num num removal of existing deck slabs num num timber num num structures drainage num num structures miscellaneous num num subcontractingsubcontractors gpnum tcnum num num subfoundation concrete numa num subfoundation investigation num num num num subgrade approval num num bleeder ditches num num control num num maintenance num num preparation for aggregate base course num num preparation for soilcement base course num num proofrolling num num subgrade construction num num subgrade drains permanent num num subsoil num num num num successful termination of contractors responsibility gpnum num num index item section page sulfur num num sump pit num num superstructure concrete placement restrictions numcnum num supports for reinforcement num num suspension of work gpnum tcnum num num t tack coat for gapgraded hma num num tack coat for hot mix asphalt pavement num num taxes responsibility for payment exemptions forms to file etc gpnum num temperature controls for concrete structures numf num temporary asphalt berm num num concrete traffic barrier num num end treatments num .num num num pavement markings num num raised pavement markers num num traffic signs num num temporary seed and mulch num num temporary asphalt berm num num termination for convenience of the state gpnum num termination for default gpnum num test piling num num test rolling embankments numc num testing of metal structures num num texturing and edging of concrete pavements num num theoretical weight of metal structures num num thickness check concrete pavement num num tie bids gpnum num tie devices for concrete pavement num num tiein hma pavement num num tie wires line post clips tension wire and clips for chain link fence num num timber pile head treatment num num timber piling num num num num timber preservatives num num timber rail traffic barrier and posts num num timber structures bolt assemblies num num bolt holes num num bracing num num bridge railings in wheel guards num num coating untreated surfaces num num connectors num num cutting and boring num num diameter of holes num num floor planking num num protection of ends of caps wales and planks num num storage and handling num num stringers num num timber caps num num time extensions gpnum tcnum num num num index item section page tolerances pile driving num num topsoil and subsoil num num amending numg num composition and testing num num evaluation of weeds numa num grading topsoil numf num nutrient management plan numb num placing num num removal numb num storage numc num tractor and hand mowing payment num num traffic control plan num num traffic barrier concrete num num num num end treatments num num metal brown polyester coated num num posts num num num num rail assembly num num w beam num num num num traffic control device cabinets num num traffic manager num num traffic signals highway lighting and signs concrete placement for foundations num num galvanized parts num num rock conditions for foundation excavation num num traffic signs num num num num transverse construction joints numa num tree branch pruning num num breakdown list of contract prices num num operations num num permits numa num size classes payment num num tree preservation program numb num tree felling num num breakdown list of contract prices num num operations num num permits numa num size classes payment num num tree preservation program numb num utilities and tree marking num num tree fertilizing num num nutrient management reporting numc num operations num num permits numa num tree preservation program numb num tree root pruning num num operations num num permits numa num tree preservation program numb num utilities marking and conflicts num num tree shrub and perennial install and establish num num abandoned planting pits num num berming num num breakdown list of contract prices numa num edging num num establishment phase num num num index item section page fertilizing and watering after installation num num final acceptance num num herbicide application numa num installing num num installation phase acceptance num num ipm program numd num nutrient management plan nume num modification request numb num mulching num num payment schedule num num planting seasons numa num pesticide application numc num pest management numc num plant material inspection num num plant storage and handling num num planting pit diameter compost water numc num preparing planting beds num num preparing planting pits num num relocating plants num num rototilling numc num staking and guying num num utilities marking layout and inspection num num unacceptable plants and replacement plants num num trenching and backfill for electrical cable num num tubular markers num num turfgrass establishment application equipment num num application rates num num fertilizing and seeding num num incorporating soil amendments num num mowing num num mulching num num nutrient management plan numc num payment schedule numa num preparing soil num num preparing seedbed num num refertilizing num num regional areas numa num securing mulch num num seed and turfgrass sod standards num num num num seeding seasons and seed mixes numb num turfgrass sod establishment num num application rates num num fasteners for sod num num final acceptance num num initial watering num num installing season and sod species numb num nutrient management plan numc num payment schedule numa num placing num num preparing soil num num regional areas numa num seed and turfgrass sod standards num num num num num index item section page u unacceptable materials gpnum num unauthorized work gpnum num underdrains num num underpinning old foundations num num unstable ground embankment on numa num unsuitable material num num num num use and possession prior to completion gpnum num use of excavated materials num num use of removed pavement num num use prior to completion tcnum num utilities layout of num num utilities on structures num num v value engineering change proposals tcnum num variable message signs num num variations in estimated quantities gpnum num vegetation not to be removed and trimming num num verbal inquiries gpnum num vibration of concrete num num w waste containment field cleaning num num disposal field cleaning num num handling plan of action num num hazardous transportation and disposal num num materials tcnum num nonhazardous disposal num num sampling and analysis num num temporary storage site num num water disposal num num water for concrete mixes num num waterproofing and dampproofing num num num num water stops num num weather aggregate base courses num num hot mix asphalt pavement num num gapgraded hma num num plain and reinforced concrete pavements num num portland cement concrete pavement repairs num num portland cement concrete structures numcnum num num num soilcement base course num num weeds salvaged soils num num num num prohibited in turfgrass sod and sha seed mixtures .
numa num prohibited in meadow and wildflower seed numb num prohibited in shrub seed numc num welded deformed steel wire fabric num num welded steel wire fabric num num num index item section page welding of metal structures num num welding materials num num wheel stops num num wildflower seeding num num application rates num num final acceptance num num nonselective herbicide application num num nutrient management plan nume num regional areas numa num pesticide application numc num seed delivery weighing mixing num num seeding schedule num num seeding seasons numb num wildflower seed num num numf num wing walls for concrete box culverts payment for num num wire fabric for pneumatically applied mortar num num num num wire for gabions num num wire rope num num water num num turfgrass sod num num soil stabilization matting num num trees shrubs perennials num num num num work control of the gpsection num num force account tcnum num in or over waters of the state tcnum num prosecution of gpnum num scope of gpsection num num suspension of gpnum tcnum num num working drawings alternate noise barriers num num alternate retaining walls num num cofferdams and foundation seals num num containment plants nume num drawings tcnum num num num forms numb num metal structures num num prestressed concrete beams and slab panels num num protective shields num num reinforcement num num sheeting and shoring num num num
